Story_ID: 577201
ANNOUNCER:  Major funding for the following program was provided by Discover Financial Services.  Additional funding, provided by, the McDonald's Corporation, Citigroup, Walgreens and other participating sponsors.
Story_ID: 577202
ANNOUNCER:  Born in Washington, D.C., she would become one of the most respected mezzo-sopranos of her time.  Her name, [HistoryMaker] Denyce Graves, from the Metropolitan Opera [New York, New York] to international opera houses and stages around the globe.  Her career has been legendary.  The HistoryMakers, the nation's largest African American video, oral history archives is proud to present, 'An Evening With Denyce Graves.'  And now to our host, award-winning actress, Angela Bassett.
Speaker 2: Denyce Graves is a wonderful woman, an amazing performer, and a good friend.  She stands on strong shoulders.  Denyce's elegant stage presence and her rich vocalism, are wrapped in a casual girl-next door demeanor.
Speaker 1: (Film clip of Denyce Graves' performances).
Speaker 2: (Applause).
Speaker 1: One of the most gracious divas of the day, Ms. Denyce Graves.
Speaker 2: (Applause).
Story_ID: 577203
Speaker 1: Welcome.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Thank you.
Speaker 1: It's always so good to see you--
Speaker 2: You too, Angela [Bassett].
Speaker 1: --and I don't get to see you as often as I like because you travel the globe all year, every year, in and out.
Speaker 2: It's pretty busy, and you're having a good time.
Speaker 1: We're gonna have a good time tonight as well.  [HistoryMaker] Denyce [Graves], do you remember the occasion on which we met?
Speaker 2: Well, I do remember when we met.  We met at church--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --through a friend.  We went to church together, and we came to meet you at your home on Sunday morning, and then we went to go eat a gigantic brunch afterwards.  I remember that.
Speaker 1: That's right.  I had, I was new to opera so it was, it was like my introduction.  And, yes, a dear friend introduced us and it's wonderful.  And I've been to opera ever since, whenever you're in town--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --and you come, you come often, and I love it.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: I also remember once seeing you at a state dinner in your hometown, Washington, D.C., a couple of years--many years ago.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And I was sitting, I was fortunate enough to sit at the table with the vice president.  And I looked across the room and there you were.  And you were sitting next to the president (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And I wasn't jealous.  I was proud as can be.
Speaker 1: (Applause) (Audience laughter).
Speaker 2: And here we are, next to each other tonight.
Speaker 1: That's right (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Applause).
Story_ID: 577204
Speaker 1: (Applause).
Speaker 2: Now let's go back in time a little bit.  You were born Denyce Antoinette Graves in Washington, D.C., 1964.  Could you give us an indication of maybe the sights and sounds and smells of your household then?
Speaker 1: I remember the smell of cooking, you know, of fatback cooking and collard greens--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 2: --and the smell of hair frying with the curling (audience laughter)--
Speaker 1: Pressing comb.
Speaker 2: --straightening comb.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it sounds familiar.  It smells familiar.
Speaker 2: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, (laughter) and the sounds of laughter.  You know, less machinery, more human noises, less cars and that sort of thing, more people walking and laughing and girls jumping rope outside and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Roller skates and playing tag--
Speaker 1: Exactly, and bicycles and all that, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now, you're one of three.
Speaker 1: I am.
Speaker 2: You have an older brother and a younger sister.
Speaker 1: I do.  I'm sandwiched right in the middle.
Speaker 2: Right--
Story_ID: 577205
Speaker 1: And we were, we have another thing in common.  I was raised by a single mom, and you were as well.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you think about that at times what you may have missed or wonder about that?
Speaker 2: We had a great time.  My mother [Dorothy Middleton Graves-Kenner] was a--my mother also was a lot of fun, you know.  And she used to play Superman with us and (audience laughter), yeah, and football with us all the time.  And she read us stories, and she was a terrific mother.  So--
Speaker 1: I know my mom, growing up, she would--she was, of course, the disciplinarian.  And she would say--
Speaker 2: She was that too.
Speaker 1: --in those moments, "I'm your mother and your father too (laughter)."
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right, right.
Speaker 1: And I know you did have an occasion of meeting your father [Charles Graves] later, later in years.
Speaker 2: I did, I did later on.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: We were outside taking photographs.  And my mother--we were all standing there.  It was my brother, my sister and some family members.  And my mother said, "Oh, my God, oh, my God."  And we said, "What?"  She said, "Do you see this man walking towards us."  Yeah, "That's your father."  What?  Oh, my goodness.  So that was a pretty--and then we, we decided to have lunch together which was rather strained, but I was glad that--I remember thinking he was short, and (audience laughter) wore glasses.  I thought, you know--
Speaker 1: Could he sing?
Speaker 2: He could sing, according to my mother.  That's how she met him, and that's how she fell in love with him, is that he was singing sort of in a barbershop quartet thing on the corner with a group of guys.  And he had a lovely voice.  So I think that that was his great gift to me.
Speaker 1: Was your mother--can your mother sing as well?
Speaker 2: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 1: She's here.
Speaker 2: I won't ask her to.
Speaker 1: She has the great love of singing.
Speaker 2: (Audience laughter) (applause).
Speaker 1: Oh (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Applause).
Speaker 1: But was there--there was a lot of music growing up in your home though?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was music growing up in our home.  My mother is deeply religious and only allowed gospel music in the house.  And so we heard, you know, Shirley Caesar and Mahalia Jackson and all those great--James Cleveland and the Mighty Clouds of Joy, and--all the time.  And so--and my mother also sang, and she still does sing quite a lot.  And so music was very present and very much a part of our--of everyday living.
Speaker 1: I remember hearing from you once that not everyone, you know, thinks singing is the greatest thing at all times (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, you remember the story--
Speaker 1: --and there was an occasion.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Well, I was a young girl.  I don't know how old I was, maybe, I don't know, eight or nine.  And I went to--for a pajama party at a girlfriend's house.  And I remember we were sitting at the table, and I was singing.  And her mother said, "How rude."  You know, "Don't you have any home training?  You're singing at the table."  And I thought, how sad that you don't.
Story_ID: 577206
Speaker 1: Well music took on a serious note in your life early on.  Let's take a look at the videotape.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Film Clip).
ANNOUNCER:  As a young girl growing up in one of the poorest neighborhoods in the nation's capital [Washington, D.C.], [HistoryMaker] Denyce Graves wore her own brand of confidence.  Noticing her middle child's voice, Dorothy [Middleton] Graves[-Kenner] encouraged Denyce to sing in her Pentecostal church.  In the future, Denyce's gospel singing would be rendered in a classical style.
ANNOUNCER:  But it all began in 1979 when a tall, thin girl realized she didn't quite fit on Galveston Street [Washington, D.C.].  Denyce auditioned and was accepted to the Duke Ellington School of the Arts [Washington, D.C.].  At fourteen, Denyce discovered a recording by Leontyne Price in the school library.  She cut her classes and listened for hours.  As Leontyne Price sang, Denyce remembered saying, "I can do that."  When voice teachers heard her pretension, Denyce Graves began the journey to develop all-inspiring gift of song.  From the Duke Ellington School of the Arts, scholarships would lead to Oberlin College [Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio] from 1981 to 1984, and the New England Conservatory [Boston, Massachusetts] from 1984 to 1988.  But before settling in at the nation's most prestigious opera house, doctors would advise the young vocalist to stop singing to save her voice.  It seemed like an early curtain call, but a year later, the Houston Grand Opera [Houston, Texas] began to pursue Denyce.  During a two-year apprenticeship, she worked roles in the chorus, learning the role that would one day become her own.  Denyce Graves became known as the new mezzo legendary tenor, Placido Domingo, had found.  The girl with the voice from Galveston Street was back, and the rest would become history.
Story_ID: 577207
Speaker 1: How about that?  Leontyne Price was an inspiration to you.
Speaker 2: She was the inspiration. Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Tell me what it felt like and when was it that you heard her voice and how that made you feel?
Speaker 2: I was fourteen years old, and I was late for a class, and I was running in the hallway, and I ran into a girlfriend of mine. This was when I was a student at the Duke Ellington high school [Duke Ellington School of the Arts, Washington, D.C.].  And she said, "[HistoryMaker] Denyce [Graves], you've gotta come hear something."  I said, "I can't.  I'm late for class."  She said, "No, no, no, you've got--I just have heard the most beautiful thing that I've ever heard in my life."  And so I went with her to the listening library.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: And we cut our classes the entire day and listened--
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 2: --to Leontyne Price sing.  And I remember, we never went to the bathroom, we never ate anything.  I said, I would love to do that, to have, I mean it really felt like I found my purpose in life.  And it absolutely did direct the whole of my life from that point on.
Speaker 1: Up until that time you were, as you said, you sang mainly gospel and in church.
Speaker 2: I sang gospel music in the church.
Speaker 1: And in the bus ministry.
Speaker 2: That's right (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right, tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, in our house, my mother [Dorothy Middleton Graves-Kenner] was very, very strict.  And--she still is actually, very strict.
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 2: And each night of the week was designated for something.  So Monday night was sewing night, and Tuesday night was book report night.  And that was in addition to our homework.  Because she was working all the time, she wanted to make sure that our time was constructive, the time that we had away from her.  And so she would assign us, you know, projects, after we finished our school work.  Anyway, Thursday night was music night, and we'd write songs and that sort of thing.  And we would perform them for her when she came home.  And we started getting sort of good at that.  And so we formed this little singing group called the Inspirational Children of God, and we went around, and we sang in different churches on Sunday.  But also, in addition to going to church, we weren't allowed to just go to church.  We had to participate--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --on a deeper level with our involvement.  And so I was involved with the bus ministry.  And that was basically, speaking to parents and encouraging them to allow their children to come to Sunday school on Sunday mornings and then we would go pick them up on the bus, on the church bus and take them to Sunday school.  But while we were on the bus, we sang songs, and that sort of thing.  And so that's what my job was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to sing the songs on the bus and entertain all the kids on the bus while we went back and forth to church--
Story_ID: 577208
Speaker 1: Now you sang gospel then, opera now.  What difference is there between the two in the training?  At that time, you were at the Duke Ellington School of the Arts [Washington, D.C.] which is a very renowned high school, junior high school [sic. high school] there for the arts.  I have other friends from [Washington] D.C. who've gone there.  And they're quite talented so a lot of great people come out of there.  Yeah, but that's where you began to move from gospel into opera.  What was that training like?
Speaker 2: Classical music is such a refined art form.  I think what's challenging about it is to maintain that initial desire that attracted you to music making in the first place because you can become so analytical of every note that you sing, that I--it can rob the joy of music making.
Speaker 1: I know.  You're concentrating on the technique--
Speaker 2: You're concentrating on the technique of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and so you can get away from passion of it, what drew you in the first place.
Speaker 2: I think it's really, that's the great challenge when you're actually learning to study the voice and learning what proper singing is and how to make beautiful, beautiful sounds because that's what classical music is.  It's the art of beautiful singing, and there are lots of rules that go along with that.  And so one has to, I think, stay in touch--because I believe that at the end of the da- and I am one of those opera singers who enjoy going to the opera.  And even though I can hear people spin beautiful tones, and I appreciate that, and I can appreciate the gymnastics and all the virtuosity that goes into refined music making.  For me, still, at the end of the day, I think that it's what moves people and touches them that brings them back to the opera house.  So I think that it's important to stay connected to that, even though all of the training can sort of strip that away.  It can do that.
Story_ID: 577209
Speaker 1: After graduating from high school, from Duke Ellington [School of the Arts, Washington, D.C.], you went on to Oberlin School of Music [sic. Oberlin College Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio.]
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: How did you get from [Washington] D.C. to Ohio?
Speaker 2: On the Greyhound bus, actually.
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, sure that was a long journey.  In fact, I had two professors at the Duke Ellington school who were alums of Oberlin College, neither of, were my professors.  One was an oboe teacher and one was a flute teacher.  But they had been very supportive of my work.  They told me about Oberlin College, and said, "[HistoryMaker] Denyce [Graves], you have to go to Oberlin, you have to go to Oberlin."  And I went as a prospective student.
Speaker 2: What was it about Oberlin that drew you there?
Speaker 1: Well, I didn't know in the beginning, and I just went because they said it was a fantastic school.  And later I learned all these wonderful things about the university, how it prides itself on these firsts.  It's the first university to accept African American, the first university to accept women.  It was a conservatory filled with all the weird kids.  It was all the kids that everybody picked on and teased and it was the kids that enjoyed music and enjoyed practicing and that sort of thing.  And, and I just, I think that there are a few times in your life where something rings true.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: People often speak of that when they, their spouse.  They say the first time I saw this person, I knew that we were gonna marry.  And it was that same sort of recognition inside of my soul that the moment I was there, I walked into the conservatory, I thought, "This is where I'm supposed to be."  It felt right.  Everything said, yes.  This is where you're supposed to be.
Speaker 2: How many years did you spend there?
Speaker 1: Well, I spent three years there.  I ended up getting my, my, my degree from New England Conservatory [Boston, Massachusetts].  Oberlin College at that time had a mandatory age retirement.  And I was studying sort of with a hot voice teacher.  And when I was there, I was asking everybody--when I was there as a prospective student, I was asking who's the great voice teacher?  Who's the teacher that everybody wants to work with?  And I kept hearing this name, Helen Hodam, Helen Hodam.  And so I met her while I was there, and I asked to sit in on a couple of voice lessons while I was there.  But she had been such a draw for the conservatory for so many years, but she was sort of a mysterious age.  And they had been enforcing this mandatory retirement--
Speaker 2: (Audience laughter)
Speaker 1: --for some of the other professors.  And since they were enforcing it for other professors, they said, "Look, you can't do this for some groups and not for others."  But because she had been such a drawing card for the conservatory, it was difficult for them to let her go.  In the end, she was forced to retire from Oberlin College, and then went to teach full time at New England Conservatory.  There were about fourteen of us who left Oberlin College to go to New England Conservatory to continue studying with her. And I was one of them (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To find a professor, a leader, a teacher for such a delicate, such an important, you know, your voice is so important.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  As we were saying before, you know, you only get one set.  I mean you can buy a new piano.  You can buy a new clarinet, but if you get that wrong, that's it.  And so it really is about the relationship that you have with your voice teacher, and it--that is a very special one, one of great intimacy and, and--that requires great care.  And when you find a relationship, I believe, where you, where there is an atmosphere of freedom, where you feel like you can experiment and that you trust them also, with your instrument and you're not afraid of your instrument in front them, I think it's one that you should hold on to.  And that's also building the voice.  I mean she was a great voice builder.  And, and I was making great progress with her, and I didn't want to interrupt what we were doing, particularly, for my final year there, to go to another voice teacher who says, "Oh, no, that's all wrong." You'd have to do it completely differently (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, let's start all over.
Speaker 1: Yeah, start all over again, you know.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  You're at the beginning of your career--
Story_ID: 577210
Speaker 1: And, of course, it was made possible by those who have come before you.  And just for a moment, I want to look back at some of the work and how it paved the way for your success.
Speaker 2: (Film clip).
ANNOUNCER:  In 1990, the humble, legendary contralto, Marian Anderson, would present [HistoryMaker] Denyce Graves with The Marian Anderson Award symbolizing her kinship with the African American divas and classical singers that came before her, [Matilda] Sissieretta Jones whose operatic work was only accepted through minstrel shows, classical vocalists you trained without open venues for their work, opera stars such as the regal, internationally-acclaimed soprano, Leontyne Price, the dramatic, risk-taking Grace Bumbry, the celebrated, majestic voice of soprano, Jessye Norman.  These legendary vocalists paved the way for Denyce Graves.  For it's 1995-1996 season, Denyce Graves would make her debut at The Metropolitan Opera [New York, New York] in the title role of [Georges] Bizet's 'Carmen' coming in, as she would later say, through the front door.  She would work often with Placido Domingo, even performing at the Royal Opera House in London [England].  Many opera houses and patrons across the globe developed a passion for Denyce Graves' Carmen.
ANNOUNCER:  The sought-after mezzo-soprano would also become known as the lead in [Camille Saint-]Saens' 'Samson and Delilah'.
ANNOUNCER:  With an expanding repertoire, Denyce Graves joins legends, becoming one of the most respected classical vocalists of our time.
Speaker 2: I love that photo of you and Marian Anderson.
Speaker 1: (Applause).
Speaker 2: You were a baby then, and you had on some grown-up earrings.
Speaker 1: Did I really?
Speaker 2: You did, you did (laughter).
Speaker 1: I was so grateful and am so grateful that I had the opportunity to meet her and to spend time with her.  I'd just won The Marian Anderson Award, and as a recipient of the award, you give a concert at her hometown where she was living at the time.  And Sylvia McNair, who had previously won, was giving a concert that evening.  And when that photo was shot, I said to her, "It's cold out here.  Do you need something around your shoulders?"  I remember that very clearly.
Story_ID: 577211
Speaker 1: I know what Broadway means to the actor.  What does The Metropolitan Opera House [New York, New York] mean--
Speaker 2: I think that every opera singer is looking at that house as sort of the standard, as the mother of all houses and that if you're invited to sing there, if you work there, it means that somehow you have arrived.  I think that that concept is held by lots of different singers.  I don't think that that's true.  It's a magnificent house.  And I'm honored to work there.  Here in Chicago [Illinois], it's a magnificent house as well, Chicago Lyric Opera [sic. Lyric Opera of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and I'm proud when I'm here, when I'm able to work here.  But I'd been singing for years in Europe as an artist before I was invited to sing at The Metropolitan Opera.  And there are lots of fantastic opera singers that may or may not be household names, who don't get--fantastic, wonderful--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --singing actors and actresses, who have never made their Metropolitan Opera debut for whatever the reasons may be.  And that doesn't make them any less of artist than some of the names that you may know.  So while it is a great honor to work there, there are also lots of other wonderful houses.
Speaker 1: Around the world.
Speaker 2: Around the world.
Speaker 1: And when you love it, it doesn't matter where you sing.
Speaker 2: (Applause).
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: You love it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (Applause).
Story_ID: 577212
Speaker 1: There was a time early in your career when it was, when you thought maybe it was cut short, that it possibly wasn't going to happen.  You lost your voice.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Do you remember how?  Do you remember why?  Or is it still a mystery?
Speaker 2: Not any more.  At the time, it was a great mystery.  I had won the Metropolitan regional auditions [Metropolitan Opera National Council Auditions] in New England, and in between that time--it's sort of like the Miss America pageant.  And they go around to all the different states, and they have this big competition.  And whoever wins from that region goes on to New York [New York] for the nationals [Grand Finals Concert].  And so I won from my region of New England.  And in between that time, there was maybe a three or four-month period before the national finals were held in New York City at The Metropolitan Opera [New York, New York].  You stay there for one week.  You coach with the coaching staff--with the whole music staff that they have there and prepare for one huge concert.  And then from that, the judges make their selection of maybe about ten singers.  And it was in this little window--I sang great for the regionals, and I won.  Actually, I had to win.
Speaker 1: Why, why is that?  Why did you have to win?
Speaker 2: I was gonna get evicted from my apartment.
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 2: I was.
Speaker 1: Was there a cash prize?
Speaker 2: There was a cash prize (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: And I said--I had one roommate who just sort of walked out, and she disappeared and everybody was sending in their rent separately.  And we found out later that we were like three months behind.  And so we were getting ready to get evicted.  And I found out about this competition, and I--and it was a cash price, and I said, I'm gonna go win that competition.  That's what I'm gonna go do.
Speaker 1: I got to keep the lights on (laughter).
Speaker 2: I gotta (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Applause).
Speaker 2: That's right, gotta keep the lights on.
Speaker 1: I sang and I sang well, but in between that time of the nation--the regionals and the nationals--
Speaker 2: Of those regionals.
Speaker 1: --I completely lost my voice.  I completely lost--it was the craziest, most mysterious thing ever.  What happened with me is that it became gradual.  Something was wrong, physically wrong in my anatomy that, I saw seven different voice doctors, and nobody could figure out what it was.  They saw a tremendous amount of phlegm on the vocal cords, and the body is so perfect that if there's something wrong, the body produces more phlegm to protect the cords.  And so I kept saying that the more that I sing, the worse it's getting, which was true because the more that I was singing, the cords were, weren't well--they weren't in a state of wellness.  And so the more that I sang, it created more phlegm to protect itself.  And so that's why the sound kept getting--and so I just completely lost the sound.  And I saw all these doctors, and I saw even a witch doctor who told me somebody put a curse on me-
Speaker 2: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 1: Looking for answers in every corner.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  (Nodding head).
Speaker 1: How did you feel emotionally?  At this time, I mean singing is such a great part of your life up until now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I was getting ready for this (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and you were so close.
Speaker 2: --serious competition at the national side.  And I arrived there in New York, and I was singing the first day.  And Larry Stayer [Lawrence F. Stayer] who had been a great supporter of mine at that time, said, "[HistoryMaker] Denyce [Graves], I'm sorry, but this is not the voice that we heard a few months ago.  And we're gonna have to take you out of this competition."  But I basically had to go back to Boston [Massachusetts] with my tail between my legs, and, and also not know what the problem was.  I finally saw a doctor who realized that I had an imbalance of the thyroid and put me on some medication that regulated that.  But that threw everything off.
Speaker 1: You had to take a year off.
Speaker 2: I took a year off, but I didn't know how long that would (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How long it would be.
Speaker 2: --how long that would be.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so, at that time, I had already started with some small contracts, and I was very excited about that.  And I had to cancel everything.  And at that time, I was working full-time as a secretary.
Story_ID: 577213
Speaker 1: Well, this is the fiftieth year of Marian Anderson's debut at The Metropolitan Opera [New York, New York], and, of course, happily so, history has moved past the time when African Americans were not allowed to sing on the stage of the opera houses or even to participate as, as audience members.  [HistoryMaker] Denyce [Graves], let's take a look at how you and your work are becoming a part of our future.
Speaker 2: (Film clip).
ANNOUNCER:  In an effort to educate, Denyce Graves has conducted master classes, preparing opera singers for the future.
ANNOUNCER:  She is known as one of the most highly esteemed African American mezzo-sopranos on the current opera scene.  Denyce Graves recently recorded with Latin American artists, bringing diverse works to the mainstream.
ANNOUNCER:  In 2005, her repertoire took on a new territory with the lead role in 'Margaret Garner,' based on the novel, 'Beloved' by Nobel laureate, Toni Morrison, who returned to the story as a librettist with composer, Richard Danielpour.  This story of a real-life fugitive who attempted to kill her children rather than have them become slaves, tells a compelling American story.
ANNOUNCER:  For Graves, it is a time of new challenges and making history.
Speaker 1: (Applause).
Speaker 2: Wonderful role.  I can't wait to see that.  I can't wait to see you in 'Margaret Garner.'  How often does--how often do new operas come along?
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: I mean we often hear of the same ones, 'Tristan und Isolde' [Richard Wagner], 'Aida' [Giuseppe Verdi], 'Tosca' [Giacomo Puccini].
Speaker 1: Right, and those are standards in the repertoire and they'll be around forever because they're just so beloved and they're--the music is magnificent and the work--I mean they're real masterpieces.  But there're a lot of new operas being created all the time in lots of contemporary operas.  The problem is or the challenge is making sure that those become the modern-day 'Tristans' and 'Toscas' and that sort of thing.  And I think that--I certainly hope so in the case of 'Margaret Garner,' that's for sure.  But I know that there's been great, there are great operas being written all the time.  And it--people just have to, they have to hear them, and they have to come to the theater, you know.
Story_ID: 577214
Speaker 1: Well, people certainly come from around the world to see you in 'Carmen' [Georges Bizet], that is, one of your sig--, or dare I say, your signature role--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and you are known and beloved for playing that passionate, alluring character.  But you've also said that to sing Carmen is, is frustrating.  Why is that?
Speaker 2: Well, because all of the pretty music goes to everybody else.
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, that could be frustrating.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she's a magnificent personality.  She's very attractive to a lot of singers because she is a personality of great allure.  But from a singing standpoint--from an acting standpoint, it's also very attractive too because it's a great, emotional range that you get to sort of explore throughout the whole of the evening.  But from a singing standpoint, it's very frustrating because the music is not what we say, cantabile, which means singable, you know, the, the foil to Carmen, Micaela, gets all of the beautiful music or in, also Don Jose gets all of the beautiful music.  Carmen never has a moment alone.  But certainly from a musical standpoint, from me, I find it frustrating because I think her music is angular.  And it can be hard on the instrument.
Speaker 2: If this is a hard role to sing, what measures do you take to protect it?
Speaker 1: Fortunately for me, as we discussed earlier, and I think it is a gift when you have difficulty and when you have vocal problems, because you learn how to take care of the instrument.  You learn how to care for it.  You learn what not to do.  And that takes a seasoning.  It takes the experience of walking through it.  You know, I had a professor who said to me, and it's so true, he said, "[HistoryMaker] Denyce [Graves], you'll never be judged on your best singing.  You'll always be judged on your average singing, and you have to work to get your average singing above everybody else's."  And that's what the challenge is.  The day that you're in, like the best voice--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --just a day you're at home, you know, cleaning out the closet.
Speaker 2: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: You know, (laughter) just a day, you know.  You're out at the movies, and you think what did you do with your gramophone now.
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 2: Today is the day I need to record 'Carmen,' you know.  But it's never when you have your Met [The Metropolitan Opera, New York, New York] debut.  It's never when you have your Carnegie Hall [New York, New York] debut.  It's not--you know, because there're so many other things that come into play.  And the thing that's so challenging about being a singer is that, first of all, you can't see the instrument.  So you don't know how it's doing.  You know, it's sort of this animal that we, we wait--I wait until I go into the dressing room on the night of performance to see what sort of voice I have that evening.  Oh, today I need to make sure that I have a lot of lift here, and today I have to make sure that I really get my breath low, and all those things which you--which are part of your good vocal technique in the first place, but you have to modify that, depending on how the voice speaks that day because it is the body.  And whatever you do to the body will be reflected in the instrument itself.  It's difficult for us too because either I'm preparing or recovering from something.  And so it leaves very little time to sometimes live.  I remember when (laughter), I was standing with my voice teacher at Oberlin College [Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio], and I went in for a voice lesson one day.  And she said, "Your voice doesn't sound good today."  She said, "What were you doing last night?"  I said, "I was out with some friends laughing."  And she said, "You were laughing?"  (Laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Oh, no.
Speaker 2: --the night before a voice lesson?
Speaker 1: Not good.
Speaker 2: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 1: Laughing is not good for the voice.
Speaker 2: Not good, not good because you'd think that a cellist wouldn't be playing the cello from the moment that he woke up in the morning until he went to bed.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: But we're speaking, and oftentimes, oftentimes, we're not speaking as well as we sing.  And by that I mean, when we're singing, we learn how to produce beautiful sounds, and we learn about placement and we learn about focus and we learn about squillo and all these vocal terms that help place the voice and take the voice off of the vocal cords because that's what you want, is to--you want for there not to be pressure on the cords.  But when we're speaking, we laughing, "Ahhhhh," "How you doing," that sort of thing.  And all of that's right on the cords.   And if you doing that from sun-up to sundown, you're using the instrument.  And that means that when you actually need it--and singing opera is heavy-duty stuff.  It's major stuff.  I mean we're not singing with the enhancement of microphones and all of that stuff.  It's just on the pure instrument itself.  It's a natural art form.  And so, when you need that to be in form, it means that you have to conserve how often you're using the instrument.  And you learn to take care of it.  All you have to do is fall down one time really badly in an important performance and know what that feels like, to know that you never wanna have to live that again.  I'm still studying.  I'm still learning about the voice all the time.  And I find it amazing.  The more that you do it, the more seasoned you become at it, and the better you become at it, hopefully, if you're singing well.  And that's the great thing.  That's the thing that I love the most about this business is that you can't fake it.  You cannot fake it.  Either you know how to do it or you don't.  It's not who you know-
Speaker 1: (Applause).
Speaker 2: You've got to do the work.  There's no cheating.  There's no--you gotta deliver and everybody knows.
Story_ID: 577215
Speaker 1: --Now you have said, and what do you mean that you have the personality of a mezzo-soprano?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't think--
Speaker 1: What is the difference between that and the lyric soprano?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I'm not dying of consumption and not very fragile, and one of these, you know, sopranos who were fainting and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 2: I think that my personality, my temperament is much more like bull.  It's (bull imitation), you know, stronger.
Speaker 1: (Applause).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Applause).
Speaker 2: I think that I could play those parts, but I think that it's, I don't--I think that my fabric, my whole makeup, physical makeup, is stronger and reflects some of those women that I portray.  And they have influenced me greatly too, and I've learned a lot from them and gained a lot of strength by knowing those particular women.  I think the thing that's been most invaluable to me was flushing out these particular characters.  And it sounds so simple, but it's the truth.  It's to learn to be yourself.  You know, when I met Leontyne Price, I had heard so many of her recordings.  And I still listen to her, and I'm still fascinated by her.  But I always felt that I knew her through her voice.  I always felt that she was really giving us a great gift as to who she was.  And when I was invited to her home, it's just the two of us girls sitting around talking, I said to her, I knew this is how you were.  I knew it, I knew it--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --I could hear it in your voice, you know.  And, I think that's saying something, particularly being an African American woman in what may be considered by some to be a European art form.  I hear everything that she is in her singing.  I hear that she's southern.  I hear that she's African American.  I hear that she's a woman.  I hear that she has a great sense of humor.  I hear that she's a great study, that she's very intelligent.  All those things to me come across in her voice, and I think that to arrive at a place in a business where the business doesn't always welcome you, to learn in the end to be yourself on the stage, through those characters, for me it was a great achievement.
Speaker 1: (Applause).
Story_ID: 577216
Speaker 1: Before the curtain rises and I'm gonna take that journey with those performers.  They're gonna make me believe because they believe.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I believe. When I come through the door, I'm ready and willing to do that.  I'm paying to do that.  So when I look about at the opera houses, I see that it's very homogeneous.  There's a lot of sameness and it's very European, and there you are on the stage (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have to digress.  When you did that, I saw that woman [Bernadine, played by Angela Bassett in 'Waiting to Exhale'] who burned the clothes of her husband.
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).  (Applause).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  Oh, (laughter)--
Speaker 1: I was like, oh, yeah, this is Angela Bassett, yeah.
Speaker 2: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: You all know what I'm talking about.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Yeah, you do digress.
Speaker 2: I loved that.  No, it's true, it's true.
Speaker 1: Have you experienced racism in the opera world?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, sure.
Speaker 1: So, and what do you do about it?
Speaker 2: I just keep singing with all the love in my heart that I can-
Speaker 1: (Applause).
Speaker 2: I just keep singing.  I just singing in the face of all that.  Of course, I've experienced it.  And I always will, and I think everybody always will.  I mean it's a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Have you ever been denied jobs because of it?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, sure.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Sure, and I've had some general directors and autenaunts [ph.] tell me very frankly, and which I appreciated as well.  At least I knew who was standing in front of me.  So I appreciated that.  And that'll--you know, I don't expect that to change, I don't.  But I, I mean I think that if we want change, it's us who has to change, you know.  It's an inside job.  I can't do anything about anybody else and how they feel and what they think and what--
Speaker 1: (Applause).
Speaker 2: --nor do I want to.
Speaker 1: (Applause).
Speaker 2: Nor do I want to.  My job is to sing and to sing well, and to make it impossible for them to say, no.
Speaker 1: We're judged so many times because of our age, because of our girth, our size, and you have a friend who's an opera singer.  And there was an incident--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --on the stage in Germany.
Speaker 2: Oh, exactly.  That's right.  Beautiful singer, oh, she is--I would, I would walk on glass to hear her sing.  She is magnificent.  And the top is of such exquisite beauty, but she is a very, very, very large woman.  And we were doing a concert together in Germany.  And when she was singing, I went into the audience because I love her voice.  And when she came on stage, when she walked out on stage, everybody laughed.  Everybody laughed when she came out.  And when she opened her mouth to sing, everybody's jaws dropped.  And that's the other thing that I said that I loved about the business is that it's so pure, it's so honest, you know.  It's about the beauty of singing--the beauty of the voice, you know.  And nobody could deny what was coming out of her mouth, that--you knew that, once she sang, you could see the face of god, you just knew it, you know.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: And, but it's true that it's not just that.  It's a concert of--people could stay at home and listen to a CD, and it also is a theater.  And we're judged, whether we're black, whether we're too tall, whether we're too short and whether we're whatever.  We're gonna always be judged about that.  I cannot, and I refuse to waste my time and energy concentrating and focusing on that.  I've got enough work to do on myself.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And to just keep maintaining a level of excellence--and that's where I'm focused on, because I don't care about any, any of that.  And I also, I just have my faith somewhere else.  It's not in the business.
Speaker 1: (Applause).
Speaker 2: And I believe, I believe that I was, I say that I believe that this is a business that you don't choose.  I think it chooses you, and I believe that I was called to do this.  I know it, I know I was.  I felt that right away, and I believe that this is taken care of, that it's in greater hands.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And so--
Speaker 1: (Applause).
Speaker 2: --I don't worry about it.  I mean, I don't worry about it.  And I've been confronted with it, and more and more, more and more, you know.
Story_ID: 577217
Speaker 1: We can speak about the great--and we have made tremendous progress, and I'm so proud when I see some of those clips of lots of other women besides, who came, came before Marian Anderson.  And when I'm there at The Metropolitan Opera [New York, New York] or any place or here at Chicago Lyric [sic. Lyric Opera of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and I'm walking around the theater, I'm so proud to be there and so happy to be there.  But you look around, and you think, well, where are the men?  You know, where are they?  And they're there.  They exists.  And one of the reasons I'm so proud of this piece, this 'Margaret Garner' [Richard Denielpour] that we're doing as well is, is that you do get a chance to see some fantastic African American men.  I mean everybody can sort of quote to you, Leontyne Price and Kathy Battle [Kathleen Battle], Jessye Norman (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, (unclear) [Shirley] Verrett and Grace Bumbry, exactly.
Speaker 1: And then for the men, everybody's quiet.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, were you (unclear)--
Speaker 1: They exists, they exists and about, they exists, and they're out there in greater numbers than we know.  But I just believe that we just have to keep singing, make it as beautiful, and as I said, to just hold onto that in--whatever it was that ignited inside of you that drew you to this in the first place, to not lose that, to remember that the business of music making is less beautiful than the art form itself, right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: But to hold on to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But to hold on to your first love----
Speaker 1: To that great beauty.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what's important.  And that's what touches people in the end anyway.  And you can sing perfectly and you can do all sorts of roulotte and jump and do all sorts of vocal acrobats.  And all that stuff is very impressive, but I think that at the end of the day, it's a person who touches you, who moves you in some way because music has that power to express that which is inexpressible, to touch you at the deepest part of who we are.  And that's why it's sacred.
Story_ID: 577218
Speaker 1: Now, I know that there is another someone who has touched you at the deepest part, and this is, this is a very new experience for you.  You've become a mother.  I'm sure I can imagine that that has to have changed you, informed your work in some way and how as a busy opera singer, a diva traveling to world, do you manage to, to balance the two?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's like when my voice teacher said, you were singing?  You were laughing on the night before a voice lesson?  I didn't wanna miss my life in the midst of all of this.  I'm having a grand time, and I consider it a privilege and an honor to do what I do, that brings me so much joy and so much beauty.  I would do it, whether people were listening or not.  So I am so grateful that I am able to make a living at doing something that brings me so much joy, and hopefully, brings joy to others as well.  But I also didn't want to miss the human experience of just being a woman and being here, I just--I didn't want to miss that.  I didn't wanna miss my life by spending so much time in the practice room that--you know, I would go away on my engagements.  And I always thought when I go home, I'm gonna do this, and when I go home I'm gonna do that.  And every time I came--well, first of all I wasn't going home (laughter)
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 2: And then every time I came back my nephews were so much bigger, and I thought, when did this happen?  You know, I feel like the same.  The last time I saw you, you were two.  And now you're eighteen.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 1: You know what I mean, and life is passing by.  And although I still feel like the same girl--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --time is passing in front of me, and I know it.  And I see it even greater now through the eyes of my daughter [Ella Thomas].
Story_ID: 577219
Speaker 1: After our nation's tragedy, September 11th [2001, 9/11], you were called to sing in the nation's capital [Washington, D.C.] for our national day of mourning.  And you've also become an, and were asked to be a cultural ambassador for our nation around the world.  What has that experience meant to you?
Speaker 2: You know, when I was fifteen, I had the great privilege of being able to go to Germany as an exchange student.  And I lived with a German family there.  And that was an amazing experience.  And my mother [Dorothy Middleton Graves-Kenner] stayed at home.  It was like one of these fairy tale stories, the mother stayed at home, and prepared the--you know, and she took care of the house and she took care of the children every--while the father went off to work.  But I remember her speaking on the telephone to a friend.  And she said, "We have an American staying with us."  And I said, "An American?"
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 2: I'm an American.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I wasn't even an American in America.
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).  (Applause).
Speaker 2: Right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (Applause).
Speaker 1: So for me, it was a great, a great, great honor and privilege because I feel that growing up, I mean I--I think my life is the so-called American Dream because I find myself in an area of life that was very unlikely that someone from my upbringing would find themselves.  And so--and I'm proud of that.  And so I'm proud to go around as an American ambassador because I also think that I bring a very different perspective.  It's, you know, you have to go away to see what people really think about you, you know.  Not everybody likes us, that's for sure.  That's for sure.  And, but I'm happy to sit down and speak with people and to share and to listen to them and to learn from them as well, and to try in one small way to extend the hand and to mend in some way, if we--if I can do that, that's brings me a tremendous sense of pride.  And then I think, now you're doing something really great with your life, [HistoryMaker] Denyce [Graves], you know.  That's really beautiful.  So that was and is a great honor for me.  I'm proud, even with all of the problems that we have, I'm still very, very proud to, to be an American and very proud to be an African American woman.
Speaker 2: (Applause).
Speaker 1: I can say for sure, I know that you are representing us very, very well.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Applause).
Speaker 2: And I thank you.
Speaker 1: (Applause).
Speaker 2: And I know you spend a great deal of time on the road, so, of course, we have to thank your husband and we thank little Ella [Thomas] and I'm grateful to your mother for being there for you and--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, that's a blessing.
Speaker 2: --thank you so very much for being so open and so candid about your life and your experiences with us tonight.  I really appreciate it.  I've learned so much, and I'm sure our audience has learned a great deal about opera and, and so rushing out to see it when you're in town.
Speaker 1: (Applause).
Speaker 2: And I thank you also on behalf of all those little girls and boys who are somewhere right now singing their hearts out, and you are blazing a path before them.  Thank you, Denyce Graves, thank you.
Speaker 1: (Applause).
Story_ID: 577220
Speaker 1: (Music clip of HistoryMaker Denyce Graves' opera performance).
Speaker 2: (Credits running).
ANNOUNCER:  The preceding program was produced by The HistoryMakers which is solely responsible for its content.  Major funding for the preceding program was provided by Discover Financial Services.  Additional funding was provided by the McDonald's Corporation, Citigroup, Walgreens and other participating sponsors.  To order a DVD of 'An Evening With Denyce Graves,' send a check or money order for $34.99 for DVD, $29.99 for VHS to the address below or call 866-914-1900.
