Story_ID: 220354
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Professor [Larry] Gibson, we're just gonna start with me saying that my name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton, and I am the interviewer.  Matthew Hickey is the videographer, and today's date is Monday, September 20th, 2004.  And this interview is taking place at the University of Maryland law school [University of Maryland Francis King Carey School of Law, Baltimore, Maryland].  Now if you would please just for the record tell us your full name, including your middle name, and spell it.
Speaker 2: Larry Steven, the Steven is S-T-E-V-E-N, Gibson, G-I-B-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And if you would, please tell us the date and location of your birth.
Speaker 2: I was born March 22nd, 1942 in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: And your occupation.
Speaker 2: I am a law professor and a lawyer.
Story_ID: 220355
Speaker 1: Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I'm a meat eater.  So a good, a really good steak.  But I got high quality, I mean high standards of what's a good steak.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer any--yeah the summer, warm weather.
Speaker 1: And your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite color.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: I travel a lot.  I've been to about sixty countries, so I guess the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying.  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think I have a favorite phrase or saying.
Speaker 1: Okay.  If one comes to mind, just let me know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'll let you know.
Story_ID: 220356
Speaker 1: Now if you will [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Larry] Gibson, let's talk a little bit about your mother, starting with her name and where she was born and where she grew, where she grew up as a child.
Speaker 2: My mother is Daisy Juanita [ph.] Hall was her maiden name.  Daisy Juanita Peterson now.  She--following my first stepfather's [Benjamin Gibson] death, remarried about fifteen years ago.  And my mother is eighty-two I believe.  And she was born in St. Mary's County, Maryland, southern Maryland.  Moved to Washington, D.C. initially at about age seventeen or eighteen.  And lived there for a while, and ultimately moved to Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 1: And did she ever share any stories with you about what life was like for her in St. Mary's County?
Speaker 2: Yes, I went and spent some time in St. Mary's County, so I do know a lot about that community and I'm in touch with my relatives there and so I, I have a fairly good understanding of my family from my mother's side.
Speaker 1: And what was some of the things she told you about what life was like for her as a girl growing up?
Speaker 2: St. Mary's County was primarily at the back of the country at that time.  Many of the people were farmers, although her father was an aggressive non-farmer.  He was a carpenter and refused to farm.  But other people in the family did.  It's at a part of Maryland where it's very close to water, where it comes to a tip there.  So the Chesapeake Bay, the St. Mary's River, the Patuxent River and the Potomac [River] are all close by, and so almost everybody in the family were--principal recreation was fishing, probably still is.  But it certainly was at the time when she grew up and that continues to be my mother's principal recreation, fishing.
Speaker 1: Actually, how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother's very intelligent.  An organizer, a leader.  This was prior to her stroke.  About ten years ago she had a stroke that, that paralyzed her left, excuse me, her right side.  And that slowed her down quite a bit, but prior to that, most of her leadership activities were associated with the church.  Smile almost all of the time, effervescent personality.  It's--I would say that in a time that I've been in my mother's presence, probably no less, no more than five percent of the time she didn't have her smile.  So 95 percent of my recollections of being with my mother is she's smiling.
Story_ID: 220357
Speaker 1: What about your father, what can you tell us about your father starting with his name.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well the--my, my functional father was my stepfather.  My biological father I never met.  But when I was age four, my mother [Daisy Hall Gibson Peterson] met who--my stepfather, whose name I took, Benjamin Franklin Gibson.  And that's who raised me and who I think of as my father.  He was hardworking, never had any less than three jobs, primarily as a janitor.  A large man, a mild-mannered person.  Just as taciturn as my mother is talkative.  They didn't look the same.  They've very different personalities.  He was calm and my mother's effervescent and, and very active.
Speaker 1: And did he ever share any stories with you about what life was like for him as a boy?
Speaker 2: No, not much in terms--I mean I met his mother and his brother who was in Detroit [Michigan], and the family.  But never learned much.  He told us that he was from Herford, I think it's H-E-R-F-O-R-D [sic. Hertford], North Carolina, but not really much about what he did as a youngster.
Speaker 1: And how far back can you trace your ancestry?
Speaker 2: Well on my mother's side I could go back maybe six generations, pretty far back on my mother's side. On my stepfather's side about three.
Speaker 1: Do you know if they came from free people or slaves?
Speaker 2: The--I would go back to, it would be after the Civil War.  So what they were prior to the Civil War, I don't know.  I assume that they were slaves.  I mean I don't have any information that indicated otherwise.  But, but there's a--and I think about it, a wing of my mother's ancestors were in Baltimore [Maryland] and 50 percent of the African Americans in Baltimore were free.  And my great-grandfather, Napoleon Jackson [ph.] certainly was a distinguished looking man, but he probably was born before the end of the Civil War.  So--but I don't really know.
Speaker 1: What can you tell us about your grandparents?
Speaker 2: My mother's father was a carpenter in St. Mary's County, Maryland.  His wife's name was Mamie [ph.] Hall, and she did domestic work.  And there were about ten siblings.  The parents of my stepfather, who I regarded functionally certainly as my father, Eliza Gibson and Benjamin Gibson.  And I met his father only briefly, but his grandmother, his mother, was a really delightful person.  Eliza Gibson lived in Baltimore, lived with us.  Just full of love, and a grandmama.
Story_ID: 220358
Speaker 1: What's your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: I don't know if this is the earliest, but I do have a little recollection of the period of time before my mother [Daisy Hall Gibson Peterson] married my stepfather [Benjamin Gibson] and we moved to Baltimore [Maryland].  Because I do clearly remember arriving in Baltimore in 1946 at age four and, and moving in with the rest of my family.  I say the rest of my family because I had another brother and my stepfather's wife had died from polio.  And so there were four siblings there, so it was an instant family of six people, six children.  And we were raised together, along with a cousin, my mother's sister's son who moved in.  So it was a--very quickly a fairly large family.  I remember the actual beginning of that and a little bit prior to that, so that would put me at some time before age four because I have some recollection of living in Washington, D.C. with relatives on my mother's side before coming to Baltimore.
Story_ID: 220359
Speaker 1: And what were holidays like in your house growing up?  Were they very special times?
Speaker 2: Well my family, my parents [Daisy Hall Gibson Peterson and Benjamin Gibson] were both very active in the church and so Christmas of course was--Thanksgiving was associated with eating.  And those were the two main holidays.  Other holidays--the main significance of them is that you didn't go to school.  I mean so--but, but Christmas.  Or Easter, no, no.  Palm Sunday you got this little piece of palm before that.  And then Easter you got new clothing, so I do remember, I do remember Easter was a clothing thing.  Let's see; Fourth of July was--in Washington [D.C.] they had fireworks but they couldn't have 'em in Maryland, so we'd go over and see the fireworks with relatives over there.  Never could understand that.  There was always a lot of sale of fireworks on streets of Washington very close to the border.  There was a big difference in law as to the availability of fireworks.  So Fourth of July was, was either going over or sneaking in from Washington, D.C. fireworks.  Let me see, Labor Day was--we had to go back to school soon, so I didn't like Labor Day.  I liked school but even so, that was the significance to me of Labor Day is school's ready to start.
Story_ID: 220360
Speaker 1: What was daily life for you like?  What was daily life for you like as a boy?
Speaker 2: Well it depended upon the age.
Speaker 1: As a, as a young boy.
Speaker 2: As a young boy it was school [Fannie J. Coppin Normal and Demonstration School; Coppin State University, Baltimore, Maryland] and life was pretty much confined to our block and maybe a couple of blocks, playing.  I mean as a very young kid on the--in the house, out on the front.  We didn't have a front yard 'cause it was Fulton Avenue, they had marble steps, which we had to scrub.  I remember scrubbing marble steps.  In the backyard, in the back next door, the neighbor who got the first television, next door neighbor Mrs. Evans [ph.].  She was the only one in the block who had a television.  So everyone humored Mrs. Evans to be able to see television and then would be a matter of trying to get her to turn off Arthur Godfrey or Kate Smith so we could see Westerns or 'Howdy Doody' or something that was fun.  But we quickly learned to hate Arthur Godfrey and Kate Smith who had variety shows and wasn't a lot of fun to kids.  So that would have been, I don't know, 1950s or thereabouts.
Story_ID: 220361
Speaker 1: Could you please give us your siblings' names in birth order, including yourself?
Speaker 2: Okay.  There was a younger sibling, his name's Stanley who, when I was age ten, who was age eight, who died of polio and spent most of his life in a hospital.  There was a large polio epidemic in the late '40s [1940s].  And then all--very close to mine was a stepbrother Benjamin, who is deceased.  And then next were twins, Frances [Gibson Alston] and Frank [Gibson], one year and a month older than me.  Birthdays were April 25th.  They're still living and my brother Frank I see quite often.  He helps me with my mother [Daisy Hall Gibson Peterson] and my sister.  Frances lives in New York.  And my older brother James [Gibson] died about four years ago.
Speaker 1: You talked a little bit about your block and your community.  Can you kind of describe it for us?  Tell us--
Speaker 2: Well I lived on Fulton Avenue, which at that time was a wide street that had a median, grassy median strip down it.  It's subsequently been reduced, it's now just a little concrete thing in the middle there.  The streetcar came down it on the tracks, the Number One streetcar.  And later was the first line in Baltimore [Maryland] to convert from the streetcar to the trackless trolley, which was an electrical powered vehicle, but off of the tracks that could come to the curb and frequently the little line would come off and the man had to get out, go around and pull it down.  The, the school was one block away.  There was a lot that we walked through and then--so I guess it would probably be called two blocks away, but no more than that, for the elementary school.  And the store that we would, I would go to, the two of them were around the corner, one on the corner and one around the corner on the block.  So life as, at, at ages six, seven, eight was, was pretty much until junior high school in our community, except in the summer when we'd go down to the country, St. Mary's County, Maryland.  And then I later spent a couple of years, four years in St. Mary's County, my fifth and sixth grades.  Then it changes when you get--junior high school.  I caught the streetcar, two streetcars.  Went outside of my community to Booker T. Washington Junior High School [Booker T. Washington Middle School for the Arts, Baltimore, Maryland] and met youngsters from all over the city and my horizons expanded with that.
Story_ID: 220362
Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up [in Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 2: Different ages.  I mean my parents [Daisy Hall Gibson Peterson and Benjamin Gibson] were active in the church and so I certainly remember how much I did not like to spend large periods of time at church, I spent too much, and still don't go to church.  Partially because of it.  I mean I developed a very negative reaction to, to going to church.  But there was a nice lady, the pastor's wife, Mrs. Gentry [ph.], always had some cookies and stuff for us.  But--so I--
Speaker 1: So the sight--is the church a sight?
Speaker 2: A sight.  I mean I do remember Sunday wondering what inning of the baseball game we would finally get home.  I mean the [Baltimore] Orioles played on Sunday in the afternoon.  Games start around one [o'clock].  Hopefully I would--I was hoping I could get home by, by the third inning.  So I mean I, I can't say have a, a big--I, I didn't--I was bored in church and I wanted to get out 'cause you had to sit still in church.  And I wanted to be out and move around.
Speaker 1: And what sounds and smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: I--the--I have no distinctive smell recollections other than food.
Speaker 1: Anything like fresh rolls baking or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes things baking.  Food and mainly things baking in the oven.  And being required to tiptoe across the floor lest they fall.  I certainly--that could be bread, cake or bread pudding.  I don't think bread pudding fell.  I think you could walk across the floor, but I, I do, I do remember things baking.
Speaker 1: And what sounds?
Speaker 2: And I mean people's voices.  Very clear in my mind as to my mother's voice.  And other people's, other people's voices; people that I remember.  I have clear recollections of how they sounded.
Speaker 1: What about the streetcar?  When you--does that sound--
Speaker 2: It did ring a bell.  And I, I, I, yes I, I recall how the streetcar sounded.  And there was a bell ringing thing and a little clicking along.  But there are other street sounds.  There were arabbers, these were people--you know what they are--in Baltimore [Maryland] who sell vegetables from--and fruit from wagons and they're called arabbers.  I guess it's supposed to be Arabs.  But anyway arabbers.  Horses, horse-pulled carts, and they had distinctive ways of announcing to the public their products.  Somewhat reminiscent of, of you know I can't remember the, the, the-'Porgy and Bess,' you know, and there's a part you've got--when the watermelon man and you got that woman selling fresh strawberries.  Well those, those, those hawkers, I remember them.
Story_ID: 220363
Speaker 1: What was the name of the elementary school you attended?
Speaker 2: I attended a school with a complicated name.  [Fannie J.] Coppin [Normal and] Demonstration School [Baltimore, Maryland].  The principal--black teachers college was called--back then they called teachers schools normal schools, it's now Coppin State College, but maybe Coppin State University [Baltimore, Maryland] now.  But it was then called Coppin Normal School.  It was on the top floor of a building, the third floor.  And the first and second floor was the elementary school.  And I think because they did practice teaching a fair amount with us, I think that's why it was called Coppin Demonstration School.  Although I don't recall ever having a student teacher.  My recollection of my teachers as far as I know, they were regular teachers, but I do know that there were these older people going to school upstairs.
Speaker 1: And who were some of your teachers, do you remember some of your teachers from elementary?
Speaker 2: Elementary level I only recall one, which was my first grade teacher and I knew her name was Ms. Matthews [ph.].  I kept in touch with my junior high school teachers [at Booker T. Washington Junior High School; Booker T. Washington Middle School for the Performing Arts, Baltimore, Maryland] and they're, they're--my favorite one I, I see now, Gwendolyn, then Brooks, but Gwendolyn Stewart [L. Gwendolyn Brooks Stewart].  And, and my other favorite teacher in junior high school was a woman named Betty Williams [ph.].  I kept in touch with her.  And one man, Lou Richardson [Lewis H. Richardson, Jr.], and, and I--but following elementary school, there were some, now that I think about it, from that fifth and sixth grade when I was at St. Mary's County [Maryland], my fifth grade teacher was named Beulah Bennett and a woman by the name of Briscoe [ph.] who taught in St. Mary's County but lived in Baltimore [Maryland], on Monroe Street I do remember.
Speaker 1: And what type of student were you during the elementary school years?
Speaker 2: Throughout all school I was a good student and usually kind of a favorite of the teacher.  I liked teachers and tended to, to have a good relationship and often beyond the school year, later I kept in touch with most teachers.  I, I did well in school and I, I kind of liked school.
Speaker 1: And what type of child were you?
Speaker 2: Skinny, talkative and kind of, you know, sort of independent.  Opinionated.
Speaker 1: And during the elementary school years, did you have dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: Dreams--I through elementary school through life, for reasons I don't fully understood, assumed I would do well.  And so it was not so much a matter of boy, that's what I hope to become.  I was always confident that life was gonna be good for me.
Speaker 1: And where did you go to junior high school?
Speaker 2: I went for two grades to the seventh and the eighth grade to Booker T. Washington Junior High School.  And right as I was entering there, the Brown versus Board decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] came down.  And my brother and I were at junior high school, contemporaneously, for just one year, James [Gibson].  And so he went to--at the same high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland] I went to, which we integrated in '56 [1956], '55 [1955], one year after Brown.  But, when I was in Booker T., it was right after the Brown decision.
Speaker 1: And during junior high school, who was influencing you during those years?
Speaker 2: Two principal teachers who I've just mentioned, Gwendolyn Brooks had a significant--and she was a English teacher.  She couldn't influence me enough to improve my handwriting.  She was determined to do that and I kidded her recently at what of a failure she was in that.  And then another woman by the name of Betty Williams.  And I remember distinctly my homeroom teacher.  He never taught me, but we just met there at the homeroom, named Lou Richardson.  And I wasn't--it was at high school I got involved in athletics, so I do remember those--oh no and another teacher, a geography teacher who later became a state senator and an illustrious political career named Clarence [W.] Blount.
Story_ID: 220364
Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: The name of my high school's Baltimore City College [Baltimore, Maryland].  It was an all-male school at that time.  I went there in the ninth grade, even though high school began at the tenth.  They had something they called the A-course, which was the advanced course.  And another gentleman and I were the first two blacks in the, in the City College A-course.  And I really didn't like junior high school [Booker T. Washington Junior High School; Booker T. Washington Middle School for the Performing Arts, Baltimore, Maryland] that much, even though I had a good relation with teachers.  I did think that it was overly regimented and I was ready to get out of there.
Speaker 1: So, we were talking a little bit about your high school.  Was it a private high school or was it a public high school?
Speaker 2: No, it was a public high school, Baltimore City College.  And I, I really thrived in, in high school.  I enjoyed it.  I, I liked high school much more than junior high school; it was just far more freedom.  You were treated more as an adult.  I was active in student government and athletics and plays and it was a delightful four years.
Speaker 1: What was it like being at an all-boys school?
Speaker 2: It was fine, it was fine.  I'd gone to a coed junior high school and my recollection of that is that I guess because the women matured in some--girls faster than, there were, there were tensions there that just weren't there at high school.  There was a girls high school right next to it.  We had good teams.  I was on a track team that never lost a dual meet in fourteen years and we started that unbroken streak in terms of victories.  And so high school was fine.  And I enjoyed it very much.
Speaker 1: And you were the first African American class president?
Speaker 2: I was the first African American student government official, I was the class vice president.  So I was the first that.  I was the first black in a play, and there were several activities there in which I was the one, or the first one to, to engage in.  It was--I went there in 1956, two years after the Brown [v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] decision.  The student body still was less than 10 percent black, maybe even significant, maybe just about 5 percent, but it was fine.
Speaker 1: And what were some of your favorite subjects in high school?
Speaker 2: I didn't, and the reason--I didn't enjoy the, the languages as much.  And, except I liked one foreign teacher.  And the reason--I mean one foreign language teacher.  The reason I got out of the A-course, I thought that it over--I thought then there was too much in the foreign language.  In high school, I studied Latin, and she was a tough teacher.  I studied Spanish and German.  And I thought there was--I maybe--I to this day I think maybe they slightly overdid the foreign language part.  Just about everything else I did well in.  I did sporadic work in the foreign languages.  Better in Spanish 'cause I liked the teacher.
Story_ID: 220365
Speaker 1: And, who were some of your teachers in high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Well, Donald Matthews I remember because there were only two African American teachers in the school.  One was my Spanish teacher, Donald Matthews, and Eugene Parker, who was a physical education teacher.  History teacher named Buchanan [ph.] who was a very interesting man.  I became involved in the cross country and the track team.  For four years I was on both of those, and Jerome Nathanson was the track coach.  And I kept in touch with him until his death just a few years ago.  And there were, there were other teachers that I--that were personalities.  I remember an art teacher who thought I had some art talent, which I didn't.  I looked for him last weekend at the Irish Festival.  For years, he was a painter, he would have a booth in the Irish Festival.  I have to look and see how he's doing, named Jerry Doyle [ph.].
Speaker 1: And who was influencing you at this time in your life?  Who were you most influenced by?
Speaker 2: During my high school year, there was no particular mentor.  The school offered so many different new things to me, new names of people, new experiences.  I was just being influenced by the diversity of new ideas and new people and new things.  So I didn't need any pushing.
Speaker 1: What were some of your thoughts about college?
Speaker 2: Well I assumed I was gonna go to college.  I, in an interview in a newspaper I said I wanted to be a teacher, but I really hadn't formulated a definite game plan.  I thought I'd go to college.  I thought I would succeed in college and I'd figure out while I was in college what I wanted to do.  But people always ask you for a goal.  So I said schoolteacher, but my recollection is that I knew that I didn't have to make that decision as I was going to leaving high school to go to college and didn't make it until later.
Story_ID: 220366
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Professor [Larry] Gibson, how did you make the decision to go to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: I decided in going to college that I wanted to leave Baltimore [Maryland].  I didn't have much money, I had no money.  And so I, I did not want to have a major travel expense, with the drive over to Washington, D.C.  So it was out of Baltimore, but in easy train or bus commuting distance.  And I heard, you know, good things about the school.
Speaker 1: And tell us a little bit about what some of your experiences were like at Howard.
Speaker 2: I enjoyed Howard.  I mean Howard University, I mean, ultimately, I was student body president.  Became the commander of the [U.S.] Army and the [U.S.] Air Force ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  My roommate was the head of the homecoming, the head of the fraternity council.  I just enjoyed it; it was exciting time to be at Howard.  Was the beginning of a certain phase of the Civil Rights Movement, and so I was very active in that and the sit-ins and the various conferences at Howard.  Had many distinguished speakers who came there.  [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and Malcolm X.  It was--Howard University at the early '60s [1960s] was an exciting place and I enjoyed it very much.
Speaker 1: And you were chairperson of the D.C. Students for Civil Rights.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about that organization.
Speaker 2: This was during the time of the passage of--the fight to get passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act that we're now celebrating the fortieth anniversary of.  The previous efforts had been frustrated by filibusters by the southern senators.  The D.C. Students for Civil Rights, originally the idea was created by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in a leadership conference, was to have a student organization that would draw on students from all of the college campuses in Washington, D.C. to lobby [U.S.] Congress persons and senators.  Since these students came from all over the country, and they were right there in Washington, D.C., who better to, to assist the lobbying efforts?  So these were students from Georgetown University [Washington, D.C.], American University [Washington, D.C.], Howard, [The] Catholic [University of America, Washington, D.C.], and some other colleges there.  And that's what we did.  In addition to the lobbying, the main event we held was a week-long filibuster for civil rights, for the civil rights bill held on the grounds of the Washington Monument [Washington, D.C.].  On the grounds there is an open theater there called the Sylvan Theater [Washington, D.C.], I think it's still there.  And we had a week-long event that got a fair amount of attention.  We got a president--a letter from President [Lyndon Baines] Johnson and other senators to, to--highlighting support for the bill that ultimately passed and became the Civil Rights Act of '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: So, also (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I was the chairman of this campus-wide group.  The city-wide group of students from, from all these college campuses--
Story_ID: 220367
Speaker 1: And you also became involved in--you, you organized your first political campaign at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] for homecoming queen (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, absolutely.  The first one was--as a freshman was Georgia Pearson [ph.] for homecoming queen.  That almost got me and several others put out of Howard.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: The most important election there was for the homecoming queen, and historically the homecoming queen had either been an AK [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] or a Delta [Sigma Theta Sorority].  And controlled by the fraternities and sororities, which I later became a member of a fraternity.  But at that point, independents, as people who weren't in fraternities almost had no chance.  But here we were, we were freshman.  And we had the temerity to, to think that since we were--outnumbered everybody else, we could elect a homecoming queen.  You had to be a senior, the candidate, and have a B average.  We supported a young woman by the name of Georgia Pearson.  And the event that caused the problem, or the activity is without my knowledge, and I really didn't direct this, one of my enthusiastic, or a group of them campaign people created a stencil for the--with the words "Georgia on my mind."  Georgia--the, the Ray Charles song had just come out and became our campaign--and they went around the campus with this spray paint and painted it all over the sidewalks and buildings.  And the dean had us out there scrubbing it on our knees, scrubbing that stuff up.  But not all of it came up.  I showed my wife [Diana Gibson] ten years later one place where it was on a side of one of these little posts that you have there at the--to block traffic, and it stayed there for at least ten years, maybe more than that, "Georgia on my mind."
Story_ID: 220368
Speaker 1: --When did you make the decision to go to law school?  When did you make the decision to actually--
Speaker 2: I think in my soph--junior year, 'cause I guess I applied the beginning of my sophomore, I mean beginning of, of my senior year.  I started thinking about it.  I guess I decided in my junior year at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and I applied to--I applied to Duke [University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina] because the dean came up and recruited.  But I pretty much decided I wanted to go to New York [New York].  I, I decided law--the location by geography.  So I applied to Columbia University [Law School, New York, New York], NYU [New York University School of Law, New York, New York].  I was accepted to both and I went to Columbia.  But I was fascinated about getting to know New York and that's how I decided where to go to law school.
Speaker 1: Was New York all that you--
Speaker 2: I was gonna go to New York City.
Speaker 1: --hoped it would be.
Speaker 2: I even had a backup plan for Brooklyn Law School [New York, New York].  I decided it was time to go to New York.  Don't ask me why (laughter)--
Story_ID: 220369
Speaker 1: Was it all that you hoped it would be?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed New York [New York], yes.  I wanted to get comfortable and familiar with New York.  And found it, yes just a fascinating place.  And interestingly enough, because there was so much to do, I found it an easy place to study.  Because there was instant ability to, to get entertainment or whatever, I could concentrate and not worry that I've gotta go to this thing that's coming through because something like it may not come along.  There wasn't that in New York at all.  I studied more than I'd ever done.
Speaker 1: And so when you graduated from law school [Columbia University Law School, New York, New York], you worked as an associate for Brown, Allen, Dorsey [and Josey, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Well I first clerked for one year for a federal judge, United States District Judge Frank [A.] Kaufman for one year.  Each federal judge had two law clerks, and there I met my best friend, Ron Shapiro [Ronald M. Shapiro], and we've been close friends since then.  Very close.  In our law firm, his office is right next to mine.  Our kids have grown up together.  And then after that, I had to make a decision whether I would accept some offers which would have made me the first black in one of the establishment law firms.  But I decided to work for a black law firm, which was the top black law firm at that time.
Speaker 1: In Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 2: 'Cause frankly I was interested--it was Brown, Allen, Watts, Murphy and Russell [Baltimore, Maryland].  The name changed because of various partners taking on judgeships and other public office, but Brown, Allen remained.  Well even [Emerson] Brown in 1970 to [Milton] Allen, I, I ran his campaign as the campaign manager, he was elected [Maryland] state's attorney.  So the senior people in that firm, almost all of them quickly left and became public officials, one a city solicitor, one a--the state's attorney, and two or three of 'em judges.
Speaker 1: And what was it like as a young African American attorney working in Baltimore during that time?
Speaker 2: Well I--two, two principal types of practice.  There was the civil rights work, I did a fair amount of that, representing all kinds of civil rights organizations and, and the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] and the Soul School [Institute, Baltimore, Maryland]--
Speaker 1: Tell us about the, Black Pan- Panthers case.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'll tell you about that.  And then there, there was the billing to--the things that I had to do to make money, which was normal, regular law practice, divorce cases, et cetera.  The case I represented the Black Panthers was a murder case in which a person [Eugene Leroy Anderson] had been killed and the prosecution contended that a group of Black Panthers had killed this person thinking that he was an informant.  And I suspected some of them were involved.  My client, who I was convinced was not, I don't think he was even there that day.  It just happened to be his girlfriend's birthday and he wasn't there.  And it was a highly publicized case called the "bag of bones" case because the victim, victim's body was found many months after he had been killed, and it was dead--deteriorated to such then that it was just a skeleton.  So the newspapers called it the "bag of bones" case.  And I succeeded in having my client acquitted in a jury trial.
Speaker 1: And what impact or affect did that have on you as an attorney?  Did that elevate you to some prominence in terms of--
Speaker 2: No.  I, I was by that point a, a young but successful attorney.  It got some press, and so some folks knew, more people knew I was around.  That was about 1970 or '71 [1971].  By then I was already on the school board.  I'd handled other, other press cases that had gotten a fair amount of media.  So the Black Panther, defendant's name was Charles Wyche, was not a turning point case for me.
Story_ID: 220370
Speaker 1: And when did you first become involved in teaching law?
Speaker 2: In 1971, I got a phone call from Monrad [G.] Paulsen, who was then the dean at University of Virginia law school [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia].  He had been my professor at Columbia University [Law School, New York, New York], but had taken over the deanship at the University of Virginia, and did not like the fact that there was not and had never been a black faculty member there.  Monrad called and told me that he was taking the train to Washington [D.C.] and he would appreciate it if I would meet him in the Baltimore Penn Station.  That he would get off the train, something he wanted to discuss with me, and then he would get back on the train and proceed on and complete his journey to Washington.  And in that conversation, he proposed that I consider teaching.  Asked would I consider coming down the next school year, which was the 1971 to '72 [1972], on a part-time basis.  I did.  I liked it.  He then as dean offered me a permanent position at the University of Virginia, which I accepted, and began my full-time teaching career at the University of Virginia.  I taught there from '72 [1972].  I got married in 1973.  I didn't like it that much, but my wife [Diana Gibson] very much did not like Charlottesville [Virginia].  We talked about it; concluded that we were both urbanites.  That we need to survive, noise and crime and pollution and other urban things.  And, I then applied to the University of Maryland [School of Law; University of Maryland Francis King Cary School of Law, Baltimore, Maryland] for a position here, was accepted and came here in the fall of 1974, and have been on the faculty here, with a couple of leaves [of absence] here and there, since that time.  So this is my thirty-first year on the faculty of the University of Maryland School of Law.
Speaker 1: And what class do you enjoy teaching the most?
Speaker 2: I teach several courses.  I have taught most consistently and very much enjoy teaching evidence.  I have taught for most of my years civil procedure, but there have been years when I haven't, and there's times when I get tired of it.  Most recently over the--in the last six years I started teaching election law and I teach that about every other year.  And most recently, the last five years I begun teaching research seminars in race and the law.  And that's been a new experience because that's been mainly research and papers; not so much teaching.  And I, and I like that now.
Speaker 1: And what does the race in the law, what's its main focus?
Speaker 2: I teach really two courses in race and law.  I teach one called "Racial Discrimination in the Law," which deals with race issues in the United States, in the entire United States, starting with the creation of slavery, the Civil War, the abolition of slavery, the Reconstruction, the post-Reconstruction, Brown versus Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], Dred Scott [v. Sandford, 1857], all the way up to the present.  And I teach a seminar, research seminar called "Race and the Law, the Maryland Experience," where just as its name implies, I deal with the developments of legal issues regarding race specifically in the State of Maryland.
Story_ID: 220371
Speaker 1: And in 1977, you served in the [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.] administration.  Can you tell us a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In the Carter administration I served really in two capacities.  First as associate deputy attorney general.  The structure of the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] at that time was at the top of it was attorney general [Griffin Bell].  At the next level were two positions of equal sta- status, the deputy attorney general and the associate attorney general.  As a general matter, the deputy attorney general had all the criminal divisions, the U.S. attorney's office, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], and the associate attorney general had the civil matters.  There's some, some overlapping there.  The assistants, the principal assistants to the deputy attorney general are called the associate deputy attorney general, and there were three of us.  I had primary responsibilities for the law enforcement administration, the Executive Office of U.S. Attorneys [sic. Executive Office for United States Attorneys], the U.S. Marshal[s] Service, and a few other federal agencies.  Some parts of the FBI, certain--some pieces.  The emergency programs that deal with the terrorism.  I was the vice chair of the National Security Council's [NSC] anti-terrorism committee [sic. Counter Intelligence Working Group (CIWG)].  We met in the Situation Room of the White House [Washington, D.C.].  So in one sense I was like the number two guy in the United States fighting terrorists.  But terrorism at point wasn't very consequential in our--I mean we had some Puerto Rican separatists, a few incidents involving Basque [Spain] separatists, some hijackings.  But the hijackings were, were people at that point wanted to go to Cuba.  So there wasn't really a whole awful lot of, of going on.  And, and so that was the position.  Then for a short period of time I was the director of something called the National Economics Crimes Project [sic. National Economic Crime Project], which was an effort by the attorney general to see if there were some ways the justice department could, could, could be more effective in fighting economic type white collar crime.  I did a study for the justice department and kind of recommended to the attorney general that there wasn't a whole lot of new initiative here.  Also as associate deputy, I evaluated and did have a lot of recommendations that were implemented with respect to the [U.S. Federal] Witness Protection Program.
Speaker 1: And, and that was in--from 1978 to 1979.
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-seven [1977] to--well let's see.  Carter was elect--1977 to 1979 I guess.
Story_ID: 220372
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about [HistoryMaker] Kurt Schmoke's campaign for mayor [of Baltimore, Maryland].  How did you become involved in that campaign (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I ran all of Kurt Schmoke's campaigns for elective office, beginning in 1982 with his election as [Maryland] state's attorney, his re-election in 1986, no that's 1982.  Four years later would be--
Speaker 1: Eighty-six [1986].
Speaker 2: Nineteen, 1986.  His mayoral election, the first in 1987.  His re-election 1991, and then his re-election in 1995.  I, I was the campaign manager and the chair of his campaign for all of those elections.
Speaker 1: And what was it like in 1987 because he was viewed very much as the underdog and were--and--
Speaker 2: Well it was a tricky election, 1987, because there was sort of an interim mayor who'd been the president of [Baltimore] City Council, who was there for less than a year because the mayor--the, the, the mayor [William Donald Schaefer] had been elected governor.  So there was Clarence [H.] "Du" Burns, an African American who'd been in the city council and worked his way up through the lines.  An older man and here we have this young, younger person running.  And so it was delicate and we therefore made it clear that we would speak and never any evil or anything negative about Clarence "Du" Burns, and that we would try to make sure that people thought of this as an election about the future, rather than a reward for past.  And then we also--was important to, to handle things in a way to make it appear as if Schmoke's election was kind of inevitable, when at times it was very close.
Speaker 1: We were talking about Kurt Schmoke's first mayoral campaign.
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-seven [1987], okay.
Speaker 1: In 1987.  So and we've talked a little bit about how he was the underdog and did win the campaign.  So what do you think was the success in--what was the key to success in winning that campaign?
Speaker 2: Kurt Schmoke won that because we were able to get Baltimoreans to understand that the election was about the future.  In fact our slogan was "Elect Kurt Schmoke mayor because Baltimore's future begins now."  And then he had this unbelievable set of credentials in terms of academic and his being a Rhodes Scholar.  Having been a student leader in high school [at Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland] and in college [at Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], having worked in the [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.] administration and the Carter White House.  And so he was qualified.  And he--and the third reason was willing to work very hard as a candidate, he was a good candidate.  I didn't know when he started what kind of candidate he would be, but he was--people liked him and people were usually--that's a criteria for getting elected, people like you.
Story_ID: 220373
Speaker 1: And what was the city like in the late '80s [1980s]?  How would you describe the City of Baltimore [Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Baltimore was beginning to, to, to come out of a kind of backwater kind of existence.  But I mean the whole nation was in a, a little bit of a, I guess you couldn't call it a malaise.  But Baltimore had a lot of potential, but there wasn't a lot of momentum.  The former mayor [William Donald Schaefer] had done a fairly good job of overcoming in some respect the kind of negative attitude that Baltimoreans had about their city.  So Schaefer was a, was a, a good cheerleader and it was [HistoryMaker Kurt] Schmoke's job to bring real substance to that and I think he did.
Speaker 1: And how did he in your opinion, tackle things like the high crime rate and--
Speaker 2: Well the crime rate nationally--in Baltimore went up in the--was continuing--was going up when he came in.  In, the '95 [1995] it peaked and started down and it was on a steady down for the remainder of his candidacy, I mean mayoral, mayoralty. And that was primarily because that's the period when the crack [cocaine] epidemic, which had started north of the city, sort of hit Baltimore in the early '90s [1990s] and you can trace the, the increase in, in crime, burglary and otherwise directly to the, the crack epidemic that, that peaked around '95 [1995] and there's been a steady decrease, fairly steady, a downward trend since then.  So it was related to crack or something over which the mayor really didn't have--or anybody had much control.  It sort of swept down through Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia.
Speaker 1: And how did he resonate during that first mayoral campaign, to some of the other ethnic groups in Baltimore?  Was he as popular with them as he was in the black community?
Speaker 2: Schmoke I think had reasonably broad-based appeal.  But there is not much history in this city for whites voting on major offices for black candidates, and, and Schmoke never carried in a, in a Democratic primary, the white vote.  That's in some respect the result of the largest portion of the white population in being in the city is blue collar and tends to not vote much for black candidates.  That's a national phenomena, not unique to this place.  So his base was African Americans, primarily his voting base.  He received much broader based support financially from, from, from whites, but most--many times those were people who lived outside of the city, so they weren't voters.  But their financial contributions were certainly welcome.
Speaker 1: And did you ever have any political aspirations yourself?
Speaker 2: I never wanted to run for office.  Actually, I appeared on a ballot once.  In the 1996 election for a delegate.  The way--I mean I was a delegate to two conventions, 1992 and '96 [1996], not--I was the state chair of the [William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton campaign the first year, the first time Clinton ran.  And I was the Clinton delegate in '96 [1996].  And the process of delegate selection is pretty complicated.  But, but I, I actually was the top vote getter in my district.  The way it worked is the, the delegates were allocated among the Democratic primary candidates.  Any candidate who got at last 15 percent was in this assembly or got a portion.  Clinton got all of the delegates, so it didn't matter.  The entire--because of nobody else other than Clinton in the re-election got 15 percent.  But I do point out that my name did appear on a ballot.  But other than that, I mean that was just a party activity.  I've never came--come close to running for office.  I, I mean I was appointed on the Baltimore City school board Baltimore City Board of School Commissioners] for six years.  But I usually try to talk people out of office because I, I think the public gets probably better candidates than it deserves because of all of the negative aspects; things that come along with holding public office.  The media assuming that you're a crook.  Many people in the public questioning your motives and I'm surprised that so many bright and honest people in fact run for office.
Story_ID: 220374
Speaker 1: Let's talk really quickly about you served as a campaign consultant and political advisor for a campaign in Madagascar.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about that?  In 2001 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah the, the current president of, of Madagascar is Marc Ravalomanana.  His election was in 2000.  He had been the mayor of the capital city at Antananarivo [Madagascar], and had developed a relationship I think through the World Bank [Washington, D.C.] with [HistoryMaker Kurt] Schmoke.  And then he was thinking about running for president.  And Kurt asked me would I go to Madagascar and talk to him.  I did.  And later had three additional trips to Madagascar and one to Germany in which I basically designed his campaign, all of his campaign literature and set forth a game plan which he followed, and he beat a twenty-some year incumbent [Didier Ratsiraka].  And he's, and Marc is now the president of Madagascar, so that was an interesting experience.
Speaker 1: And what were some of the challenges for that cam--wasn't there a challenge with getting materials back into the country?
Speaker 2: Well language.  Were there were a couple of challenges.  One was just simply the language.  The people there speak Malagasy and the second language is French.  And so designing material and making sure the words are the right words.  In this case designing materials to be published ultimately in Madagascar using Malagasy language to be printed in Germany.  And I'm trying to communicate with the German printers and all who speak sort of English.  That was a challenge.  So we were--I would write it in English, have someone translate it, but then have it checked and interpreted back to me in English by a person other than the person who originally translated it to make sure it said what I wanted it to say.  So I'd write it in English, it would be translated into Malagasy and I'd have someone else take the Malagasy version and says what does this say in English.  So the language thing was interesting.  And there were certain cultural differences also.  As to the election itself, it was a campaign against an incumbent and in that part of the world, incumbents don't like you losing, and they don't often.  There is an official campaign period of a--in this case it was about a month.  And no one could campaign or put any--put out, distribute any literature or posters before the official beginning of the campaign.  And there was concern that if the incumbent had any idea of the scope of the campaign or had seen the materials that that would be difficult, cause difficulty.  Even concern as to whether it would get into the country.  So Marc essentially sneaked in about fourteen shipping containers, the big containers of material under the nose of the, of then the incumbent government.
Story_ID: 220375
Speaker 1: So [HistoryMaker] Professor [Larry] Gibson, we're gonna pick up where we left off, which I believe is right around high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland].  We were just wrapping up high school.  When you were in high school, what were some of your thoughts about college?
Speaker 2: Well I assumed I was going to go to college, I was a good student.  I didn't know much about many colleges.  One college I applied to was Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, State College, Pennsylvania], and the only reason I knew about Penn State is Lenny Moore played for the Baltimore Colts [Indianapolis Colts], he was a running back and a very good halfback.  And I heard that he'd gone to Penn State.  But Howard University [Washington, D.C.] came to my attention.  I'm not sure exactly how.  I did know that I wanted to leave town.  I, and, and--but I wanted to be within traveling distance that didn't require air flight.  And so Howard University was conveniently located and I had relatives in Washington, D.C., although I stayed on the campus, it still was helpful to have some people around.
Speaker 1: And what were you thinking that you wanted to pursue when you went to college?
Speaker 2: I didn't really, I didn't really know.  I read recently an interview that I gave to my high school paper in which I spoke of wanting to be a teacher, but I don't think I had any firmed career goals of that sort.  In a sense, I've never really planned that far in advance.  I thought I would succeed at whatever I wanted to do, and but I knew that it would be time to decide.  And so I, I went without a, a particular career objective.
Speaker 1: And what was the campus like when you arrived there in 1960?
Speaker 2: I had a ball.  Howard University, this is 1960, so this is sort of a beginning part of the particular phase of the sit-in, of, of the Civil Rights Movement, what we call the sit-in phase that in a national sense began in the February of 1960, although on a smaller basis had been taking place, sit-ins in lots of places including here in Baltimore [Maryland].  Something I'm writing now is trying to see that the Morgan [College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] students get credit for their sit-in efforts beginning in 1955.  But anyway, the national attention had focused, so there was lots going on there.
Speaker 1: In the nation's capital.
Speaker 2: In the nation's capital.  Well the sit-ins that I participated in were in Maryland.  We, we, we met at Howard or we came over here, but I, I think public facilities were integrated in Washington, D.C. as of '60 [1960].  I don't recall any sit-ins in Washington.  So there was that going on.  And Howard was just a ball.  I moved into a dormitory, immediately became involved in campus activities--
Story_ID: 220376
Speaker 1: What kinds of activities were you involved in?
Speaker 2: Well I ran my first political campaign.
Speaker 1: Your--what year was this?
Speaker 2: My first political campaign was Georgia Pearson [ph.] for homecoming queen.  I was a freshman at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and the most important election on the student--among the students was not the student body president, but the homecoming queen.  And the homecoming queen has always been, or was almost always either a member of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority or Delta Sigma Theta [Sorority].  Well we in [George W.] Cook Hall dormitory, before they flunked out a good percentage of the first year, figured wait a minute.  We're, we're the largest group here, us freshmen.  And so we decided to support a non-fraternity young woman, Georgia Pearson, beautiful eyes, for homecoming queen.  And it was right about the time that Ray Charles' song 'Georgia on my Mind' was, was, was hitting the charts.  In fact it almost got us expelled from school because in our exuberance, some of the supporters made a stencil and went around the campus spraying 'Georgia on my Mind.' And the dean had us out there scrubbing.  And one of those, those stayed up for at least ten years up on a side of a wall, I would go back and proudly see 'Georgia on my Mind'.  Well Georgia came in second.  I was the campaign manager.  But we learned from that.  And in the second year, my second most important campaign was Wilma Monteith for homecoming queen, and we won that one.  I also in the very first campaign, understand the--learned the importance of music in political campaigns.  And there was a 'Georgia on my Mind' song and then in Wilma Monteith, we took the song 'Gypsy Woman' and we made a song about Wilma Monteith.  And still to this day, I, I--on any political campaign, I make sure there is a, a campaign song.  I mean just recently I completed, last week a voter registration effort here in, in Baltimore [Maryland].  And I had a hip-hop song done by a man who sounded a lot like Tupac Shakur.  That's playing a lot on the radio and up and down the streets of Baltimore, supporting voter registration.
Speaker 1: So were you starting to become interested in politics, per se, and maybe perhaps pursuing politics as a career?
Speaker 2: Well I've never thought of pursuing it as a career, and I never, never have.  In high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland] I was active in student government, I was the class vice president.  And had done I guess some things that one would call a little political until then.  The--but from Howard, from the time I hit Howard University, involvement in issues and campaigns and things of that sort, just seemed natural to me.  And it's been the case off and on ever since.
Story_ID: 220377
Speaker 1: And let's talk a little bit about your activities with the D.C. Students for Civil Rights organization.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This was an organization that came into existence in the fall of 1963, I guess.  Most of our work was during '63 [1963] and primarily in, in the summer of '64 [1964].  What this was, this was a time when this 1964 Civil Rights Act was being considered by [U.S.] Congress.  There had been an effort the prior, previous year in '63 [1963], which was the year of the march in Washington [March on Washington].  It hadn't gone, that had been frustrated by filibusters in congress.  And, but then the real push came the next year in '64 [1964].  And a group of us realized that, that there were at campuses all over Washington, D.C., students from all over the nation.  And so we put together a organization of students from eight colleges and universities in Washington, D.C., Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.], American [University, Washington, D.C.], [The] Catholic [University of America, Washington, D.C.], Gallaudet [University, Washington, D.C.], Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And our principal focus was to provide a structure in which students could lobby members of congress.  We would come together and we would be--we were assisted by the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights [The Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights] and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Color People] and Clarence [M.] Mitchell [Jr.] who was the head of the Washington [D.C.] bureau would tell us go see this congressman, go see that congressman.  I'll never forget when we were having a meeting and we were sort of planning some of the efforts and he asked student, asked each student where they were from.  And there were some students from the Deep South--of course, deep southern.  The senators from the South were the principal opponents.  But nevertheless, he advised them and insisted that you go see [Senator John C.] Stennis, you go see [Senator James] Eastland.  They say why should I go to see him?  To which Mr. Mitchell, Clarence Mitchell said that's your senator and it, it never--they never thought of these Southern Dixiecrat segregationists senators as being their senators.  In addition to the lobbying activity, the principal event that got publicity and attention was a counter-filibuster, a students' filibuster for civil rights that we organized and conducted over a week period on the grounds of the Washington Monument [Washington, D.C.].  There is a--there was then, I think it's still there, an open air kind of bowl, amphitheater called Sylvan Theater [Washington, D.C.].  And we had there, a week long, all-day series of speeches, a filibuster for civil rights.  We got a letter from President [Lyndon Baines] Johnson and congress people came by, and that was something we got a lot of publicity.  So that was a separate organization.  My other civil rights activities in Washington were mainly in connection what later became Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, SNCC.  But it was not called that in Washington in its early stages, it was called NAG, the Nonviolent Action Group.  And it later became SNCC, and the leader locally was, was Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture].  And it's that group that I participated within other civil rights activity and principally you know, sit-ins.
Speaker 1: What were your impressions of Stokely Carmichael?
Speaker 2: He was a good friend.  Kwame Ture as he later became.  A firebrand, a bright man, fun with good sense of humor.  I, I have very vivid memories of Stokely.  The last time I saw him was in London [England].  He was speaking at Hyde Park [London, England], on a stump at Hyde Park years later.  But I would bump into him every now and then when I was in law school [Columbia University Law School] in New York City [New York, New York].  And so Stokely was committed, he was charismatic, and just a good person.
Story_ID: 220378
Speaker 1: What other activities were you involved in on campus [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  You pledged a fraternity.
Speaker 2: Yes, I pledged Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity.  That was fun.  I mean pledging wasn't fun, but being in the fraternity was.  Of course eventually I became the student body president.  They called it the president of the liberal arts student council, which was essentially the top student elected office in the, on the campus.  Interestingly enough, I was concurrently--that was the sort of the civilian head of things.  I was also the head of the military.  I was the Joint Forces commander of the [U.S.] Army and the [U.S.] Air Force ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  I later declined the, the commission.  Something that you can't do now because you actually when you go into advanced ROTC now, you become a member of the [U.S.] military.  But then you--that was not the case.  But so I had my--
Speaker 1: So back then after you graduated, you did not have to--
Speaker 2: I did not accept the commission.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It caused a little bit of an uproar because I was selected as the top student, top cadet for the region.  Maybe about eleven states and they're wishing me to go to compete to be the top ROTC cadet in the nation, Air Force ROTC cadet in the nation.  I--by that time I was having lots of second thoughts about accepting this commission in the military career, the Vietnam War was starting.  I didn't agree with--didn't understand what that war was about.  And there was a part of the, of the oath that an officer takes that says "I take this without reservation or purpose of evasion."  It became clear I had lots of reservations.  So when the national competition time came, I engineered so that I would have a visit to Duke law school [Duke University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina] as for perspective admission and scholarship.  They were very upset, but how could they oppose him?  He has an opportunity for a scholarship to law school.  So they didn't like it, but so the region was not represented, represented.
Speaker 1: And so what did you get your degree in in college?
Speaker 2: They called it government then.  They would probably now call it political science, government and philosophy.  Actually I probably took about as many philosophy courses and, of the two subjects that I enjoyed most, it was probably more the, more philosophy, exploring tough questions and great thinkers, than, you know, than the political science.  I liked both, but my favorite subjects were philosophy.
Story_ID: 220379
Speaker 1: Were there any particular professors at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] who had--
Speaker 2: Oh sure.
Speaker 1: Particular influence on you?
Speaker 2: The poet Sterling [Allen] Brown became sort of like a, I call him my, my Howard father.  But he was like a, like an uncle to me.  He had a group of students around him and we met on Saturdays at I think the name of the restaurant [sic.] was Frazier's.  Was Frazier's the restaurant or the funeral home [Frazier's Funeral Home, Washington, D.C.]? Because it was right next door, I can't remember.  He would have a bottle of Wild Turkey.  It was the first time I learned what--that something could be more than 100 proof.  I thought proof was equivalent to volume, whereas proof is, is double what the volume is 'cause Wild Turkey is 104-proof whiskey.  And we, we read poetry, we discussed literature.  He was a jazz person.  Stokely [Carmichael] would sometimes participate.  Michael Feldwell [ph.], others, very bright people.  I mean I, I consider myself the dummy in the group.  These, these were true intellectuals and, and, and somehow, I perpetrated, as the brothers would dare say, and got to participate in that.  But that was the faculty member I was closest with.  A staff person who wasn't a teacher, but he was administrator, I was also close with, is [HistoryMaker] Carl [Edwin] Anderson.  He was the director of student activities, later became the vice president for student affairs.  And he was the person who supervised student government and things of that sort.  So the, the faculty members I was closest with were Professor Sterling Brown who is a famous poet.  I read his poetry.  I mean and and Carl Anderson.  I read--this was the beatnik period where coffeehouses and that sort of thing, and hootenannies and I, I for a couple of years read black poets, but particularly Sterling Brown's poetry at a coffee house in Washington [D.C.].  That was called Bohemian Cavern[s, Washington, D.C.] I think it was called.  And there was another one called, it was called Coffee 'n' Confusion [Washington, D.C.], yeah it was a coffeehouse.  But the, the Caves.  I think it was, I think it was called Bohemian Cavern, like someone's back their shaking their head, so I think that was the name.  Was that the name (laughter)?
Story_ID: 220380
Speaker 1: So when did thoughts about law school start cropping up?
Speaker 2: Probably in my sophomore, but certainly by the junior year.  By the junior year I started meeting leaders.  I became a student leader.  I led a march around the campus when the kids were bombed, killed in the [16th Street Baptist Church] bombing in Birmingham [Alabama].  I became pretty active in the civil rights activities and I got to meet first some lawyers.  I never met a lawyer until I was at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], probably not until, I don't know what year.  But certainly I'd never met a law--lawyer beforehand.  And lawyers seemed to be at the center of things.  They seemed to have predominate and legislate in governmental bodies.  And many leaders that I met were lawyers.  And I said I'll--let me try that.
Speaker 1: And so where were you thinking you would perhaps go to law school?
Speaker 2: Being able to afford it was a factor.  But ultimately I decided on geography.  I, I don't remember why, but I became fascinated with New York [New York].  I didn't--I'd never been to New York, but New York seemed to me to be a place that I wanted to get comfortable with and to learn about.  And so ultimately I applied to Duke [University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina] and got a scholarship, an offer from Duke, but I knew I wasn't going there if I had an option.  I applied to Columbia University [Law School, New York, New York] and to NYU [New York University School of Law, New York, New York].  I was accepted at each, I received scholarships at each, and I went to, I went to Columbia.
Speaker 1: Why did you decide on Columbia?  What was the deciding factor at that time?
Speaker 2: Columbia at that point, still is, was simply a more prestigious law school.  NYU has done well.  I'm on the Board of Visitors at Columbia Law School now and it's nip and tuck.  There was one year, just one year when under the 'U.S. News and World Report,' the assessment of graduate schools, they placed Columbia, I mean NYU above Columbia Law School.  That was a matter of some great, great consternation to the, to us.  Although we acted like we didn't care, but we, we did.  But--
Speaker 1: Behind closed doors.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but at that point, Columbia was an Ivy League law school and continues to be of some considerable stature.  So I guess it was prestige.
Speaker 1: And what were your impressions of New York?
Speaker 2: I actually became--
Speaker 1: So we're talking about 1964?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-four [1964].  I became a serious student at, at Columbia.  I hadn't studied very much at Howard.  I studied enough to get reasonable grades.  But there were lots of other things taking time at Howard.  It was just--there were speeches, there was government to organize, there were marches to lead and--but I found in law school that, that there were a lot of bright people there, and, and I had to learn the discipline of studying.  So for the first couple of years I didn't do very much.  I mean I later got involved, you know to some extent, but it was, it was by and large, you know a down period in terms of external involvement.  I principally studied in law school--
Story_ID: 220381
Speaker 1: And what was happening with your civil rights activities during this time?
Speaker 2: Well I mean what had happened is the '64 bill [Civil Rights Act of 1964] had passed.  The national issue then was the Vietnam War.  I mean what was happening from--in that period is opposition to the Vietnam War.  I mean there were civil rights things that happened.  I mean I'll never forget the day that Malcolm X was killed.  I was visiting a fraternity brother, Alvin Chisholm [ph.], who was at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] in medical school.  And I come up out of the subway and I see people around the, the, the newspaper boxes sort of looking.  And at that point Malcolm had been shot, although he hadn't--at least the newspaper didn't have him--he wasn't dead.  And so I, I mean, I do remember that.  The principal civil rights, of sorts, activity that I can recall, surrounded--centered around Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.], [U.S.] Congress's decision to not sit him at one point.  Some litigation that followed, and then a decision that a schoolmate [at Columbia University Law School, New York, New York], a law school colleague, James Meredith, had made to run against him.  Meredith had graduated as the first black from University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi].  He had come to New York.  He was one year behind me.  And in fact it is in my apartment that we talked Meredith out of the race.  And he withdrew and from that.
Speaker 1: How did you convince him not to run?
Speaker 2: Well a group of black law students and we explained to him that what we thought was happening--being done to Adam was unjust, or at least to his constituents because he--they had re--they had elected him, re-elected him.  They knew about the difficulties he was having with that lawsuit and, and all, but they still had elected him.  Interestingly enough, the, the paper that we put together is actually the beginning of the Black Law Students Association [(BLSA); National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)] nationally.  People--very few people know this, but the, the first sort of manifesto by black students at a predominantly white school--I still actually have the original draft of it, was around this issue of Adam Clayton Powell, initially, Columbia University would then involve some black law students at NYU.  Now it is a year or so later that BALSA, the black--originally called Black America[n] Law Students Association, gets formally put together by A. J. Cooper [HistoryMaker Algernon Johnson Cooper, Jr.] up at NYU, and they sort of take over the building and there's some demonstrations and things like that.  But the beginning of that was really around the Adam Clayton Powell issue in 1963.
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about law school.  What were some of your favorite courses and, and any particular professors who--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was a research assistant for Professor Albert Rosenthal, and he was a good man.  Monrad Paulsen was the professor there who was responsible for my becoming a law professor.  I mean he--we, we were good friends.  He later became the dean at University of Virginia Law School [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia], and was the person who first invited me to consider moving from law practice to law teaching.  And so I've always remembered Monrad.  There were bright people at Columbia.  There were no blacks on the faculty at that, at that point.  Willis Reese is another name that Columbia people remember.  He was a reporter to the Restatement on Conflicts [Restatement of Conflict of Laws] but, there were, there were good people there.
Story_ID: 220382
Speaker 1: What was some of your favorite law courses [at Columbia University Law School, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  I remember professors.  I can't say, even the course which I teach, I teach evidence.  And but I liked evidence, but I think I particularly liked it because Jack [B.] Weinstein taught it.  He was one of the attorneys on the brief in Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  He's now a judge on the Eastern District of New York.  And I took a couple courses from him 'cause I liked the person.
Speaker 1: And what kind of law career were you thinking you wanted to pursue?
Speaker 2: Well I wasn't sure.  I was in New York [New York].  I was contemplating staying in New York City.  I had spent very little time in Baltimore [Maryland].  I'd left Baltimore to go to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] in 1960.  When I left it, it was a segregated, backwards city in my view.  And I really had no intentions of returning here.  I would never visit for longer than a couple of days to see my parents [Daisy Hall Gibson Peterson and Benjamin Gibson].  All summers were someplace else.  And but I'm not exactly sure why.  At my mother's urging to some extent, I decided in my last--between my last two years of law school to take a look at Baltimore.  So I--
Speaker 1: Had it changed from when you first left in '60 [1960]?
Speaker 2: I applied to some law firms.  I didn't know at this point.  I mean I applied for summer positions.  None of the law firms had any black lawyers.  I got an offer, I got offers from a couple of them.  Venable, Baetjer, and Howard [Venable LLP] was one of the prestigious law firms.  And I came and spent the summer of 1966, between my two year, last two years of law school, here and found this was a city in transition.  That, that it was not the same place I had left six years earlier.  Public accommodations law had passed.  I wasn't as hemmed in geographically as we had been prior to '64 Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] and the sit-in movement.  There was a city in transition and I thought maybe I, I could have a role in its transition.  And so I made--decided at the end of the summer to come back.  Near the end of the summer, the law, lawyer I principally worked for suggested I should consider clerking for a year with a federal judge.  He contacted Judge Frank [A.] Kaufman, and I, I'll never forget this.  He called this--the lawyer, this (unclear) could do is call Judge Kaufman and says you have two law clerks, don't you?  Yes.  Well I'm gonna send over one of 'em.  And you gotta find one more.  I mean he basically told the judge this is--you're gonna hire this young man.  I mean he was polite about it.  And of course it was Judge Kaufman's option.  But Judge Frank--[Judge] Frank Murnaghan [Francis D. Murnaghan, Jr.] himself later became a federal appellate judge, made that phone call on my behalf.  And then so when I got out of law school from 1967 to '68 [1968], I in fact clerked as the first black law clerk below the Mason-Dixon [Line] for a federal judge for, I clerked for Judge Frank Kaufman.
Story_ID: 220383
Speaker 1: So [HistoryMaker] Professor [Larry] Gibson, you graduate from law school [Columbia Law School, New York, New York], you have these two offers.
Speaker 2: Right, I guess we--I graduate from law school.  Then for the first year out of law school I'm a law clerk with the federal judge, Judge Frank [A.] Kaufman.  From 1967 to '68 [1968].  Now you gotta understand 1968 because that's the year [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] is killed and Bobby Kennedy [Senator Robert F. Kennedy] is assassinated.  There is the raucous [1968] Democratic [National] Convention in, in Chicago [Illinois].  It's a turbulent year.  And it's, it's--in this context, I am--had to make a decision as to whether to work for a predominantly white law firm as the first black lawyer in such a firm in Maryland, or to accept an offer from a predominantly--a black law firm.  It became clear my summer of 1966 that with the larger firm, my clients and therefore my talents would better fit mainly businesses.  Their principal client was Mercantile-Safe Deposit and Trust Company [PNC Bank], it was people with money.  I decided that I wanted to spend my time and my talent with a different kind of clientele.  And so I went to work -- and never regretted it--for a firm at that time the name was Brown, Allen, Dorsey and Josey [Baltimore, Maryland].  They just changed the name.  It had been historically Brown, Allen, Watts, Murphy and Russell.  But in 1966 George Russell [HistoryMaker George Russell] had become the first black circuit judge, they called it the supreme bench.  [Robert B.] Watts had become a, a district, I think they called it people's court judge.  And so there'd been this transition out of the firm, but it was the largest and most successful black law firm in Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 1: And what was it like practicing law during that time period in Baltimore as an Africa--as a young African American attorney?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean one had to have two--I mean I did, I had two law practices.  My civil rights work and then that which made money for the law firm.  My--as to the later, my principal caseload was domestic relations with divorce cases, and I did lots of other things.  But I had, I handled divorces.  But also during that period with the complete support of my law firm, I represented the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party], I represented picketers and demonstrators, Soul School [Institute, Baltimore, Maryland], which was that kind of local, black nationalist organizations.  The Congress of Racial Equality [CORE], group called the activists and housing and other kinds of matters.
Story_ID: 220384
Speaker 1: Let's talk about one of your cases in which you represented a member of the Black Panther Party who was accused of murder.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I believe it was 1971?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-one [1971].  The "bag of bones" case.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about that case?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was called the "bag of bones" case because a skeleton was found in Lincoln Park [Baltimore, Maryland].  And it was the skeleton of a man named [Eugene Leroy] Anderson who apparently had been killed, and I think killed by some members of the Panther Party.  And there had been a trial and one member of the Black Panther Party had been, been convicted.  I represented the second defendant, a man by the name of Charles Wyche, about whose innocence I became absolutely convinced; that he just was not there the evening that this all occurred.  Just happenstance it was his girlfriend's birthday and they had done some things to celebrate that.  But he'd gotten caught up in the wave of, of, you know, of the arrest.  And so I represented the--Wyche in about a two-week trial, maybe not quite that long, and he was acquitted.  But it, it was at a time when there weren't very many acquittals.  According to Paul Coates, who at that time or later head of the Black Panther party in Baltimore [Maryland], that this acquittal here, and Wyche was the first of its sort in the nation.  I don't know whether that's true, true or not, but that was, that was one case that got a lot of publicity.
Speaker 1: And was it a, a high profile case?  Was it a very hi--in, in Baltimore and beyond?
Speaker 2: Well nationally.  Yeah, you know it got, it, it got a lot of attention.  The, the Black Panthers were getting a lot of attention back there.  Another related case was called the "dog bite" case.  The Afro-American newspaper [Afro-American Company] had a way of la--of putting nicknames on things, including cases.  Well the "dog bite" case involved a police dog that had, depending upon who's version you accepted, either broke loose or been set loose and bit a lay person, man.  And there were some demonstrations in front of the western police district calling for an investigation, dismissal of some police officers.
Speaker 1: Was the layman African American?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And the, the, the leaders were arrested and charged with--the demonstrations were charged with inciting to riot.  And that was another two-week trial, which I, I had--in which they were acquitted.  I tried it before a judge who I thought was a very unfair judge, a man that--and part of what I did was expose his, his bias I think to the jury.  The--fortunately there was a newspaper reporter, excuse me, television reporter, who was at the time of this trial out of town, learned about it and says what these officers are saying is just not true, and not only that, I can prove it.  He came back into Baltimore, went up to WBAL[-TV, Channel 11, Baltimore, Maryland], found the film that--the, the newsreels.  Back then, there wasn't videotape, this was hard film, and gave it to me and I used it at the trial.  It was some of the convincing evidence that showed that the officers were just totally--were lying.  Those were, there were a couple.  There were other times.  I mean I, I was reading something last night, actually, about another case.  This involved a group of, of demonstrators in front of a--of a place, but they, they were all in jail.  And they decided to use the--their hearing to expose the horrendous and unsanitary conditions in the prison.  And the judge cooperated with this.  And so rather than trial about their case, each defendant came forward and gave this long testimony about, you know, how bad the, the jail was.  And this led to some changes in the lockup and, and the places where people were held.  Then, so--and as I said, I, I happened to be reading a book last night and read about that again.
Speaker 1: And these were in the early '70s [1970s], these cases?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 220385
Speaker 1: So 1972.
Speaker 2: What happened in 1972 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You take a change in your career.
Speaker 2: In 1972 is when I began teaching, yes, yes.  And the--in 1972, actually began a little bit in 1971.  In 1971 Dean Monrad [G.] Paulsen at the University of Virginia [School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia], who had been my professor at Columbia [Law School, New York, New York], called me and said I'm traveling from New York [New York] to Baltimore [Maryland] and--I mean to Washington [D.C.].  But I'd like you to come by the train station.  I will get off the train in Baltimore.  I'd like to talk with you about something, and then I can catch a later train and continue and finish my trip to Washington.  And he did that, we met.  And he suggested that I consider teaching.  And he ultimately invited me down to sort of try it on a part-time basis, a one course Friday night, Saturday morning course at Charlottesville [Virginia].  I--and I did that for the fall course of 1971.  I liked it.  He then extended me an offer to change my career from, from principally law practice to teaching.  And I began my teaching career in earnest in the fall of '74 [1974].  Seventy, 1972 at the University of Virginia.  I taught there.  I got married in seven--1973.
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you one quick question.  What were your impressions when you first got to Charlottesville?  What did you think?  I mean from Baltimore to D.C. to New York, back to Baltimore.
Speaker 2: Well my impression of Charlottesville is that it is a beautiful place.  That it was, it was rural.  It wasn't an urban setting.  I was the first black professor there.
Story_ID: 220386
Speaker 1: How were you received on campus?
Speaker 2: I think, I mean--my experience at [University of] Virginia [School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia] was absolutely nothing but positive.  Of course the black students were delighted to have a, a black law professor.  But the white students were, were receptive and I, I--the faculty, supportive.  I, I enjoyed my teaching career at Virginia.  It was, it was brief because after getting married in, in 1973, and Diana [Gibson] coming down a few times.  We both concluded that we really were urbanites, that we needed noise and crime and a pollution to stimulate us.  And that although it was pretty, Charlottesville [Virginia] was boring.  I mean you know we'd go to the--read the magazines on the stand of the all-night People's [ph.] for excitement.  I mean it was not our cup of tea.  And I applied to this school, to the University of Maryland law school [University of Maryland School of Law; University of Maryland Francis King Carey School of Law, Baltimore, Maryland] to transfer my teaching.  I came here in the fall of '74 [1974] and I've been a member of the faculty here at the University of Maryland law school since the fall of 1974.
Speaker 1: And what were you teaching when you came here in 1974?
Speaker 2: I was teaching my--evidence and civil procedure, principally.  I've taught other courses.  I taught in my early years, trial practice.  I have also taught years ago state and local government.  I teach now, still teach civil procedure and evidence, but I also teach election law and, and race in the law.
Speaker 1: Now in 1974 when you came back to Baltimore [Maryland], to the University of Maryland, did you--were there any changes in terms of the types of students that you were dealing with.  Were students at UVA [University of Virginia] pretty much the same as students at Maryland, or what were some of your impressions on the students?
Speaker 2: Keep in mind that, that even though I was teaching at Virginia, I'd never fully disengaged from Baltimore.  I was appointed to the school board [Baltimore City Board of School Commissioners], for example, in Baltimore at the end of '68 [1968], and I began serving on the school board through--in, in 197--'69 [1969].  I was a member of the school board for six years.  And so even while I was on the school board, at Charlottesville, I was traveling back and forth.  And so, to Baltimore, and I left the board at the end of, end of '74 [1974].  The--as to the law school students at both schools, I just found them bright.  I, I was just--and continue to be much more comfortable in an urban setting.  I think law is urban type stuff.  I mean I've also taught at the University of Mississippi [School of Law, University, Mississippi] as a visiting--on a visiting basis for a short time.  If you gotta write something, I can tolerate a rural setting, but I need a city.  And so the--but the students at all three schools are just as bright and I haven't noticed any, any qualitative difference in the students at the schools I've taught at.
Story_ID: 220387
Speaker 1: From 1977 to 1978 you were the associate deputy attorney general in the [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.] administration.  How did that opportunity come about?
Speaker 2: Well I got involved in the effort to elect Jimmy Carter president when a friend of mine, a young lawyer, [HistoryMaker] A. Dwight Pettit, said could you come by this event at my house?  I'm supporting for president this peanut farmer who is the mayor [sic. governor] of Georgia, named Jimmy Carter, to which I say who?  And--but he asked several of us.  And we all came by just because Dwight asked us to.  And that began an involvement in the Carter campaign, which I was.  And so I developed some relationship with some of the key people in the Carter, the Carter administration, and ultimately I was offered a position as the associate deputy attorney general in the administration.  And the deputy attorney general I worked for was Pete Flaherty [Peter F. Flaherty], who after I was there for about a year, left and came back to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] to run for governor of Pennsylvania.  I had taken a two-year leave from the law school [University of Maryland School of Law; University of Maryland Francis King Carey School of Law, Baltimore, Maryland], and I sort of had to make a decision as to whether I really wanted to give up my position at the law school.  I, I had taken a, another leave a year--for one semester to visit back at Virginia.  So I was, I was getting ready to sort of wear that leave stuff out, and I decided that I really wanted to be a law professor and government was fun to do for a while, but it was not gonna be my main thing.
Speaker 1: But still very interested in politics.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that was a fascinating experience.  I mean that's at the third level of management.  There's attorney general, there was a deputy attorney general, and associate, which at the next level.  And at the very next level.  So this is pretty high in the, in the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice].  I had supervision over major parts of the justice department, the [United States] Marshals Service, the Executive Office of U.S. Attorneys [sic. Executive Office for United States Attorneys].  Just about any--I was the vice chair of the National Security Council [NSC] working group on terrorism [sic. Counter Intelligence Working Group (CIWG)].  It's funny, how I think about that.  I've gone back and seen--I saw a piece that was in the New York Times about this which was discussing my, my role.
Story_ID: 220388
Speaker 1: But then there wasn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What--
Speaker 1: --terrorism wasn't much--
Speaker 2: Right.  What kind of terrorism issues were there?
Speaker 1: It was Puerto Ricans separatists.  Occasional hijackings where most of the hijackers wanted to go to Cuba or occasionally wanna get somebody freed.  I didn't--I learned of Croatia, Croatian separatists.  This is when they were still Yugoslavia, but there was this movement in Croatia.  And a few things like that.  One of the main things I was responsible for [as vice chair of National Security Council Counter Intelligence Working Group (CIWG)] was seeing that the Marshal [Josip Broz] Tito of Yugoslavia had an uneventful state visit.  What had happened was the Shah of Iran [Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi] had come and there was a lot of opposition to him and massive demonstrations.  They had to use tear gas, there was a famous picture of teargas causing tears come down the Shah's eye.  And so the attorney general [Griffin Bell] asked me to make sure, to coordinate all of the branches of government, the [U.S.] Marshals Service, the, the [U.S.] Park Police, the Secret Service, to see that Marshal Tito's visit didn't have a repeat of that because there was a lot of opposition to him.  And so that was fun.  And I generally had control of things like hijackings and trouble.  Back then, people were in active opposition to nuclear plants.  And so people would climb the fences.  They really weren't doing any trouble, but just to penetrate the perimeter of the nuclear plants.  And a couple times I had to deal with those sort of situations.  And so I mean one of my most vivid recollections, this is in a time when cell phones were new and phones in automobiles were really rare.  This was a big thing, this was, you know, high-powered government thing.  And one of these times I was going to the White House [Washington, D.C.] because this working group met in the Situation Room of the White House.  And the phone rang and so the clearest recollection, one of the clearest--is, is being on the phone, the gates of the White House opening up and I'm going in this car into the White House on the phone.  I don't remember--it probably was a inconsequential call.  The other one--one, one--no there's a, there's a second one.  There was a hijacking.  And I was in Baltimore [Maryland] and I had to get there because I kind of dealt with hijackings.  And so they contacted the city and the state patrol.  And I could drive as fast as I could, wanted to, and the police would just pick me up in different places.  I had the Volkswagen.  The thing wouldn't go more than about 70 miles--I could have driven 100 miles an hour with a police escort.  I know it didn't go over 75.  I--so here I am going down the road with carte blanche to speed in a Volkswagen, in a, in a yellow VW bug that wouldn't go fast, trying to get to the, to the White House to deal with this, to deal with this crisis.  So little funny things like that you remember.  And Paul [L.] Vance's thing.  He later became the school superintendent of Montgomery County [Maryland], it was his car and of, of Washington, D.C.  I had Paul's car.
Story_ID: 220389
Speaker 1: --What was the National Economic Crimes Project [sic. National Economic Crime Project]?
Speaker 2: Okay.  There'd been this talk about white-collar crime.  That, that, that there ought to be more attention paid to that and not just crime on the streets.  That was the contrast of crime on the streets.  And the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] was trying to figure out whether there really was some new initiative or role to be played.  And so the attorney general [Griffin Bell] asked me to sort of think this through, to go around the country, talk to people in businesses and things of that sort.  And I did that for about six or seven months and put together a report.  Basically concluded that there's a lot of talk but nobody really wanted anything fundamentally changed in terms of more government involvement.  And it really was no big thing.  But the--probably the most consequential report that I did had to do with the complete review of the [United States Federal] Witness Protection Program.  I, I was in charge of that, that, that's you know the program that protects and gives new identities.  Well the program I found was being abused.  That the organized crime, a lot of the figures had sort of understood it, and they were pretty much all getting placed into Dade County, Florida or Orange County, California.  I put a moratorium on that and made a lot of adjustments on how that program was run.  Something was done with that.  My, my economic crimes report was one of those that kind of sat on the shelf but really didn't have much, much teeth to it.  I got a lot of travel out of it.  I ran, I went, I went around all over the nation.  One other thing that I do remember, and I've gotta find the photograph.  The one time in which there was an international conference and I sat at the table, you know, representing the United States.  You have all these countries, and you know each country has a little nameplate.  This was in Bonn, [West] Germany.  This was a preparatory meeting for international conference on crime and the treatment of prisoners.  And another justice department official and I represented the United States.  And so at this big thing, I was the United States.  What I remember very much about that is that how in so many of the international organizations the Soviet Union had the parts of the Soviet Union had their own individual status.  So there was, there was not--I mean you know Georgia--a lot of these things are now separate countries.  But at that point they were all part of the Soviet Union, but, but they came with a whole bloc of votes because in a lot of international organizations, they would subdivide the Soviet Union and, and they would have multiple representation.  And so it would be a speech by the whole bloc.  So you'd have to sit through maybe seven speeches, whereas the U.S. would speak once and there would then come, you know, Byelorussia [Belarus], whatever.  That was fun.  That was in Bonn, Germany.
Story_ID: 220390
Speaker 1: Let's talk about [HistoryMaker] Kurt Schmoke's campaign for mayor in 1987.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you just tell us a little bit about what the City of Baltimore [Maryland] was like in 1987 and your success.
Speaker 2: Okay, right, sure.  The first campaign I ran for Kurt Schmoke as campaign manager was in 1982 for state's attorney.  We won that and then we prepared to run a reelection campaign in '86 [1986], but he was unopposed.  So in '87 [1987] Kurt decided to run for mayor.  And his opponent was a man who had been the president of the [Baltimore] City Council, an elderly black man, Clarence "Du" Burns, who had risen to the mayoralty because the mayor, William Donald Schaefer, had been elected governor.  And so there was ten months of the Schaefer term that "Du" Burns was going to serve.  And the city at this point, both in population and in votes, was predominantly African American.  And the trick in that campaign was to deal with the delicate situation of running against an, an older black man who had sort of paid his dues, but who we thought was not the person for the future of Baltimore.  To show appropriate respect, but also get across to the, to the electorate that this younger man was, was better qualified and better equipped to take the city forward.  And so we were able to pull, pull it off, but it was, it was a--it was tricky.
Speaker 1: How were you able to pull it off?  How did you manage it?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean we--it required some, some discipline on our part.  I mean one directive that we issued and operated by is that at no point did we criticize Clarence "Du" Burns.  We treated him with respect.  We always spoke in terms of this being election about Baltimore's future.  In fact, our slogan was "Vote for Kurt Schmoke because Baltimore's future starts now."  Because the variable vote in there were older blacks.  One time we did a poll and well over a third of the undecided voters, maybe as much as half of the--close to half of, of the undecided voters were blacks over fifty, and they were conflicted.  "Du" Burns was one of them, but, but Kurt was like the son they all wanted to have.  And so it, it, it was delicate.  And we--part of what we needed to do was to, to make his election seem almost inevitable even though our polls showed that it was close.  We never acted like it was close.  And to walk this delicate line of talking about the future, but not showing disrespect for this older man.
Story_ID: 220391
Speaker 1: You all went on again and again to be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, [HistoryMaker Kurt] Schmoke was re-elected in 1991.
Speaker 1: And '95 [1995].
Speaker 2: And [Clarence "Du"] Burns ran again in '91 [1991], and again in 1995.  This time he ran, his principal opponent was the president of the [Baltimore] City Council, Mary Pat Clarke.  And we won that election.
Speaker 1: What did you do, did you do anything--well what did you do differently in '91 [1991] and '95 [1995], and also how was the city changing as well?
Speaker 2: The 1991 campaign, this is after his first term, was one where we adopted a momentum, a train motif.  Everything was built around the concept of the train.  The slogan was "Stay on board with Schmoke."  Our campaign posters, we always used this train motif.  Even on Election Day, on the polling places, all of our campaign workers had on a railroad engineer's cap.  We had a song, always have a song, "Stay on Board with Schmoke."  We issued these little train whistles that our kickoff event was at the B&O Train Museum [sic. B&O Railroad Museum, Baltimore, Maryland].  We had Kurt Schmoke and Ron Brown come into the station pumping one of those railroad cars.  So that was all about momentum.  By the second term, 1995, at this--by this point we had to run on accomplishment.  The man had been the mayor for, for eight years.  And so our theme there was "Kurt Schmoke makes us proud."  And we issued a publication, Reasons to be Proud, and, and ran essentially on what we believe to be and still believe to be an outstanding record of accomplishments.
Speaker 1: How successful do you think slogans and songs and you know like campaign ideas are in terms of persuading voters?
Speaker 2: I think that in selling any product or an idea, it's most effective if one finds a way to condense it down to a visual and a few words.  That's, that's not unique to politics, but it's certainly the case in electing an office, someone to office.  To find some way to simplify it.  And so slogans, colors, letter size, letter, character, all of these convey meanings.  I mean the first time that he ran for state's attorney, I wanted to give the impression of a young, athletic person, so I used blue, yellow and white.  And our design looked almost like football.  When I--when he was running against "Du" Burns, because of this age, I had to make him appear older and the whole campaign was more settled with hues like maroon and white.  Much more subdued.  The train motif, I purposely didn't have a particular color because I didn't want the colors to interfere with the railroad, with the train.  And "Makes Us Proud," the '95 [1995], we used red, black and green.  We went Afrocentric colors.  So it depends on--but colors and graphics and slogans are important to convey ideas.
Story_ID: 220392
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Professor [Larry] Gibson, how--do you think that sometimes the message gets lost in the shuffle of the, the campaign, not gimmick, but just for lack of a better word?  Do you think sometimes, oftentimes the message gets lost?
Speaker 2: I think often people have a message and don't effectively deliver it because they don't find out how to simplify and communicate it.  People have lots of things on their mind.  They're only gonna give you a certain amount of attention.  People are worried about paying bills, about their health considerations, et cetera, and then you come along with some political message.  If you want to be effective, you need to find some way to capsulize that message and, and for it to, to get it to stick.  You need some way for people to remember it in comparison with all the other messages they receive.  They're getting--they're bombarded with, with themes on television, on--and, and billboards as they--and so a political person who says to himself I'm just going to state my message straight without all of these trappings, probably is not going to be very effective.
Speaker 1: And how often do you think elections are lost because of not solely on this, but the wrong colors, the wrong font size, that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: It has always amazed me that people will try to sell an idea or a product, will use printed material and will not give adequate attention to the design.  I mean it cost no more ink, no more paper to print something that's attractive and effective than one that is ineffective.  And why people will produce many thousand copies of something that is just ineffective, I don't know.  Yes, I think there are many people who do not have adequate appreciation for how difficult it is to an idea across and to be remembered con- considering all of the competition.  And so if you've got an idea and you want people to pay attention to it, and to remember it, it must--one must keep in mind that you're competing with Madison Avenue [New York, New York] and all of those ads on television and you ought to get some professional help to try to get a way of getting your point across and remembered.
Story_ID: 220393
Speaker 1: And get some professional help even if you're in Madagascar, huh?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about (laughter), tell us a little bit about how you lent your professional expertise there?
Speaker 2: Okay.  About three years ago I guess it is now, former [HistoryMaker] Mayor Kurt Schmoke asked me would I consider going to Madagascar to meet with a friend of his who at that point was the mayor of the capital city Antananarivo [Madagascar].  A businessman, Marc Ravalomanana.  I thought he was joking at first, but I did know that Kurt had gone over after this man had been elected and done something.  I now know that he'd gone over and advised him on setting up his city government.  But I'd never been to Madagascar, I like to travel and I--my first attitude was why not?  And so I made my first trip along with Kurt Schmoke, to Madagascar.  Met an absolutely engaging man who at that point was considering running for president.  Who the, the president was a twenty-some year incumbent [Didier Ratsiraka] with strong, but, but I could see this was an attractive man with, with resources.  I spent about two weeks there, sort of evaluating, learning the, the, the, the politics.  I ended that period--that visit with a fairly long memo and meeting with him, giving him some ideas.  But still his not having decided whether to run.  A few months later, I was in my kitchen with a map of the Carolinas and Virginia on my dining room, kitchen table.  My wife [Diana Gibson] had just gotten a new car and we were gonna take it on the road and go see the Outer Banks [North Carolina].  And I pick up the phone and Marc says, "[HistoryMaker] Larry [Gibson], this is Marc.  I'm in Germany, can you come to Germany, can you come to Heidelberg [Germany]?"   "Well I'm getting ready to go on vacation."  "When?"  "Today."  Well fortunately we did have the time off because we planned to be driving.  By the end of that day, that same day, we were on a plane to Heidelberg, Germany.  Diana and I and Marc and his wife was there.  And I spent about a week in, in Heidelberg thinking through this campaign, designing material for the camp--he told me he had decided to run.  So I--the whole week just about was spent in design studios and print shops and places like that.  The only tourist thing I know is that there's a famous castle [Heidelberg Castle, Heidelberg, Germany] that we went up to the castle one morning.  We ate at some good restaurants, but that's all I saw of Heidelberg.  Most of it was in print shops and design places.  But I designed all the campaign material.  We wrote a--basically a message why he was running, and this was funny 'cause he's, he's writing.  I, I'm writing in English and he's interpreting it back into Malagasy and the like.  And we sort of planned a campaign.  But now at this point, part of the problem has to be his, his--how is he gonna get this stuff into the country?  I mean so I--we, we thought that through, how it would be packaged and this, and the like.  Just not only designing it, I had to figure out population, quantities, how many posters, how many t-shirts.  Ultimately we bought, to give you some ideas, 540,000 t-shirts.  About seven million pieces of material, of posters, you know, of posters.  No, we did about twenty millions of ballots.  But little pins and visors, other handouts.
Story_ID: 220394
Speaker 1: Why was there--
Speaker 2: Then I went to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) concern of how he'd [Marc Ravalomanana] get it [campaign materials] into the country [Madagascar]?
Speaker 2: Well, because he was running against an incumbent [Didier Ratsiraka].  I'm sure that if the incumbent, and a part of this was the element of surprise.  That if the incumbent had learned that he--the massive campaign that was about to be run, the material I don't think ever would have seen the light of day.  I later in fact made, made a total of about four trips to Madagascar at the beginning of the campaign, at the end of the campaign.  I was there for Election Day.  But one time we thought the government had discovered the material because this was, this was before bringing--we brought--he brought fourteen containers, I mean shipping containers.  Big things, you know look like big things into the country under the government's nose.  And there was two containers tied up in a port of Tamatave [Toamasina, Madagascar] that we thought had been found.  But it was just the normal, local corruption.  Somebody looking for a payoff to let--duty officer to let it pass.  But after it was all there, there was one time I got a call that they thought that the government knew that he had all this campaign material.  I developed this quick plan to disburse it throughout the material, got on the plane and got to Madagascar as fast as I could.  That time I think I went through South Africa.  And we over a period of about four nights, in the middle of the night through trucks, disbursed the literature, the posters, the things, all around the country.  But still a package, because in Madagascar, there's an official campaign material.  Not one piece of campaign literature could be distributed, one poster put up, until the official campaign period.  But this scare caused us to distribute and get it out of one place so that when the campaign did begin, it was already the campaign material all over the country.  So that, that really worked to our benefit.  I have a poster of Marc putting up the first poster and the campaign was launched and he ultimately, and, and he won.
Story_ID: 220395
Speaker 1: This sounds like something like out of a novel.  I mean (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm going to write something about this because I kept every piece of paper.  I kept all the memos, I mean because then there was like a six-month period fighting for the official recognition of his country because the incumbent didn't want to leave, there was this long period of time in which I'm over Washington, D.C. with the, the state department [U.S. Department of State], the World Bank and all, trying to get his country recognized.  With the World Bank, the issue was trying to avoid Madagascar defaulting on, on its international obligations.  There was one time when they had some money in a Swiss bank account and we had these two factions.  The old government which saying they wanted to have a second round, another vote, a reelection.  And we're saying recognize the Marc's [Marc Ravalomanana] government.  So there was at one point two, two people claimed to be the head of the national bank [Central Bank of Madagascar].  And this was a--but, but, but I was able to work out something where both factions agreed that we don't want Madagascar to be in default on its international debt.  And we worked out a thing where they simultaneously signed authorizations, everybody saved face, permitting this money to--in this Swiss bank account to be used to pay down the debt.  You know the U.S.--but then we exhausted the money in the Swiss bank account, they had maybe 150 or some million [U.S. dollars] in the U.S. bank accounts, but the U.S. Federal Reserve [System] wouldn't do that.  But we were able to, to still get things worked out.  So there was a six-month period of working with the IMF [International Monetary Fund] and the, the World Bank and the U.S. government.  And, one day, I was in the Lexington Market [Baltimore, Maryland] near here with a friend of mine who's now the minister of education of Madagascar.  And I got a call from the jus--state department that, that said tomorrow we're gonna recognize Marc's government.  This is six months after the election.  'Course I immediately got on the phone and told him that the U.S. ambassador would, would do it, et cetera.  This was in--but that was quite an adventure.  And someday I will--I'm gonna, I'm gonna write something about this because it's fascinating.
Story_ID: 220396
Speaker 1: Speaking of writing, let's talk a little bit about your book ['Young Thurgood: The Making of a Supreme Court Justice,' Larry S. Gibson].  I think that you're still currently writing on--
Speaker 2: Right.  What I'm doing now, well I'm working on--but the one that's most furthest along would be completed but for this voter registration campaign that I did for the last four months, is a book about Thurgood Marshall's four years of law practice in Baltimore [Maryland] from 1933 to the end of '36 [1936] before he then goes to New York and becomes famous.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I think a lot of people may not have even realized.
Speaker 2: And people don't know much, or very little.  I mean I've now assembled all of his law practice, all of the cases, and it was a really an exciting time.  And he did a lot.  And so that's what I'm writing about is the formative years of Thurgood Marshall.
Story_ID: 220397
Speaker 1: What about your oral history project on Maryland's African American lawyers (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well the, the longer project of which I've done a fair amount of writing and publication already is just a history of black attorneys in Maryland.  I've had a couple of exhibits that trace the beginning of our first black attorney in 19--1877 who was a lawyer who was admitted to federal practice.  The--under Maryland law, one had to be a white male to practice law.  That was challenged in 1977, the statute was upheld.
Speaker 1: Eighteen seventy-seven [1877].
Speaker 2: Excuse me, in 1877.  It was upheld, but they admitted a black lawyer to the Federal Bar [Association].  It was not until 1885 that the Maryland law was declared unconstitutional and we got out first black lawyer as a member of the Maryland Bar [Association].  Well I've traced the development from then for the next 100 years until 1977, 1877 to 1977.  And I've identified every black attorney admitted.  I am about the 132nd.  I have to say about, because about two months ago I found another black, I guess I'm 133rd, another black attorney.  He--I, I didn't know anything about.  And he didn't really practice, but he was admitted.  And so he pushed me back one.  But that's amazing.  I'm like 130th-some black attorney in the history of the State of Maryland.  The state that bred 40, 50,000 lawyers.  So I have traced that history.  I've had exhibits, I've written pieces about that.
Speaker 1: Why has that been important to you?
Speaker 2: The Maryland--well lawyers generally, but particularly the lawyers, the black attorneys in Maryland, have really made very, very special contributions to this nation.  The most famous of course is Thurgood Marshall.  But, but Maryland being this sort of border schizophrenic state, the most southern, northern city, the most northern, southern city, was the place where a lot of important legal developments occurred.  And primarily at the initiation of African American attorneys and there's a history there that, that needs to be, that needs to be told.
Story_ID: 220398
Speaker 1: You've worked on so many political campaigns.  We, we touched on this when we--very briefly, but has there ever been a desire to run for office yourself?  Have you ever had a desire to have a political career of your own?
Speaker 2: I've never wanted to run for office.  I usually am talking other people out of it.  I mean I, I think people who run for office do so typically at such great sacrifice, I'm surprised that competent people who have options put up with all of the negative consequences of being an elected official.  And I've never been willing, personally, to do so.  So, when someone tells me that they're gonna run for office, I first ask them, have they had their head examined?  Because it's--elected officials and politicians are treated by the media and much of the public as if, if they're crooks.  So their motives are suspect.  And I find that not generally to be the case in, in terms of accurate reflection.  So no, I, I've never wanted, run for office.  I actually was on a ballot once.  I, I've been a delegate to two democratic conventions.  And one of the two conventions, '92 [1992] and '96 [1996], I don't remember one.  The formal way of getting on is I had to be on a ballot.  Now it turns out that--I mean I was a [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton delegate.  I think it was the second time.  And I got the largest number of votes.  I mean it didn't matter because Clinton got all of the, all of the delegates from the 7th Congressional District in Maryland.  And so the, the Clinton delegate who got the lowest number still went to the convention.  But be that as it may, I kept a copy of the ballot with my name on it, but that's about it.
Story_ID: 220399
Speaker 1: Your class that you teach, Race in the Law, can you tell us a little bit about it?
Speaker 2: I teach actually two courses here [University of Maryland Francis King Carey School of Law, Baltimore, Maryland] dealing with race.  I teach a research seminar called Race in the Law, which I--in which I trace the history of legal matters related to race throughout the whole history of the country, starting from the beginning of slavery through slavery, the Civil War, Dred Scott [v. Sandford, 1857], all the way through Brown [v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] and the current, the most recent public, excuse me, affirmative action decision.  And in addition to that, I teach a difference course called "Race in the Law: The Maryland Experience," which is, as the name suggests, about the history of race relations in the State of Maryland.  And often what happened in Maryland affected what happens national--nationally, but some of what I teach in Maryland really is just Maryland.
Story_ID: 220400
Speaker 1: And what are some cases where what happened in Maryland affected what happened nationally?
Speaker 2: Well scholars regard the first step on the road to Brown [v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] as being the case that was brought, that desegregated this law school.  The Murray versus Pearson case [Murray v. Pearson, 1936] which integrated the University of Maryland law school [University of Maryland School of Law; University of Maryland Francis King Carey School of Law, Baltimore, Maryland] was the first successful school desegregation case in the nation.  Young Thurgood Marshall in his second year of law practice, was involved with that with his mentor, Charles Hamilton Houston.  So the, the road to Brown began here in Maryland.  The road from Brown also began here in Maryland.  The first case in which the U.S. Supreme Court approved the direct application of the Brown decision in a non-education context, was a Maryland case.  Case called Dawson [Mayor and City Council of Baltimore v. Dawson, 1955] that had to do with Sandy Point State Park [Maryland] and Fort Smallwood Parks [sic. Fort Smallwood Park, Pasadena, Maryland] which were operated on a segregated basis.  These cases were pending at the time of the Brown decision, and the issue was, is Brown just an education decision, or does it apply to other governmental activities?  And the Fourth Circuit--the Federal Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals [sic. United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit], applied it to Brown to these recreational facilities.  The Supreme Court affirmed that, and it's the first time that Brown was applied in a non-education context.  And so those are two examples of important Maryland based cases.
Speaker 1: What about [HistoryMaker A.] Dwight Pettit's case in terms of, not cultural bias with--or just ad--admitting African Americans to the [Maryland State] Bar [Association] or how they--
Speaker 2: Well Dwight Pettit was involved in several interesting litigation.  One was one that dealt with the bar that kind of got worked out; didn't establish a real precedent except that what it did was bring some pressure that produced some concrete results of more blacks being admitted.  Dwight's first litigation was as a high school student in Hartford County [Maryland].  He wanted to go to a school in the county that had a college preparatory program.  The school they wanted him to attend, predominantly black school, didn't.  Exclusively black school.  And he brought that--his father [George David Pettit] brought that litigation on his behalf and he won. Dwight Pettit also brought an important litigation involving for sale signs in--there'd been a statute that forbade for sale signs.  And, and so much of for sale transactions as a result were sort of little private word-of-word, word-of-mouth.  And he got that statute declared unconstitutional.  So Dwight Pettit has been in the forefront of a lot of different important developments.
Story_ID: 220401
Speaker 1: And let's talk a little bit about what you currently do.  In addition to teaching here at the law school [University of Maryland Francis King Carey School of Law, Baltimore, Maryland], you are of counsel at a firm.
Speaker 2: Right.  I mainly teach here at the law school.  I do writing and and research.  In terms of law practice, I'm of counsel to my best friend's law firm, Shapiro, Sher, Guinot & Sandler [Baltimore, Maryland].  Ron Shapiro [Ronald M. Shapiro] and I met in 1967 in Judge [Frank A.] Kaufman's law--chambers.
Speaker 1: He was the other clerk?
Speaker 2: He was the other, he was the other law clerk.  We've been best friends since then.  The--my principle client now that takes up most time in my part-time law practice is the World Umpires Association.  This is the union that represents the Major League [Baseball (MLB)] umpires.  And so, I am their lawyer for them and that's been an interesting and exciting client.  I've had to learn much more than I knew about baseball.  And it's been fun.
Story_ID: 220402
Speaker 1: And when you look back at your life [HistoryMaker] Professor [Larry] Gibson, what stands out the most to you and why?
Speaker 2: As I think about my life, I think of good health.  I've never spent a night in a hospital.  The only time I got treatment in a hospital was one time I was playing softball and ran into a soccer goal and had to virtually scalp myself, that was actually another time.  And I got stitched up, but I didn't spend the night.  But no there I remember there was another time in high school when I broke my arm.  I was running track and they took me to Union Memorial Hospital [MedStar Union Memorial Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland], which didn't treat blacks.  And it took a while for the coach, Frank Novak, to convince them to set my arm.  It's interesting 'cause my brother just had bypass surgery at that hospital and caused me to think about that.  But I think that how blessed I've been with, with just about perfect health.  Without health, none of this other stuff matters; you're not around.  Or you're around in a debilitated fashion.  So I consider the fortune, the blessing of good health as being the most important thing when I think about I've had--I've lived a life of virtually no physical pain.
Story_ID: 220403
Speaker 1: And, while we have you, we are in the midst of the 2004 presidential election, what are some of your thoughts?  Who do you think is going to win this election, [Senator John] Kerry or [President George Walker] Bush, and why?
Speaker 2: Well you know I'm partisan here.  I was the state chairman the first [William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton campaign.  A delegate to a couple of democratic conventions, so let me be clear that, that I'm quite a partisan.  But I honestly do believe that Kerry will win the election.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Well, if one knows how to read even the current polling data, I don't know of an incumbent who's ever been re-elected who is at under 50 percent on job approval, or even at this point under 50 percent on voter preference.  With reg- regardless of the office, president, senate, congressman, in the last couple of weeks almost all undecided, people who poll as undecided, vote for the incumbents.  Partially because they really aren't undecided, but will not tell a stranger by phone that they're voting against the incumbent.  Or they really haven't decided.  So you--to the extent there is any undecided, unless this is an unusual election, almost all of that goes to Kerry.  Also in a way that now in the last two weeks the writers seem to be understanding.  You've got to take all existing polls and discount them to some extent because of some phenomena that have occurred that the polling profession has not been able to catch up with.  The advent of the cellular phone and particularly among--among young people, who therefore aren't being reached by the polls.  Pollsters reach landlines--
Story_ID: 220404
Speaker 1: Just tell us quickly about your voter registration campaign that you led here in Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 2: In June of this year I met with Congressman Elijah Cummings.  And we reviewed the voter registration numbers in the State of Maryland, including Baltimore.  And we noticed a disturbing downtrend in voter registration in Maryland, in, in Baltimore.  And that what was happening is that Baltimore in comparison with the other subdivisions was, was getting a smaller and smaller percentage of the state vote.  And he asked me to help him do something about it.  I says look, I'm in the middle of this writing project; I mean get somebody else.  But I've known Elijah since he was in high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland].  He's a great congressman.  Of course he's the current chair of the Congressional Black Caucus, and I can't really for too long say no to him.  And so there went the next three and a half months in which I organized a voter registration effort here.  We put up a lot of posters and signs.  Of course I had to have a song done.  And, and tried to get a voter registration movement going.  Meaning by that, many multiple voter registration campaigns and we were successful.  And we're waiting for the final numbers, but we clearly registered many thousands of people.
Story_ID: 220405
Speaker 1: And how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I've asked people that question in interviews, and I don't have a single answer to that and I'm going to stop asking other people how would I like to be remembered.  I think that, that I--that I was a good friend is probably, is probably it.  But there are so many different things, but it's important to me that I have minimized the harm that I've done.  So if people remember me as not hurting anything, I mean that's the big thing, do no harm.  Then if you're in the middle, you can do some good, okay.  But first obligation is to do no harm.  So if people remember me as someone who tried to not hurt anybody, and to, to try to help, that'll be okay.
Story_ID: 217077
Speaker 1: Say who's in it and--
Speaker 2: This is the summer of 1993.  [President William Jefferson] "Bill" Clinton's first term.  I was the state chairman of his campaign, I had been.  Left to right it's me, Bill Clinton and the person with the [Baltimore] Oriole[s] jacket to the right is [HistoryMaker] Mayor Kurt Schmoke.  In the president's hand is an album that I'd just given him of his various campaign stops in Baltimore [Maryland] during the 1992 campaign.
Speaker 1: This is a photo taken after Clinton's reelection.  This is the night after the 1996 election.  I believe it's the very next day.  And it's in Washington, D.C.  That's in the photograph it's the president, my wife [Diana Gibson] and I.  It's, it's, it's at a place in Washington, it's a big--
Speaker 2: You don't have to say location [HistoryMaker] Professor [Larry Gibson].
Speaker 1: That's in my law office [Brown, Allen, Dorsey and Josey, Baltimore, Maryland].  It's in 19--about 1970.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in 19--when I start teaching in Virginia?
Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972].
Speaker 1: Nineteen, the fall of 1972 at the University of Virginia law school [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia], I'm teaching there.
Speaker 2: This is July the 7th, 1993 [sic. 1973], my wedding picture.  My wife, Diana and I.  Left to right, Mary Irving [ph.], Ruth Glen [ph.], the two of us, then Randy Carol [ph.] and David Allen [ph.].
Speaker 1: What did I say?  No, no, no, 1973.  I'm sorry.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: I ran in two marathons.
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty [1980].
Speaker 2: This is 1980, which would be the second marathon I ran in.
Speaker 1: This is the Baltimore City College [Baltimore, Maryland], which is the name of my high school, 1956 junior varsity cross-country team.  I'm the one in the middle holding the sign that says 56.  The coach's name is Vic Schmid.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of Diana and I at the second Clinton Inaugural Ball.  The, the reelection, 1996.
Speaker 1: I am a scuba diver, and advanced and a rescue diver.  And that's me on a boat somewhere, getting ready to take a plunge.
Speaker 2: About what year was that?
Speaker 1: About six years ago.
Speaker 2: So late '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: Going next, my son [Steven Gibson] defends his doctoral dissertation.  We're going on a liveaboard [boat] in Belize.
Speaker 2: This is--I'm shaking hands there with Kofi Annan.  In the middle is the president of Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  This is at the Howard University commencement.  I think it's the 2001, but commencement.  I'm not positive.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph in courthouse in Baltimore.  The name of the courthouse, it's a ceremony.  It's being named in honor of Clarence [M.] Mitchell [Jr.].  In the photograph in the center is [U.S. Supreme Court] Justice Thurgood Marshall, and the woman is Juanita Jackson Mitchell.  To the rear is judge, young Judge, deceased now, Michael Lee [ph.].
Speaker 2: In about what year?
Speaker 1: I don't know what year.  What year did they name the courthouse for Mitchell?  Eighty-three [1983] maybe.  I don't know, I'm guessing.
Speaker 2: So mid-'80s [1980s].  Okay.
Speaker 1: I don't remember.
Speaker 2: This is in the two--this is taken in the 2002 baseball season.  It's at [Oriole Park at] Camden Yards [Baltimore, Maryland].  I'm counsel to the umpires.  These are four major league umpires.  It's the, the man in the center there, the tallest, is John Shulock. That was the crew chief.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is this your mother and your stepfather?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my stepfather John Peterson, and my mother Daisy [Hall Gibson] Peterson.
Speaker 2: About what year was that one taken?
Speaker 1: That--they're going to church, so she's got her church hat on.  She has lots of those.  I think that was last year, which would be--
Speaker 2: Two thousand three [2003]?
Speaker 1: Two thousand three [2003].  Church hats.  My Lord.
Speaker 2: I am ten years old I believe in this photograph.  And so this would be about my sixth grade school photograph.
Speaker 1: And the, the one right here, is this you and your brother?
Speaker 2: That's me and my brother James [Gibson].
Speaker 1: We'll do this one.
Speaker 2: That's the--that's a photograph in Washington, D.C.  What am I about two, two years old.
Speaker 1: Maybe three or four.
Speaker 2: I have no idea; I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And let's do the track one here.
Speaker 2: Seconds later I had a broken arm, the one I broken arm, it's in that picture in the bottom there.  Two hurdles later, one I said they didn't wanna set my arm.  Okay but that's not--I meant--okay.  Here I am at high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland], I ran hurdles.  It looks like I won this race, yeah.
Speaker 1: About what year?
Speaker 2: This is in the spring of 1960.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's do this one here.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION
Speaker 1: Baltimore City College. October of 1957.
Speaker 2: Oh really?  Okay, all right.  Okay.  This photograph was taken in the fall of 1957.  So I'm in high school, in the tenth grade.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION
Speaker 2: Well that's the junior prom.
Speaker 1: Okay we'll take it.
Speaker 2: That's in the fall of 1959.
Speaker 1: What's the young lady's name, do you remember?
Speaker 2: Not, not the fall, fall of 1958.
Speaker 1: You remember her name?
Speaker 2: She was pretty too.  I wanna say Lydia [ph.], it may be on the back.  It's Lydia, but Lord, I don't remember.  Oh I can't believe I don't remember that girl's name.
Speaker 1: This is the September Swing.
Speaker 2: It's the September Swing?  So that's really not the junior prom.  So I'm a sophomore.  So that would be the fall of fifty, '58 [1958], yes.
Speaker 1: This prom here?
Speaker 2: No, I took Dotty's [ph.] sister to the prom.
Story_ID: 217078
Speaker 1: This photograph is with my homeroom class at Baltimore City College [Baltimore, Maryland] in 1960.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION
Speaker 1: Teacher there got killed in an automobile accident about four, five years later.
Speaker 2: Now is this high school graduation?  Let me check that back.
Speaker 1: I think it is.  It's either that, what does it say on the back?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960].
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  I graduated, I went up to Atlantic City [New Jersey], yeah I remember that picture now.  I graduated, but I, yeah.
Speaker 2: This photograph was taken in the summer of 1960 after I graduated from high school, I took it in Atlantic City.  I was working up there as a bellhop in a motel.
Speaker 1: Now those are student body presidents; these are Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 1: 'Cause that was my campaign picture.  I--well I took it right after I'd won.
Speaker 2: The student body--.
Speaker 1: Student body, yes.  This photograph was taken in the spring before, before--of 1963.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And at Howard University.  I'd just won the election as the student council president.
Speaker 2: This photograph is in my office as the student body president in the fall of 1963.  I smoked a pipe pretty much through college.
Speaker 1: That's my--this is a photograph with my mother [Daisy Hall Gibson Peterson] upon my graduation from Howard University in the spring of 1964.
Speaker 2: This is as a ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] cadet captain in 1962.
Speaker 1: Right, right, it would be the fall of '62 [1962].  Fall of '63 [1963]. I became a colonel, right.
Speaker 2: Well that's my law school [Columbia University Law School, New York, New York] graduation yearbook.  I mean that's, that's law school; I know what that is, that's '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-seven [1967]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is 1967 upon graduation from law school.
Speaker 1: Let me see that picture.  I said graduation from law school, no.  I think this is, is going into law school.
Speaker 2: So what year do you think?  You can--do you think it's like--
Speaker 1: I think it's sixty--it's either sixty, '67 [1967] is when I got out of law school, but I don't know if it's '64 [1964] or sixty--it's clearly mid-'60s [1960s].  I don't know if--it's definitely in New York [New York].  It's law school.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is 1970, about, in my office.  You had an earlier picture of that same series.  With a bunch of books in the background.
Speaker 1: I think this was your Black Panther [Charles Wyche].
Speaker 2: No, that's not the Black Panther ["bag of bones"] case.  He had a police--altercation with the police.  This is in [Judge Frank A.] Kaufman, that's as a law clerk.  The one I'm sitting at the office--the only picture I have.  Okay, but this is just as a young attorney.  Both of these are clients.  The one to the right is a fantastic artist with a famous picture that you've probably seen with a little crying child.  I had rescued his work from somebody else on another matter.  The other man I represented who had had an altercation with the police.
Speaker 1: About what year was this one?
Speaker 2: I would estimate that's '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, that's in Judge Kaufman's--this was taken in Judge Kaufman's chambers when I'm a law clerk for Judge Kaufman.  So that would be in--I think I took it right as I came in.  So it would be the fall of '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay.
