Story_ID: 317720
Speaker 1: My name is Tracey Lewis, and I am here in Miami, Florida today with the very wonderful and fabulous host, Ms. Thelma Gibson [HistoryMaker Thelma Gibson].  And Ms. Gibson can you please spell your full name for us, including your maiden name?
Speaker 2: My name is Thelma T-H-E-L-M-A, Vernell, V-E-R-N-E-L-L, Anderson, A-N-D-E-R-S-O-N, Gibson, G-I-B-S-O-N.  And I live at 3661 Franklin Avenue, in Coconut Grove, Florida [Coconut Grove, Miami, Florida], the place where I was born.
Speaker 1: That's right, and can you give us your date of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born December 17, 1926, in Coconut Grove, delivered by a midwife at home.
Speaker 1: Awesome.  Date of birth, location, your occupation?
Speaker 2: I was a registered nurse in my other life.  Today, I consider myself a professional volunteer, and I have been doing volunteering since 1981.
Speaker 1: Oh, today's date.
Speaker 2: Today's is October the 16th, 2006.
Speaker 1: Oh wait no, February.
Speaker 2: Oh!
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's okay.
Speaker 2: February, what did I say?
Speaker 1: You said October, I was like wow.
Speaker 2: Oh, October--February, I was going--I'm sorry, I was talking about my date of--
Speaker 1: No, birth, right.
Speaker 2: I'm not drinking coffee, I'm sorry--February the 16th--
Speaker 1: That's perfectly okay.
Speaker 2: Two thousand and six [2006].
Speaker 1: Oh, and I'm Tracey Lewis the interviewer, and our videographer today is Matthew Hickey.
Speaker 2: So good to have you here.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you for having us.
Story_ID: 317721
Speaker 1: I'm gonna jump into our icebreaker questions.  Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I wish I could really say I had a favorite color, I like colors and I, I sort of like purples and the orangey colors that sort of bring out some of the color in my complexion.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation spot?
Speaker 2: The Bahamas, my grandparents are from the Bahamas and so I like going there, to the different islands in The Bahamas.
Speaker 1: Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I have pigeon peas and rice and fish.
Speaker 1: Pigeon peas?
Speaker 2: And a salad.
Speaker 1: What are pigeon peas?
Speaker 2: Pigeon peas and, oh you don't know pigeon peas, oh my goodness that's a famous Cuban and Bahamian and Caribbean, food.  Pigeon peas are one of the things was a staple in our house.  We used to have pigeon pea trees where you grew 'em yourself.  And then when the Hispanics came they brought, they started with the canned pigeon peas, so started canning them.  So you could get them in the can.  And you cook them much like you would black beans and rice.  Or any of the other--we ate a lot of white rice with lima beans, soup and black eyed pea soup and that sort of thing with the pigeon peas, we mixed it.  So you cooked with bacon and onion and tomatoes, and a lot people put bell pepper, I didn't put bell pepper in mine.  But you fry your onions and bacon, and sometimes you don't even use bacon they just used canola oil or olive oil.  And it makes the delicious dish, and it's not only a vegetable, it's, you get your carbs in your peas.  So you get a combination.
Speaker 1: Well I'm hungry now (laughter).  Ms. Gibson [HistoryMaker Thelma Gibson], what is your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I guess my favorite time of year is during the time of my birthday, which is December, so it's usually the fall of the year, or early winter.
Speaker 1: And is there a particular saying that people know you by?  Or that your parents [Sweetlon Albury Anderson and Thomas Anderson] may have passed down to you?
Speaker 2: I, there are several things that people say that I say all the time and that's just, "How about that?"  I'm constantly saying, "How about that?"  But I didn't know that was a favorite saying until it was brought to my attention, that I'm forever saying, "Well, how about that."
Story_ID: 317722
Speaker 1: Tell me about your mom?  And her full name?
Speaker 2: My mother, mama as I called her, was Sweetlon Vernell Albury Counts Anderson [Sweetlon Albury Anderson].  My mother was married twice, she was born in Key West, Florida, back on June 17, 1902.  And she came to Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida] at age twelve and lived here, married her first husband David Counts when she was seventeen or eighteen, I guess, because she had three little girls by him.  Two of them died, I had one sister who's still alive that was David Counts' daughter.  That's my oldest sister Joyce [Joyce Counts] who lives in Detroit [Michigan].  And then she married my father, Thomas Theodore Anderson, about which she had eleven children.  So I had one brother [Thomas E. Anderson] and a sister Virginia [Virginia Anderson], who was born in 1925, and then of course I was born in 1926.  And then the others came after me, so I was like the middle child.  I also say I'm number six of fourteen, but number three of eleven.  I never talked about being one of fourteen until I started writing my book ['Forbearance: Thelma Vernell Anderson Gibson, The Life Story of a Coconut Grove Native,' Thelma Gibson].  Because it was hard enough being one of eleven, children tease you about all those Anderson children and all those brothers and sisters.  So it was interesting being one of eleven and after I started my--when I wrote my book, one of my brothers, somebody said to him, "Percy [Percy Anderson], man I didn't know you had all those brothers and sisters," he said, "I didn't either."  Because it was something we never really talked about, those three girls who died, because they were really before our time, and mama didn't talk about them that much.  She always she had these three children, she would always tell us, that we had three sisters, I didn't even know their names really until I was researching for my book, and I was looking through the church's records and I saw the name of Naomi [ph.] and Mabel [ph.], I didn't see Virginia's name, Naomi and Mabel were Counts, Virginia was an Anderson.  So I didn't see her name there, but they had been baptized and they died, one like just seven days old and one was a couple of weeks.  But they had been registered at the church, had been baptized, we were Episcopalians and mama believed that every one of her children had to be baptized.  In fact we didn't go anywhere hardly until we were baptized, at age three months.  In the olden days, you know, you stayed in; mamas kept you in the house.  Babies went out after they got baptized, and from then on you went to church.  But mama was the kind of mother who worked days and made three dollars a day, when she made five dollars a day that was a lot of money.  And I always teased her, back in 1960, mama was called to be juror in Judge Peter Fay's [Peter T. Fay] court, and that was a federal court.  They were paying twenty dollars a day, and mama was on that case for ten days, and they paid you for transportation as well.  So when she got this check for over two hundred dollars, it was the most money mama had ever made.  So she was really excited about that, 'cause she had all this money.  So we were able to truly shop, for clothes and everything else, when mama got this money.  But she was very frugal, and knew the importance of trying to save a little something and still take care of us.  And we always lived in a little rented house.  We lived on Charles Avenue [Coconut Grove, Miami, Florida], where most of my brothers and my baby sister was born.  We lived in this little house that we rented, and it was two bedrooms, with a hallway and a little kitchen, but a big front porch.  So the front porch was really our living room.  You know, you had the chairs out there, so when everybody came by they'd, we'd sit on the porch and talk.  It was a time when there was no electricity, you had to go outside to the bathroom.  They had to go outside to pump water, and it was really rural living, but we were in Colored Town.  You know, Colored Town and White Town, Coconut Grove, was known as two separate areas.  Colored Town and White Town, the area that Main Highway and Charles Avenue, started right at the corner of Main and where that playhouse [Player's State Theater; Coconut Grove Playhouse, Miami, Florida] is, and it came down to Douglas Road.  And it was really the first main street in all of Coconut Grove, Charles Avenue.  And then it was a dirt road in the beginning.
Story_ID: 317723
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) My paternal grandfather came as a lad of fifteen back in 1887 and worked in White Town [Coconut Grove, Miami, Florida] for the Munroes.  And he stayed on their land, which is right on the other side of Main Highway across from the playhouse [Player's State Theater; Coconut Grove Playhouse, Miami, Florida] pretty much.  And he worked for the Munroes, Ralph Munroe, in the beginning and then for Kirk [Munroe] and Mary Barr Munroe.  And much of what I know about my grandfather was written in Mary Barr Munroe's book, or in her diary.  And she talked about Dan, his name was Daniel William Anderson.  And she tells how he went back to Bahamas in 1894 and married my grandmother, who was Catherine Jane Ratray [Catherine Ratray Anderson].  And they married, and he told how he brought her back to Miami [Florida].  Told how Dan bought his lot from Frow [ph.], or Mr. Frow we called it Frow we called it Frow in those days, now they call it Frow.  But they in that book that told how Dan bought his lot, and he had a lot at 3326 Charles Avenue.  Now we lived at 3382, and he lived, his lot was at 3326.  Told how Dan paid for his house, paid for his lot and how they helped him build a house.  And so a lot of that information I got from them.  I do have a picture of my grandfather, that you could see, and they told how posed, in 1895, Dan posed for this picture.  And told who did the picture.  And it was rather interesting to find out that information.  But mama [Sweetlon Albury Anderson] was one of those who insisted that we go to school.  Said she didn't want us to do what she did.  She was cleaning other folks' houses every day for this three dollars and five dollars.  But she wanted her children to get an education.  So she pushed schooling, so all of us pretty much finished high school.  Four of us got an opportunity to go to college.  I was the first one to go away to school.  My brother Thomas [Thomas E. Anderson] would have been, but my sister Joyce [Joyce Counts] was the oldest, she finished high school.  She worked for a few years, and I had an aunt in Detroit [Michigan] and my aunt had asked her about coming to Detroit, just to visit.  And she got to Detroit and never came back.  So then my brother [William Anderson] who was next finished high school the same time I did.  And then he went to the [U.S.] Army, he had to go in the Army.  And so he had, he really had a scholarship to go to Bethune-Cookman College [Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida], and then the school said to me that I could take that.  But I wanted to be a nurse and Bethune-Cookman didn't have nursing.  So I applied for Jackson [Jackson Memorial Hospital School of Nursing, Miami, Florida] not knowing at the time that segregation would keep me from being able to get into the Jackson Hospital [Jackson Memorial Hospital, Miami, Florida] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now Jackson, okay, that and that's--
Speaker 1: The nursing school that's here in Miami [Florida].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I ended up going to nursing school in Raleigh, North Carolina at Saint Augustine's [Saint Augustine's College; Saint Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina], really it was St. Agnes Hospital [Raleigh, North Carolina] which is housed there at Saint Augustine's College, in Raleigh (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 317724
Speaker 1: It was important for your mom [Sweetlon Albury Anderson] to see her children educated (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Get an education--yes.
Speaker 1: Do you know about her parents?
Speaker 2: My mother, my grandmother I know about, her father [Donald Albury] died.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was her name?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was Sarah, Sarah Johnson Albury Sawyer Bethel [Sarah Johnson Bethel], she was married to my grandfather who's an Albury.  My grandfather was drowned in Key West [Florida], and while she was in the Bahamas.  My grandmother was in the Bahamas and pregnant with my Uncle Eugene [Eugene Albury].  Mama was the oldest, and then she had Aunt Mary [ph.] and then my Uncle Eugene.  And when she came back, her husband had drowned.  She married again and had a daughter, Grace [Grace Albury] in 1911.  And then she moved to Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida].  She divorced Mr. Sawyer and came to Coconut Grove with mama and Grace, she left Aunt Peeve, which is Miriam Peeve [Miriam Albury] my aunt, and my Uncle Eugene in Key West with her mother, who was Matilda Johnson [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then they came to Coconut Grove, she came here and then she got married, and two years later she brought my Aunt Miriam and Eugene up along with my grandmother Matilda.  My grandmother Matilda lived to be ninety-two, and when she came up she lived with my grandmother.  The house where we have the Thelma Gibson Health Initiative [Miami, Florida] over on Grand Avenue was my grandmother's house.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And so it's now the office for the Gibson Memorial Fund [Theodore Roosevelt Gibson Memorial Fund] and the Thelma Gibson Health Initiative.  But my grandmother lived there, she married Mr. Bethel, Clarence Bethel, and she had an additional six children.  She came here with four, she came with two then brought two more and then had an additional six for him.  And two of my aunts are still living.  I have an aunt who's going to be ninety-one on the 28th of this month, living in Los Angeles, California.  And I have another aunt who's next to me, she doesn't like you to tell her age, so I'm not gonna tell you her age, but I can tell you she's younger than I am.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So, I have those two aunts, and I have no uncles or other aunts living.  But my grandmother made bread every Saturday after we went to the movies.  We'd go there and get the hot rolls, with either peanut butter and jelly or maybe just some sugar on the roll, but butter on the roll.  But you knew you were gonna have hot bread (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) With sprinkles on top?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you could sprinkle on top.  You knew you were gonna have a hot roll, and then there was always and loaf of bread to take home to Sister.  They always called my mama, Sister.  And so being the oldest, you know all of the children, all of her siblings called her Sister.  And so my grandmother also called her Sister.  So she said, "You gotta take home this bread for Sister."  And so we'd bring home the loaf of bread for mama.  And it was just a joy.  My grandmother made fruitcakes every year.  I used to enjoy going there around October and see all these different things that she had to make her fruitcakes, and she'd get the fruitcakes ready.  My grandfather, who was really my step-grandfather, made wine.  And so you'd see them putting the wine over the year to keep it soft for Christmas.  And every year, all of my childhood, every Christmas Eve, we'd go to church at midnight to service.  When we left there it would be Christmas morning.  We went to my grandmother's house and we'd have a piece of fruitcake and a small cup of wine.  And so I tell people now that I'm a wino, 'cause I drink a glass of wine almost every day.  And sometimes my, I have a friend Ethel Phillip [ph.] and I, we have dinner together we can finish a whole bottle of Manischewitz wine.  But that's one of my joys of telling people.  That I tell kids all the time, it's okay to know but you gotta know how much of this stuff to drink.  And so from a child I have been drinking sweet wine, 'cause my grandfather made it, and we had in the presence of our parents.  And I tell people all the time what the Jews did with their children, is teach them the importance of drinking wine and what the wine meant.  And we don't do that with our children, and that's why we have more alcoholics than anybody else.  'Cause they don't know the importance of having just enough, and what Passover meant.  And why you drank the, the wine and that sort of thing, so.  It's a great lesson.
Speaker 1: That's a very rich family history.
Story_ID: 317725
Speaker 1: Before I forget, can you just tell us your siblings' names?
Speaker 2: Okay, my oldest sister's Joyce, Joyce Counts, and she's alive, now that's, these, you want the living ones, you want the dead ones too.
Speaker 1: Just everyone just from top to bottom.
Speaker 2: Well when I tell you Naomi [ph.], and Naomi was mama's [Sweetlon Albury Anderson] first child and Mabel [ph.] was her second child and then Joyce was her third child, but I did not know Mabel and Naomi.  And then my brother Thomas, Thomas Eugene Anderson, and then Virginia Anderson, and she's the other sibling that died that I did not know.  And then I came along.  And then there's William, William Theodore Anderson, he's dead.  There's Percy Garcia Anderson, he's alive, Doris Anderson Woodard, and she's alive.  Donald Renaldo Anderson and he's alive.  Hubert Leroy Anderson and he's alive.  Herman Lewis Anderson is alive.  Fredrick Matthew [Frederick Anderson] is deceased.  Now William is deceased, Thomas is deceased and Fredrick is deceased.  And then Alvin is the baby, Alvin Alfonso Anderson.
Speaker 1: That's good, you remember everybody's names, too.
Speaker 2: Oh I remember their names and their birth dates.
Story_ID: 317726
Speaker 1: Kind of move over to your paternal family.  Can you tell us your dad's name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Okay, Thomas, T-H-O-M-A-S, Theodore, T-H-E-O-D-O-R-E, Anderson, was my father.
Speaker 1: And what year was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born February the 14th, 1903.  He would have been 103 years old this week, had he lived.  He lived to be ninety-four.
Speaker 1: Oh wow.
Speaker 2: He always said he was gonna live to be a hundred, but didn't quite make it.
Speaker 1: Darn close.
Speaker 2: And papa did manual labor, he worked on the golf course and he did all kinds of things until I guess 1944.  He started working for Dade County [Florida], worked at the tag agency and see then ended up in maintenance at Jackson Memorial Hospital [Miami, Florida].  When I came back as a nurse at Jackson, he was working there in maintenance.  So--
Speaker 1: And what do you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he died Christmas Day in 1997.  Right here.
Speaker 1: Right here?
Speaker 2: I brought him here yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: I brought him here and had a little bed back there in what was my husband's [Theodore Roosevelt Gibson] office.  I put a hospital bed and brought in and kept him for a couple of years until he died.  Mama [Sweetlon Albury Anderson] died very suddenly on October 31, on Halloween; she'd give out her Halloween candy and sat down and said to my brother Billy [William Anderson], "When 'Sanford and Son' comes on wake me up."  And 'Sanford and Son' came, Billy said, "Mama, 'Sanford and Son,'" and mama didn't answer, and he said, "Mama, 'Sanford and Son,'" he said, "Papa, you know, I think mama's sitting over there dead," and mama was dead.  Just that quick she had gone out.  'Cause she had been sick and that day she'd been up and did some work around the house and gave out her Halloween candy and sat there and went on.
Speaker 1: Well, sounds like they both had very rich and wonderful lives.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but anyway back to Papa, his daddy was Daniel William Anderson and his mother was Catherine Jane Anderson.  Catherine Jane Ratray [Catherin Ratray Anderson].
Speaker 1: Ratray, okay.
Speaker 2: Ratray, R-A-T-R-A-Y.  They were both born in the Bahamas, both my grandparents.  My father was born in Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida].
Speaker 1: Another Coconut Grove (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father was born at 3326 Charles Avenue in Coconut Grove.
Speaker 1: And what do you know about your father's childhood here in Coconut?
Speaker 2: Well, my father was the lightest one of all of his siblings.  And he had, let's see, my aunt, his sister, you want his siblings?
Speaker 1: Yes, please.
Speaker 2: His siblings, Rosemary [ph.], John [ph.], Dempsey [ph.], all Andersons and then Papa who's Thomas.  And then Palmer [ph.], Aremetha [ph.] and there was a girl who in between that died and I'm not recalling her name right off but I can get it for you, 'cause I do have it written down.  And then his baby brother was Louis [ph.], Louis Anderson.  But he had a sister that only lived eleven months, and died, so I'm not recalling her name right off.
Speaker 1: Okay, so yes, his childhood in Coconut Grove, oh you said he was born in 1903?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was born February 14th, 1903, here in Coconut Grove.  And of course it was the same as it was when I was a child except they had a lot fruit trees and they did things that all children could do.  But Papa growing up, being fair, he could pass for white anywhere.  And we always laughed, 'cause when we were children, papa could go into places that we couldn't go in.  And so there was a drugstore up on the corner of Main Highway where we couldn't go in and sit down, but Papa could.  And he'd go in and sit down and order ice cream or sodas or whatever.  And then bring it out to his little brown skinned children, who would be out.  And we would laugh, we would say, "They don't know that papa's colored."  And so papa had the kind of childhood where--which was more affluent than ours, because his parents owned the house.  And they, and grandfather and my grandmother worked and they were able to give them the kind of background that we didn't have.  Because they did have some of the, well they still in those days, the kitchens were outside; most of the Bahamians cooked on the outside.  So while they had a big house, they still went outside to cook.  And they still had to go outside to the bathroom, because they didn't have the infrastructure then to have the bathrooms like they had in other places.  So his was a pretty rugged but very wonderful childhood apparently.  And all of my, all of his siblings pretty much grew up and had their own homes.  Or married well and, was able to have more than we had.  Papa was the poorest of all of the Anderson children.  And he married and then had all these children.  And just he never finished more than eight grade.  And then, but he talked about going to private school, Saint Albans School [St. Albans Episcopal Industrial School, Miami, Florida], for industrial school, was the Episcopal church school.  And papa went there and his pictures, on one of the pictures that, that you see in almost all the books about Coconut Grove, a group from Saint Albans School is there, and there's Papa with his little curly hair in that picture.  But he said he went to school and his mama and papa paid fifteen dollars--fifteen cents a week for him to go to private school.
Story_ID: 317727
Speaker 1: You're describing your father's [Thomas Anderson] childhood?
Speaker 2: Oh yes so he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fifteen cents a week for a private school.
Speaker 2: He paid fifteen cents a week to go to private school and went to St. Albans Industrial School [St. Albans Episcopal Industrial School, Miami, Florida], and so he was proud to have it known that he went to private school.  There weren't that many schools around anyway.  And so the little public school that they had, the kind of training school for colored didn't come about when he was a child, so they, he had to go there.  Mama [Sweetlon Albury Anderson] of course went to school in Key West [Florida] and then we she came here, I guess she was around sixth grade.  So I understand she finished to eighth grade.  And that was she and he both only went to eighth grade.  And I'm not even sure they went that far.  'Cause, but they boost about having gone to school and they were both literate, so.  My grandfather [Daniel Anderson] was also literate when he came from the Bahamas.  I understand, and one of the things that the Munroes liked about him was the fact that he was literate.  And they wrote about that, and he was able to help them sail from Key West to Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida].  And the mail, he would help with the mail, when the mail would come in from New York [New York]. 'Cause everything came in by boat in the days, in the early days of my grandfather.
Speaker 1: That's really exciting.
Speaker 2: So it's really exciting, and when we would go to my grandmother's [Catherine Ratray Anderson] house she could always find all kinds of fruit, because they had mango trees and orange trees and guava tree and pear--avocado, pear trees and everything in their yard.  The Bahamian came with a lot of, they knew how to work in the coral rock.  And this--may not know much about Miami [Florida] yet, but this is the highest ground in pretty much all of Dade County [Florida], the Coconut Grove area, and it's full of coral rock.  And so a lot of, you'll see a lot of the buildings with the coral rock on it.  And we like the coral rock walkways, it's in that sort of things.  Because the Bahamians and every time they dig a grave you get all these rocks, and the people save them up.  So you'll see the coral rock around the cemetery as well.  And this is how they used some of the rock.  And the houses were built of the Florida pine, my grandfather's house was built with the Florida pine.  And it's no longer there of course, but the space, the lot, the land is still there.  And another CBS [concrete block stucco] house is on it now.
Speaker 1: What--now your dad's life, now you, one thing, that you just said that when he was a child there were a lot of fruit trees.  But by the time you were a child, there weren't as many (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no there was still a lot of fruit trees around, oh yeah that was a joy of living in Coconut Grove.  'Cause you walk down the street, and we used to enjoy hurricanes even.  Because after hurricanes you could go and pick up coconuts out of everybody's yard, and oranges, and oh whenever was in season.  And I always the remember the Sawyers [ph.] had a guava tree that hung over the street in over Charles Avenue, and we'd go down there and pick guavas, and they yell at you sometime but basically they didn't care.  'Cause there was usually so much, so much.  And everybody knew everybody.  We knew everybody and knew them by name.  And everybody knew all the Anderson children.  Because we were all over the place, and we're a part of everything.  We were very active, all of us were pretty much active in church.  And whatever happened at the schools you know the Andersons were gonna be a part of it.  My brothers played football; they were active in most things.
Story_ID: 317740
Speaker 1: We just left off on the previous tape talking about your father's [Thomas Anderson] childhood here in Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida], and your paternal grandparents Daniel [Daniel Anderson] and Catherine [Catherine Ratray Anderson].  What else do you know about his life here, like how did your parents meet?
Speaker 2: I really guess they, Coconut Grove's such a small town.  And I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How many people--how large was it, at least in Colored Town [Coconut Grove, Miami, Florida]?
Speaker 2: In Colored Town I venture to say there may have been three or four thousand people around, when I was a child.  And of course, before my childhood I guess there weren't that many, in his childhood they migrated from the Bahamas.  And then with the railroad people started coming in from South Carolina and Georgia, and North Carolina, and coming down to Miami [Florida].  And quite a few settled in Coconut Grove.  But Coconut Grove was really a small village that had just almost all single family homes when I was a child, and of course during my father's childhood I think it was pretty much the same.  When I went away to school and I came back I began to see some of the apartment buildings it was built on Grand Avenue.  And so I always said Thomas Wolfe was so right when he said, "You can't go home again."  'Cause you go away and stay a year or two and come back and things change.  And Coconut Grove really started growing in the '40s [1940s].  Remember now Papa was in the, before even the teens, he was born in 1903.  So I guess when he got married must have been like 1922, or 'cause my brother was born in 1924, and he's the oldest of his children.  So I venture to say he must have met my mother [Sweetlon Albury Anderson] along the way, because she was married and they had these three girls, remember.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And when she divorced, then she and David [David Counts] broke up.   They evidently met, and shortly after that they were married, because my oldest sister [Joyce Counts] was born in 1922 and my brother was born in 1924.  So we figure they got together, pretty quick after that divorce.  I don't know if that was a part of the divorce, any of that.  But you know, they were married and, and Thomas [Thomas E. Anderson] was born 1924, and then the rest of us, right up to 1943, my youngest brother, '46 [1946], my youngest brother was born in 1946.
Speaker 1: So twenty years.
Speaker 2: Yeah there is exactly twenty years difference.  Mama couldn't come to my graduation from nursing school [Saint Augustine's College; Saint Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina] because Alvin [Alvin Anderson] was born December 30th of 1946.  And I was graduating January 29th of 1947.  So he was just going to be a month old, the next day, so she couldn't come to my graduation.  But I graduated and then I had another six months that I had to spend in the field of my choice which was operating room technique.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which meant I went from Raleigh [North Carolina] to Meharry [Meharry Medical College] over in Nashville, Tennessee, to do six months of operating room technique.  That's why I didn't really finish nursing school until August of 1947.  Even though I graduated in January, end of January, had to do an additional six months.
Story_ID: 317741
Speaker 1: We're gonna jump back to 1926, when you were born.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so as you said, you were three of eleven at that point.  What was your childhood like here in Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida]?
Speaker 2: I had an interesting childhood, a very, very wonderful childhood really.  Because having a sister [Joyce Counts] and a brother [Thomas E. Anderson] coming along, my brother always told everybody, he used to tell me, he used to try to show me how to urinate.  That I had, we had to bring in the bucket every night.  And the boys would stand up to urinate, of course I was trying to do like my brother, stand up.  And he always told everybody, he used to enjoy telling people, "I had to teach her how to sit on the pot."  And so that was interesting and then next to me was a brother [William Anderson], and then another brother [Percy Anderson].  So there were like three boys with two girls for a long time while we grew up.  My baby sister [Doris Anderson Woodard], I'm really--she was born in 1934--so I'm like eight years older than my baby sister.  And in fact my oldest sister is eighty-four, and I'm gonna be eighty, so I'm seventy-five, so really five years between us.  But then, then we all grew up together and we enjoyed one another.  We'd sit around and we'd play marbles, shoot marbles, we'd jump hopscotch; we knew how to plait babies' hair.  May had the rope and a doll and a bottle and you could plait doll--we made our own dolls.
Story_ID: 317742
Speaker 1: So you were just describing some of the games that you would all play together (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, so we had a good time.  And when it was time, we'd go to school.  We had the neighbors who kept us, Ms. Bee [ph.], Ms. Hattie Bethel, who lived across the street kept us.  And then we went to Ms. Ross [ph.], who had a little place for keeping children, 'cause mama [Sweetlon Albury Anderson] worked every day pretty much, and papa [Thomas Anderson] worked, and so.
Speaker 1: Now did your mom work, in--
Speaker 2: In days' work in other folks' homes.
Speaker 1: Okay, in White Town [Coconut Grove, Miami, Florida]?
Speaker 2: In White Town.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, always in White Town.  She had to walk pretty much down here on Concord [ph.] or down on as far down as Poinciana [Avenue] and Loquat [Avenue] and all the little places down here.  And then she, excuse me, then she even had some days work that she did over in the, what now I call The Roads [Miami, Florida] section.  But we pretty much walked everywhere around here, we used to walk downtown, we used to walk to South Miami [Florida].
Speaker 1: Now how far is that from here?
Speaker 2: South Miami is just like two miles, two and half to three miles.  But downtown is five miles.  But it was old, you know, no pave, no highways and stuff that you had to worry about.  So you'd go down Main Highway which was not, well then there weren't that many cars either, remember, when I came along.  There were only, well I could remember the few families that had cars in Coconut Grove, when I was a child.  The Cass [ph.] family had a car and the Knights [ph.] family had a car, and Ms. John Smith, Ms. Smith had a car.  Ms. Smith used to take the kids from here to Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Miami, Florida].  You know Carver High School [George Washington Carver Senior High School; George Washington Carver Middle School, Coral Gables, Florida] didn't become a high school until 19--the first graduating class of 1939.  So the kids who came on before that--Booker T. Washington came on in 1927--so they had to over town to school.  So Ms. Smith had a big car, now she really had a big car.  So she would take at least six or seven kids from Coconut Grove to Booker T. Washington, those kids who went there.  In fact my oldest sister [Joyce Counts] finished from Booker T.  Now she could have finished from Carver but she started at Booker T. and she wanted to continue going there.  So she went, finished from Booker T. Washington, but there were very few cars, and we rode bicycles and had skates, and the biggest thing for Christmas was to get Union [Union Hardware Co.] skates.  And that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what are those?
Speaker 2: --always a big thing, 'cause everybody would be skating with the few roads that we had, there were no sidewalks back then.  So we'd be in the streets skating most of the time.  Oh, when you finally got a bicycle, now that was truly a big deal.  'Cause there wasn't that much money to do much else.  So had bicycles and there were no telephones, and so everything went by word of mouth.  Every parent knew what their children were doing because the other parents would tell them.  So if a boy brought my books up to that corner of Charles [Avenue] and Hibiscus [Street], mama knew it before I got home.  That I was walking home with Roy [ph.], or I was walking home with whoever it was that was carrying my books.  And so it was just really a small town, where everybody knew everybody.  And we kept straight because people told your mamas what you were doing out there.
Speaker 1: So what was the name of your elementary school?
Speaker 2: Carver, well it was Coconut Grove Elementary Colored--in the beginning it was Coconut Grove Training School for Colored [Coconut Grove Training School for Colored Elementary School, Miami, Florida].
Speaker 1: And that community (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then it was Coconut Grove Elementary [Coconut Grove Elementary School, Miami, Florida] and Coconut Grove Junior High School [Miami, Florida].  It got to be Carver in 1943.
Speaker 1: George Washington Carver?
Speaker 2: So I really finished, George Washington Carver Junior-Senior High.  And the whole school we went from elementary, actually kindergarten, first grade through twelfth grade at the one school, when I came along.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I finished from George Washington Carver in January 29, 1944.  And then I went to St. Agnes [St. Agnes Hospital, Raleigh, North Carolina] in August of 1947, to Raleigh [North Carolina], the school of nursing.
Speaker 1: Now Raleigh, North Caro--
Speaker 2: Raleigh, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But school was interesting, I knew all my teachers, they knew me.  Ms. Mazon [Lillian Stirrup Mazon] who had me in second grade and Ms. Dean [Kate Stirrup Dean] who had me in fourth grade, lived in the Stirrups' house [E.W.F. Stirrup House, Miami, Florida] right at the corner of Charles and Main Highway.
Speaker 1: The Stirrups family or?
Speaker 2: The Stirrups' house, you will see that, if you do history of Coconut Grove, you will hear more about E.W.F. Stirrup [Ebenezer Woodbury Franklin Stirrup, Sr.] and his holdings, in fact the house we rented, we rented from the Stirrup family.  But our teachers lived in the neighborhood so Ms. Dean and Ms. Mazon lived up there.  And then their children who walked to school, Dazelle, Dr. Dazelle Simpson now and my brother Thomas [Thomas E. Anderson] were the same.  And Ms. Mazon's daughter Gloria [Gloria Mazon] and I were the same, were born 1926.  The oldest daughter Charlotte [ph.] and my oldest sister Joyce [Joyce Counts] were the same age.  So if they were coming down from up on the hill, we called it, down to go to school.  We were down at the bottom of the hill.  All of us would walk to school together, so everybody sort of knew one another.  And the thing about Coconut Grove, there was no such thing as caste and class.  Everybody was the same regardless to how much money you had or how little money you had.  We were all sort of treated the same way.  And so the Stirrups who had--what we thought were millionaires--would walk down the street, and walk to school with us who were poor.  We really had nothing when you think, but we were all rich, in that we were all friendly.
Story_ID: 317743
Speaker 1: And all went to the same church pretty much, all went to school.  In fact everybody in our neighborhood went to church with one another.  Macedonia Baptist Church [Macedonia Missionary Baptist Church, Miami, Florida] was right across the street from where I lived as a child.  And Reverend Finlayson [James A. Finlayson], who lived across there had two daughters and a son.  Willie Finlayson [HistoryMaker Dr. William Finlayson], who is now Dr. Finlayson, and Claudia Finlayson was a nurse and Love [ph.] who was a teacher.  Love was a teacher and Claudia was, Love was the nurse and Claudia was the teacher.  But Ms. Finlayson taught school and Reverend Finlayson was the minister.  And they went to school, to church over there, we would go to BYPU [Baptist Young People's Union] with them, they would go Young People's Service League with us (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now BYPU is?
Speaker 1: Is Baptist Young People's Union and Young People's Service League was YPSL, that we went to.  And then we went to the Methodist church.  And I remember the Methodist church was up just three doors from us on the same side of the street on Charles [Avenue] when we were children.  They later moved down here on Thomas [Avenue] and Douglas [Road].  Just like Macedonia moved from where we were up there right here in the corner.  Now Macedonia is the oldest church for colored, in all of Dade County [Florida].
Speaker 2: Now you said raised Episcopalian, correct, but you went to the Macedonia (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we went to BYPU, went to Union with the Methodist children.  And we were all just friends and we all sort of went with one another.  The kids in our class, Julia Malachi [ph.] belonged to the Methodist church and so I went with her sometime to the Methodist church.  And the young people serv- whatever they were doing with their young people.  And I went with the Finlaysons to Macedonia, and they would then go with me at Christ Church.  And we were the three largest churches around, Macedonia, St. Paul [Greater St. Paul AME Church, Miami, Florida], and Christ Episcopal Church [Miami, Florida], and we were all right in the same little neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So those of us who lived on the south side of Grand Avenue, sort of stuck together, and we were friends and we did.  The people on the north, we didn't get across there so much, to know the kids on the north side of Grand Avenue.  And if you get to know Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida] you'll realize that there were sections on the north side that was for white only.  When you get past Elizabeth [Street] and Florida Avenue, white people lived all there.  We had white flight after the [U.S.] Supreme Court decision in 1954 [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) After Brown?
Speaker 1: After the Brown, and then blacks began to buy those houses as whites began to move out.  And so that's how blacks got all up in that area over there.  So we were pretty much on this side of Grand, and then on that side of Douglas.  And whites lived on this side of Elizabeth, and so it was really two separate communities.  But we knew one another we were friends with one another.  And so we followed one another to church activities, to school activities and we kept busy.  My Dad [Thomas Anderson] played baseball and so we would always go to the baseball games.  And especially when the team from Key West [Florida] came, 'cause there were a lot of Hisp- Cuban, we call 'em, They were blacks and white Cubans, and you know, didn't know the difference, the team would be mixed.  And so we always enjoyed.  We had a young man who lived down the st- two brothers, the Gibson brothers.  I called 'em Speed--Will Gibson [Wilfred Gibson] and his brother Clarence Gibson.  One was the pitcher and one was the catcher and papa was on third base.  And so we always enjoyed the baseball games.  And there were, and my brothers came along, they all played football.  So we'd go to football games.  And we would get a chance to have straw rides.  We didn't have a beach.
Speaker 2: And what's a straw ride?
Speaker 1: Well, a straw ride is when you had a truck, and you put a lot of straw on it and the kids would get around and we'd be all dressed in all kinds of, pantsuits and, and overalls and all that kind of stuff.  And you get these trucks and you go, it's like a moonlight ride.  Where you go up to, oh just to the beach.  Or you go on a Saturday outing where you go to the beach, because we didn't have a beach for colored.
Speaker 2: Oh!
Speaker 1: Until Virginia Beach [Virginia Key Beach Park, Miami, Florida] came along in 1945.  And I remember I finished high school [George Washington Carver Senior High School; George Washington Carver Middle School, Coral Gables, Florida] in '44 [1944].  So I was a teenager in the '30s [1930s], and so there was nothing here for us to do (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You couldn't go to the beach at all?
Speaker 1: You couldn't go to the beaches here, no.  So we had to go up to Ogis [ph.] which was in Broward County [Florida], but we'd get straw rides and we had fun.  And it was like, I say to people all the time, we knew our place and we sort of stayed in our place.  We were colored and we knew it. When we got to be Negroes, we were Negroes and we knew it.  When we got to be black, we were blacks and we knew it.  And then African Americans, you still know it.  And I, in every one of my books, I write, (background noise) "The struggle continues."  Because it's not a, it's not a matter of being able to get around--
Story_ID: 317744
Speaker 1: We just left off, describing life in Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida].  Now you were born right before the Depression [Great Depression] and you came of age right before and during World War II [WWII].  What are some of things that you remember about those two pivotal times?
Speaker 2: I could remember during the '30s [1930s], early '30s [1930s], during the Depression, that people had to go to welfare.  And Mr. Jackson, we had a man by the name of Melvin Jackson, who was a social worker for this area.  And he ran cleaners right on the corner of Douglas [Road]--on the corner of Hibiscus [Street] and Grand [Avenue].  And his wife did the sewing and repairs in there, and he did the welfare.  So, those people who had to go for flour and rice and that sort of thing, he sort of decided who.  And he was the person who would decide who would get the things that government was giving out.  And I could remember us going to get rice and flour, and then there was a meat market.  And we had a man name Thomas Horse [ph.] and Mr. Horse would always save the bones from the meat after he cut it up.  And said, "This was for Ms. Anderson [Sweetlon Albury Anderson], come here child, get these bones to take home to your mama to make some soup."  And so people looked out for you.  Everybody knew who needed what, and they sort of helped.  And so I could remember wearing clothes that were made out of flour sacks.  They would get the gingham and make little skirts and stuff for you out of the material that came with the flour sacks.  So it was a time that I remember that people went for.  And we were a part of that group who had to get some of the things from the Jacksons, the sugar and the rice and the flour.  And mama knew how to make bread and papa [Thomas Anderson] always made johnny cake.  So we survived through the whole area of--and never, never had a day that we were hungry.  People always looked out for you.  And my grandparents would, my aunts and my uncles would look out.  I had aunts who had favorite children, my aunt, one aunt had let my brother Percy [Percy Anderson] and she looked out for him and did almost everything for him.  I had an aunt who loved my brother Billy [William Anderson] and she did everything for Billy.  And bought his clothes, and I had an aunt who would bring us school clothes and the things that we needed.  We were able to get, because we had all these relatives all around.  And while we were--there were a lot of us, mama was the only one, and I guess from her family, who had all these children, papa was the only one from his family.  My papa had one sister, his oldest sister had one girl.  His second sister had three children, two boys and a girl.  And his third sister had a boy and a girl.  And they were the only family members I had one cousin living from my paternal--papa's side of the family.  Whereas, mama had, he had eleven of us, and between all of them they just had six.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So it was like everybody having--my Uncle John [ph.] who had no children, would always bring bread, and oh we had my cinnamon buns and stuff that he'd bring from the bakery.  Holsum Bakery [South Miami, Florida] over town where he worked.  And it always nice to see him coming, 'cause you knew he was coming with all these goodies and stuff.  And then mama's family always looked out for us, and so we were well taken care.  I had, I worked for Ms. Sawyer [ph.], on Saturdays I scrubbed her kitchen and got twenty-five cents.  And that twenty-five cents paid for my ten cents to go to the movies, and five cents for popcorn and then you went to the Dew Drop Inn [Miami, Florida] and got a five cents ice cream cone.  So they were the days that you had little but everything cost little, so we managed to survive.  And then I had a nickel for Sunday school for the next day.  So, and we went to Sunday school, went to church in the morning at eleven o'clock.  Went home, had dinner, you were back at Sunday school at three o'clock.  You went to Young People's Service League at six o'clock and then back at church at seven thirty.  So it was your day, your Sundays were taken up with church.  Now when my late husband [Theodore Roosevelt Gibson] came to Christ Church [Christ Episcopal Church, Miami, Florida], and he wasn't my husband at the time, when he came here.  But he started saying that church was more than just a Sunday thing.  So he started having Young People's Service League on Mondays.  So the kids would go, would not have to go to Sunday school on Sunday and then Young People's Service League and then back to church.  They were able to go to Sunday school and then the next day at six o'clock on Monday, you went to Young People's Service League.  And so things started being spread out over the whole week rather than everything being on Sundays.  But by then I was away in nursing school, when he came to Christ Church.
Story_ID: 317745
Speaker 1: That was the Depression [Great Depression], what about, what effect did World War II [WWII] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When the war, when I, I never shall forget, I could hear the news that December 7th of 1941, when they said the World War, that Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii] had struck and the war was on.  And things began to move around here, and people started going to the [U.S.] Army.  But it wasn't until 1944 that I really felt what it all meant, because my brother and one of my classmates, Thomas [Thomas E. Anderson] and my classmate Earl Counts [ph.] were called, and they had to go.  And they were just boys of 19 and 20, 18 and 19, and it began to hit home that this was real, this thing called war.  And, fortunately though, because of the war, they started the [U.S.] Cadet Nurse Corps, and I was able to get my nursing, I went into the Cadet Nurse Corps.  When I went, not knowing anything about it, when I got to St. Agnes [St. Agnes Hospital, Raleigh, North Carolina], mama [Sweetlon Albury Anderson] and papa [Thomas Anderson] had borrowed three hundred dollars for me to get on the train to go Raleigh [North Carolina] to go to nursing school.
Speaker 1: Three hundred dollars.
Speaker 2: So, they borrowed three hundred dollars.  They bought my train ticket, and they pinned the rest of the money in my bosom, so that I could pay my tuition and everything.  When I got to Raleigh, there was a nurse there that was from Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida] who was the assistant director nurse, Myrtle Albury, she was Myrtle Roberts at the time.  And she said, "You know, they have the Cadet Nurse Corps and we could sign you up to be a Cadet Nurse, you won't have to pay any money.  And they give fifteen dollars a month for the first two years.  And then when you get to be a senior you get thirty dollars a month."  Well that was a lot of money in those days.  And so there was no phone for me to call mama to tell her this, so I wrote her and told her that I was going to be joining the Nurse Cadet Corps.  Well, she wrote me back and told me, no I wasn't.  Because she didn't want me in the Army, my brother was in the Army.  She didn't want me in the Army, she did not understand that this was not the Army.  The Nurse Cadet Corps, all you want to do was promise that you would work at least two years after you finished your nursing school.  You would work for two years and that would pay back Uncle Sam.  So, and then when I told her I was going to send her some money back, it made a difference.  And I wrote and said, "Mama, I join this, they give you a uniform, you get an overcoat and all this stuff, wool stuff.  And you don't have to pay any money, so I'm going to send you two hundred dollars back."  So Myrtle got the money order for me to send her the money back, and I joined the Cadet Corps.  And then the first time I came home in this uniform--and you'll see it in my book of pictures, of me in my cadet uniform--they were all so proud, even though she thought I was still in the Army because it was a uniform.  And I said, "No, all I gotta do is, to be sure that I work two years after I finish."  So the Army Nurse Cadet Corps came about in I guess in 1942 and it ended in '48 [1948] or '49 [1949].  But it was an opportunity, there was a shortage of nursing at that time, and because of the war, the government put up the money to train.  And at that time it was called nurses' training, now it's nurses' education.  But then we called it training, because we went to school but then we actually trained in the hospital where you took care of patients from the time you got there, pretty much.
Story_ID: 317746
Speaker 1: Did you do your training right there in Raleigh [North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Right in Raleigh in the hospital [St. Agnes Hospital, Raleigh, North Carolina], however we had, we went to different places for different things.  Now for tuberculosis we went to Fort Bragg [North Carolina], to Fayetteville, North Carolina, to the sanatorium there for child, for children's care.  We went to a hospital there outside of Winston-Salem [North Carolina] for children's care.  And you know we took courses Saint Augustine's College [Saint Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina], we took courses over at Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina].  And so our little education was varied, but very intense and then you practiced on patients, actual patients in the hospital.  When you went in the hospital you learn how to draw blood, start fluids and catheterize people, and take temperature and blood pressures and all that kinds of stuff.  You actually practice on human beings.
Speaker 1: Now when you went to Raleigh that was your first time leaving Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida]?
Speaker 2: That was my, well for any long trip, I went to Key West [Florida] and I went to West Palm Beach [Florida] to meetings as a part of the Young People's Service League.  We had meetings in parts of the state so we went to Key West.
Speaker 1: But you'd never left Florida?
Speaker 2: I went, I never left Florida until I went to North Carolina, right.  So I went, you know, little places like Palm Beach [Florida] and Stuart [Florida] on the bus.
Speaker 1: Now what year did you start, what year did you start your training?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-four [1944], August of 1944, and I actually finished August of 1947.
Speaker 1: Right, right, after you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But when you see I graduated, in January, but I didn't really finish until August 'cause I had to do the extra six months of specialized operating room.
Speaker 1: Right, so now here, your specialty training.
Speaker 2: Okay getting to the specialty and I never worked in an operating room after I left Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].  I wrote to Jackson Hospital [Jackson Memorial Hospital, Miami, Florida] from Nashville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Wait now how, let's, how did you get, how were you at Meharry, so you're in Raleigh?
Speaker 2: I'm in Raleigh, we're doing the six months, Cadet Corps [U.S. Cadet Nurse Corps], specialized, all of us were went to different places.  So four of us went to Meharry, four went to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And are you all black, all black?
Speaker 2: Out of my classmates there were seventeen in my class.
Speaker 1: All black women?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, this is an all-black school.  And four of us went to New York and four of us went to Meharry, the rest stayed in Raleigh.
Speaker 1: And what year was that?
Speaker 2: This was '47 [1947], see, we graduated in January, and February we were then all going to our various places where we were going for whatever the specialty was, that you were going for.  So the four of us who went to Meharry, went for specifically operating room.  Those who went to New York, I thinks a couple of them were in pediatrics and some in just surgical nursing.  But we went for specialized.  So I got this, get this specialty, get this special training, and then I wrote to Jackson for a job.
Speaker 1: Now Jackson?
Speaker 2: Hospital, Jackson Memorial Hospital.
Speaker 1: Which is where?
Speaker 2: Which is in Miami [Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was coming back home, so I wrote to Jackson for, Jackson Memorial Hospital for a job.  And they hired me and sent me the letter of acceptance.  But when I got here and they saw me, they, you know, they said, "Nurse Anderson [HistoryMaker Thelma Gibson], we don't have any vacancies in the operating room, but if you'd work on colored one or colored two and get some experience maybe a vacancy will come about."
Speaker 1: Now colored one, colored two?
Speaker 2: So colored one and colored two were the wards that they had in the hospital for colored patients.  They had three wards, colored one and colored two and colored three.  Colored one was med, colored two was surgical, and then a part of colored one was pediatrics and then you had OB/GYN [obstetrics and gynecology].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: The OB/GYN was on the third floor, so you could work either one of those floors, and you work the shifts from seven to three, three to eleven or eleven to seven.  So I said, "Okay I gotta work," so I went.  No I didn't, I decided I would to go to West Palm Beach, my classmate was in West Palm Beach, Theresa McCarty [ph.], and so I said "Old gal, I can't work in the operating room in here, do you think I could get in the operating room up there?"  She said, "Old gal, come on, yes, you can get in the operating room up here."  So, I go to West Palm Beach thinking I can get to there was a St. Mary's Hospital [St. Mary's Medical Center, West Palm Beach, Florida] up there.  I never shall forget, and she was working on the surgical floor.  And so I go up there and said, "I'm here, I'd like to work in the operating room."  And they looked at me and said, "You know we don't have any vacancy in the operating room."  So then I came back to Jackson and I stayed there two years working on colored one and colored two, colored three, working all the different shifts.  And then I decided to leave and I went to Washington D.C. thinking I could work in the operating room.  I went to Gallinger Municipal Hospital, which was a city hospital there in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: That was 1950, and I couldn't work in the operating room there.  Now I tell, I laugh about it now, 'cause I said, I thought Virginia was the dividing line.  And I didn't know it was still segregated in Washington.  But I couldn't work in the operating room, so I stayed there one year.  And I came back to Jackson in 1951.
Story_ID: 317747
Speaker 1: Actually I just enjoyed what I was doing [at Jackson Memorial Hospital, Miami, Florida], but I was always questioning why we couldn't be this and why we couldn't be the other.  Ms. Musta [ph.], who was the director of nursing, I was in her office more than anybody you'd ever seen.  Because I was forever being challenged by the fact that I was Ms. Anderson [HistoryMaker Thelma Gibson], over against Nurse Anderson.  Or why couldn't our nurses who were good nurses be in charge, head nurses and just not only charge nurses.  But I fought for the rights of our, for nursing all through my career I guess.  But I stayed at Jackson because I had to work and then finally my uncle, my aunt had a brother who had bought a house in Richmond Heights [Florida], there were some houses built for veterans (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now Richmond Heights?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Where is that in relation to here?
Speaker 1: That's twelve miles south of here [Coconut Grove, Miami, Florida].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But some houses were built for veterans in Richmond Heights.  And my uncle, my aunt's brother-in-law had bought a house in Richmond Heights.  And he said it was too far and he didn't like it, and told mama [Sweetlon Albury Anderson] if she'd give three hundred dollars he could take over, his, her, his rights, veteran's benefits, get and take over that house in Richmond Heights.  Well, fortunately, I said earlier mama was one of those who always said you had to save something, so I was the one who put some money in the post office, so I had all these little money post office money things, and I managed to get three hundred dollars, and we gave Mr. Peeve [ph.] that three hundred dollars and took over his rights.  And so August of 1950, we moved to Richmond Heights, which was a big house, we thought.  It had three bedrooms, a living room and dining room and a kitchen and a big yard.  And then of course by that time my baby brother [Alvin Anderson] was only four and I had a brother [Frederick Anderson], six, and one [Herman Anderson] eight and my sister [Doris Anderson Woodard] was ten.  And so we were happy to move to Richmond Heights, so the first time everybody had their own bed.  'Cause we had the bunk beds, and you were able to put two bunk beds so there were four bunk beds in a room.
Speaker 2: So, before did you all share like one big bed?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we all slept in one big bed, my sister and I, well the three girls slept in one bed.  And the boys slept in a bed, well now the baby stayed in the room with mama and papa [Thomas Anderson] until the next baby came.  So it was like you know, fortunately some of us had left before my baby brother was born.  And I say we were eleven, we didn't, we were never all there at one time, eleven, so.  By the time Fred came, Joyce [Joyce Counts] had left, well Joyce left right after Fred was born.  And then I left and Thomas went in the [U.S.] Army.  Thomas [Thomas E. Anderson] went in the Army then I left, and so then Alvin was born while I was still in nursing school.  So actually there were, we were never all eleven of us there, there at one time.  But there were enough of us that when we little, my three sisters and I shared one bed and there were three boys who shared a bed.  My oldest brother always had a cot in the kitchen, a fold up cot.  And he could fold up the cot every morning and then take it down at night and sleep out there.  But the other boys would be in the bed together.  So when we went to Richmond Heights my sister and I had twin beds and the boys had the bunk beds and Mama and Papa took the smallest room in the house, 'cause they just had to have one bed.  So, but it was a great time to be moving and to be able, and at that time, the rent was only twenty, well not rent, the mortgage, you paid twenty-nine dollars a month.  And then it probably went up to thirty-one dollars I don't think it ever got over thirty-three, or maybe up to thirty-nine dollars a month.  The mortgage, and it was a twenty-four-year mortgage, but when papa retired in 1969, we paid off that house and I still have the house in Richmond Heights.  And now it's valued at 150, two hundred thousand [dollars], people are offering two hundred thousand dollars and all that for his little house that only cost seven or eight thousand [dollars] back in 1949, 1950.
Speaker 2: That's really wonderful.
Speaker 1: He bought it in '49 [1949], and of course we took it over in August of 1950.  And that so, and that's how we left, left the little rented house in Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida].  I had been out of nursing school [at St. Agnes Hospital, Raleigh, North Carolina] three years already.  Had already been to Washington [D.C.] and back--no, no, I went to Washington after--I went to Washington in 1950 and came back in '51 [1951].  But at that time we were living in Richmond Heights.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I was still single, and I was still running back and forth.  So, I left Jackson finally in 1955 and went to the health department [Dade County Health Department; Miami-Dade County Health Department].
Story_ID: 317748
Speaker 1: And in 1959, I decided to go back to school, 'cause then they started talking about nursing education, and you had to have a bachelor's degree and all this.  And I have a friend Helen Bentley [Helen B. Bentley] who was, had been at the health department [Dade County Health Department; Miami-Dade County Health Department] for a long time.  And she said, "Thelma [HistoryMaker Thelma Gibson], why don't you go back to school and get your degree, 'cause you should be a supervisor."  And I said, "Well, nobody else have degrees here, and they're already supervisors; white nurses were supervisors without degrees."  So I said, you know, I would ask 'em, "Why can't I be a supervisor?"  And again they said, "Well you have to have a degree."  So then I decided, okay, I'll go get this degree, so I went to Teachers College at Columbia University [Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Columbia University in New York [New York] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In New York.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I worked, while I was up there, with teenage drug addicts over at the little hospital [Riverside Hospital] in the Bronx [New York] that was just for teenage drug addicts.  And I worked at night and I went to Teachers College and took courses.  Got the bachelor's degree, came back in '61 [1961], and they weren't ready to promote me, so I went back to New York.  And worked as a supervisor at that same little hospital, and then I finally came back in 1963.  And I didn't get promoted to an assistant supervisor until 1964.  So I was the first colored assistant supervisor in the Dade County Health Department.  And at that time only one supervisor would accept me as her assistant; that was Ms. McWilliams [Zola McWilliams] who was downtown.  Now I remember I was living in Richmond Heights [Florida] which was twelve miles from here; downtown is six miles from here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was working out of the South Miami [Florida] clinic which was like six miles from Richmond Heights.
Speaker 2: Did you have a car (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But my clinics--yeah I had a car by then.  But my clinics were down in Goulds [Florida] and Perrine [Florida], Homestead [Florida], so that was convenient, but for me to have to go over town.  But I said, "Okay, this is a challenge; they want me to work, Ms. McWilliams will take me," so I went to downtown center, to work for Zola McWilliams as assistant supervisor.
Speaker 2: Well I wanted to, so hold one second, well 'cause I didn't get a chance to ask about, your training as a OR [operating room] nurse.  And you constantly being thwarted, how did that, how did that make you feel?  I mean here you've gone through this training and again, obviously you go to Columbia, which is the, the third oldest university in the United States [sic.].  Yet in your own hometown it's you're still not accepted.  Wh--how did that affect you?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, it's interesting; a lot of people ask me why wasn't I angry.  And the reason I didn't get angry was because I was working, and I was making money.  And I was doing the kinds of things that I wanted to do.  The biggest thing I wanted to do was to get a house for my family, for my mama [Sweetlon Albury Anderson].  The only reason I didn't get married when I was still in nursing school, was because I wanted to be able to come home and help move my family from where we were to something different.  And so I came home and I had to work, and even though I didn't work in the operating room, and as I said, I never worked in the operating room from that day to this.  But I had to work so I did what I had to do, and made the best of it.  And because I thought and knew that I was a good nurse, I felt thought that I could work anywhere and do anything that anybody else could do.  And that's why when I left the hospital, went into public health, I had taken a couple courses at Catholic University [The Catholic University of America] while I was in Washington [D.C.], epidemiology and principals of teaching and principals of learning and all that kinds a stuff.  And I, I just knew I wanted to do more than just bedside nursing.  And so I did, when I went into the health department, and then when I went to New York and got the degree and came back and finally got to be an assistant supervisor.
Story_ID: 317749
Speaker 1: I finally fell in love long enough to decide that I would get married (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was--you stood still long enough (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You know I really didn't get married until I was forty, but I really didn't really want to get married.  Because I felt I had to help, mama [Sweetlon Albury Anderson] with these children.  And I wanted them to have a better life than I had.  And I felt they had given me an opportunity so, I needed to help, come back and help, and so that's what I did.  When I came back from New York [New York], my husband [Theodore Roosevelt Gibson] who I finally, the person who I ended up marrying was my priest.  I had no idea that I'd be marrying an Episcopal priest.  But he started inviting me--he was president of the Miami [Florida] branch NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] at the time.  And he had invited me to the meetings, and I would go.  And little by little, I started seeing more and more of him.  And then he finally invited me to go to the inauguration of Lyndon Baines Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] which was in Washington, D.C.  And of course, I had no idea would what it be like.  He had a son, Theodore Jr. [Theodore Gibson, Jr.], and Theodore was in law school at Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] at the time.  And he said, "Come on, we've got the invitation; go and and meet Theodore."  And so, well, I knew Theodore, because I had even taught him in Sunday school before I left here going to, to Washington and to New York.  But we went up there, we went to the hotel and Theodore came over and stayed with his dad, and I stayed in the hotel, and we went to the inauguration.  And then when he came back he said, "You know, I'd promised my late wife that I would see to it that Theodore got an education.  So now that he's had his education, he's about to finish law school, I guess I'm ready to get married."  So he asked me to marry him, and that's how I ended up getting married to an Episcopal priest.  And then we didn't get married until 1967.  At that point I left the health department [Dade County Health Department; Miami-Dade County Health Department] and went over to Mount Sinai [Mount Sinai Medical Center, Miami Beach, Florida] because I wanted to be off on weekends and be able to pretty much do what I wanted to do.  So I headed up the outpatient clinic at Mount Sinai (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now where is Mount Sinai?
Speaker 1: In Miami Beach [Florida].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's a hospital on Miami Beach.  And I worked there from 1967 to 1973 as a nurse.  And then I was ready to quit nursing, quit work.  And Mr. Golden who was the assistant superintendent said, "Oh you're too young to quit work, and we've got just the role for you, and you could head up our health."  They wanted to start a visiting nurse sort of thing where nurses would go out into the field and visit in the homes.  But they didn't get it started, so they asked me to work in the social work department, so I started working three days a week.  And I stayed there from '73 [1973] until 1980 and still didn't start this little agency that they wanted to start, with the visiting nurses.  So I left December 31, 1980, and since that time I've been just volunteering, doing volunteering.  And, and fortunately for me, I'd left at a time that my husband got sick.  The very next--I left December 31st, in January he was diagnosed with prostate cancer.  And had the surgery and lived, he lived another eighteen months.  But it was good that I didn't have to work, because I was able to stay here and take care of him.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry to hear that.
Speaker 1: By that time we had moved here, we built this house and we moved in.  He had always said to me, "I want you out of the rectory."  The rectory is a place where you live as a clergy; at the time most clergymen lived in the church's rectory.  And he said, "If something happens to me I don't want you in the church's rectory, so let's build a house."  So I had this lot, he had an acre down in Goulds [Florida], in Perrine [Florida].  And his mama wanted us to build down in Perrine, and I said, "No, I want to stay where I could know people."  And be able to, if something happens, I can't get around.  I can get in a wheelchair, wheel myself around in Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida].  Or somebody will come and get me and take me in.  I just couldn't see going down, because of a lot of land in Perrine, when I didn't know anybody down there.  So, this is why we built this little house which was our retirement house.  And he stayed for four years before he died.  And so I've been here now for twenty-seven years and it's been a wonderful, wonderful life.  Of course as I said he had a son, Theodore came and lived with us.  He got married, he was, finished law school at Howard, got married, came and lived with us for a year.  Bought a little house, and had a son, Theodore, Jr.  Well, he was married, but he, his wife went back to law school.  And he got involved with Charles's mother, and she had this little boy [Charles Gibson], so we have a grandson, he lives next door.  And (laughter) he too is a lawyer now, but anyway Theodore died had a heart attack on--right after his thirty-fifth birthday, or thirty-sixth birthday.
Speaker 2: Really, oh my goodness.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he died in March--he died--his birthday was March 28th of 1980, and he died April 10th of 1980.
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness.
Speaker 1: Charles was five years old, his little boy.  He's now, he just turned thirty-one on the 13th of February.  And he has a little girl who's nine, she'll be ten in April.  So that's all of the Gibsons, that's just--Theodore had one son, his son had one son, and his, that son has one little daughter.  'Cause he may get married and have more children, but right now he only has the one.  So there're just two Gibsons left out of that part of the family.
Story_ID: 317750
Speaker 1: I wanted to talk about your life as a volunteer since, since then, because I have this little list here, see some of the things that you're--the boards you're on the Jewish Home for the Aged [Miami Jewish Home for the Aged; Miami Jewish Home and Hospital, Miami, Florida], Coconut Grove Care Mental Health Association, Grovites United to Survive.  Oh and there's the Theodore and Thelma Gibson Charter School in Miami-Dade [Theodore R. and Thelma A. Gibson Charter School, Miami, Florida], how did this come (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, let me say that I, I guess I've always been one who, who when people ask you serve on a board of something, you do it.  The first board I served on after getting involved with the Red Cross [American Red Cross].  I was on the Red Cross board back in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s].  And then the Mental Health Association, I served on that board, and then the Visiting Nurse Association [Visiting Nurse Associations of America].  And I, whenever anybody asked me to serve I just, if I had the time I said okay.  I'm one of those who feel you gotta go to meetings.  I may go and not say anything, but I felt you had to be there.  I like to interact with people and watch people when there talking and see the reaction to different things.  So I've been involved with boards and that sort of things all during my marriage.  And then when my husband [Theodore Roosevelt Gibson] died, I felt that I had to continue doing something, I wasn't just sit here and drink wine all day.  So I had to get out and do something.  So I started the Gibson Memorial Fund [Theodore Roosevelt Gibson Memorial Fund], some of his friends actually, I didn't want to do anything but had raise so money to put an organ in Christ Church [Christ Episcopal Church, Miami, Florida] in his memory.  Because my husband was a lover of organ music, and everywhere we went, throughout Europe and everywhere else that we went.  There had to be somebody playing an organ for him to just sit there and listen to organ music.  And we had had this little organ in Christ Church and he wanted to put an organ in there before he died and didn't get to do it.  So I wanted to do it as a memorial for him.  So I had some people come in and we met and they said, "You can't raise money to just do an organ in Christ Church.  You gotta do more than that, we gotta do scholarships."  And Ms. Virrick [Elizabeth Virrick], who was a friend of my late husband's, and who helped when he first came to get some get some of the infrastructure put in and get laws changed and on the books of the City of Miami [Florida], for the infrastructure back in the '40s [1940s], excuse me.  Said, "Oh Thelma [HistoryMaker Thelma Gibson], we gotta do more than that, Theodore meant more to this community than just an organ in Christ Church.  And gotta have a learning center, we gotta do something, where he was about education having kids learn.  And we have to do something more than that just an organ in Christ Church."  So, we formed the Gibson Memorial Fund, and we have one dinner a year, where we raise all of our funds.  And since we wanted to do a--we really started out wanting to do just a kindergarten.  And so we started writing grants, and everybody would say to us, they don't give you money to buy land.  And they would help you with the building after you get the land, and that sort of thing.  So after every dinner we started buying land.  And the first piece of property we bought was my grandmother's [sic. Gibson's maternal great-grandmother, Matilda Johnson] house.  And the reason we bought that was because my siblings and I had bought it from my aunt who wanted to move, and we bought it from her.  And we weren't doing anything with and so it was just sitting there.  So I encouraged them to go ahead and sell it to the Gibson Memorial Fund.  So the first piece we bought for thirty-five thousand dollars, we bought that house.  And then as land, as I went around the neighborhood and I said to them, "If you ever get ready to sell you know give us the first opportunity to purchase."  So we were able to buy three lots, one year and that time we borrowed money from another group that I had helped start.  And then when Ms. Silver [ph.] got ready to sell her property, we bought that and Ms. Miriam Smith [ph.].  So we owned enough land over there to build a school on Grand Avenue.  And for each piece, I tell people this all the time.  We own nine pieces of property on the north side of Grand Avenue and Florida Avenue and Plaza [Street], and we spent three hundred and twenty five thousand dollars, over a period of some eighteen years.  Three years ago things started changing and the Blumenthals decided to sell all of their properties in the Grove [Coconut Grove, Miami, Florida].  And they, like the Stirrups, owned a lot of the property here.  And they had two pieces across the street from my original property, on the south side of the street.  And those, for those two pieces we paid $325,000.  Now, we have nine pieces that we paid, and then we had two pieces that we paid $325,000.  Today that land is valued at more than two million dollars.  But it shows you how things escalated over a period of three years.  Really twenty years at twenty-four years almost, twenty-three years that we've been in existence.  But we have the land to build a school.  We started the school in one of the buildings that we bought, three years ago.  And we just have a sixth and seventh grade center.  We have a charter (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's the charter school, okay.
Speaker 2: We have the charter, yeah, we have a charter, and we're gonna build on the property that we have across the street.  But, and then we'll have K [kindergarten] through eight, or maybe K through twelve.  But right now we just have sixth and seventh graders, and we're in our third year at that school.  And it's going well, and we continue to try to raise money.  The next building we have rented it to the Collaborative, the Coconut Grove Collaborative [Coconut Grove Collaborative Development Corporation, Miami, Florida], they been at the building next door.  So they have programs going to try to get everything going in the Grove.  So yes we started that, then we started a group called GUTS [Grovites United to Survive].
Story_ID: 317751
Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I was told by the local development corporation, David Alexander, who is executive director of the Coconut Grove Local Development [Coconut Grove Local Development Corporation, Miami, Florida].  Said to me he had that there were some men in the Grove [Coconut Grove, Miami, Florida] who had some money, and they wanted in invest in the Grove, and wanted to help make change place, take place.  So he told me who they were and I went to them.  And I said, "You know, if you want to invest some money I will help you, to invest it.  And there is some land available," the Tiki [Tiki Club, Miami, Florida] building, which you will hear more about, was available for a hundred thousand dollars.  I said, "If you four men put up twenty-five thousand dollars apiece, we got a hundred thousand dollars.  We could buy that piece of property, and I will help you leverage it with the City of Miami [Florida]."  I said, "I don't want be a part of it," because my husband [Theodore Roosevelt Gibson] was on the commission, and he had said there was an agreement that you couldn't do any business with the city until after two years having been off the commission.  And so I said, "I don't want to have to go as a member of the group.  But I could go as a just a citizen, interested in helping the group get."  Well, they didn't want to put up twenty five thousand dollars.  I said, "Okay, get ten people and put up ten thousand dollars, and you got your hundred thousand dollars."  Well they tried that, and they couldn't get enough people to put, those four wanted to put theirs up, but they couldn't get the other six.  So I said, "Okay, if you put up five thousand dollars, I could give you five thousand.  I'll come in and give five thousand, let's get twenty people and put up five and we'll have the hundred thousand dollars," well, there were people who came just because I decided that I would be a part of the group.  So we were able to get the twenty people, we had the hundred thousand dollars, we bought the Tiki Club.  And then we went to the City of Miami, we decided we were going do a Goombay Plaza, commercial and housing on that piece of property.  Went to the city, borrowed the five hundred thousand dollars.  And we went to out to bid on the property on the building that we had proposed, and it came back the cheapest thing was like eight hundred thousand dollars.  So that sort of fell through, so we continued to work on it, and we continued to buy more land.  And we borrowed from ourselves and we bought additional properties.  So the GUTS [Grovites United to Survive] group owns four pieces on Grand Avenue on the north side of the street.  We own the parking lot, four lots on the back that we turned into a municipal parking lot.  And then we own two pieces on the south side of the street which are businesses.  We have the NET [Neighborhood Enhancement Team] office on one corner, Pat's Kitchen [Miami, Florida] is next to it.  And then the Police Athletic League [Miami Police Athletic League] have a boxing gym and their program is in the second building.  Then we have a beauty shop across the street.  The Tiki's still there and four years ago, really five years ago, we decided we would try to fix the Tiki to start the school [Theodore R. and Thelma A. Gibson Charter School, Miami, Florida].  That was before we purchased the land where the school is presently.  And of course we couldn't find the funding to do what we need to do there.  So once we got the land three years ago, we started the school.  And just decided to wait and we gave up on the Tiki.  Now there's plans to do something with the Tiki and we're constantly talking with developers, as to what we could do on that land.  And we want to do some affordable housing, or some commercial on the bottom and affordable housing on the top, now that we could go up five stories with that building.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Our school is planned, the plans are there, we have the building permits have already been approved.  They did the land, they were testing the soil this week to see if there were any contaminants in the soil.  So we're hoping with the next couple of months, we'll start building our facility for the big school.
Speaker 1: Awesome.
Speaker 2: And that, when we do that, I will be ready to come home on put my feet up and stop.  But to get to back to these boards that I'm on.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: I went from one board to another, and finally Jackson Hospital [Jackson Memorial Hospital, Miami, Florida], where I could not work in the operating room.  In 1984, Jack Gordon [Jack D. Gordon], the late Jack Gordon just died less than six months ago, who was the comm-, who was a senator in the state of Florida.  Came to me, he said, "Ms. Gibson [HistoryMaker Thelma Gibson], you know I think you'd make a good politician," I said, "No, I won't."  He said, "You really ought to," he said, "Your husband was such a good politician, and you should think in terms of politics."  And I said, "I'm not interested, I know the dangers and I know what power could do; I'm not interested."  So he said, "Well, why don't you serve on the Public Health Trust [Public Health Trust of Dade County], and that would be one thing."  I said, "Well, I don't mind doing that."  So we went to Commissioner Carey [Barbara Carey-Shuler], she was not Shuler yet, she was Barbara Carey, Commissioner Barbara Carey, and she appointed me to the Public Health Trust at Jackson Hospital back in 1984.  And that's a hospital where I couldn't work in the operating room.  So now here I am on the governing board for that hospital.  And so I served on until 1990.  And papa [Thomas Anderson] got sick, and I told them I had to bring him here to take care of him, and I didn't think I could continue to serve.  So I brought papa home and took care of him.  And then they asked me to come back on.  So I went back on in 1997, papa died of course in 1997.  But I went back on and stayed until 2002.  So I did one six year period in the beginning.  And then went back and did another six year period on the Public Health Trust.
Story_ID: 317752
Speaker 1: In the interim, I couldn't go to school at the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida].  I took a course in 1987 at an instructor's home from the University of Miami.  And then in 1988, I took that that they gave over at Booker T. Washington Senior High School [Booker T. Washington High School, Miami, Florida], from the University of Miami, but I couldn't go on campus.  And of course--
Speaker 2: Wait in the '80s [1980s], wait hold a, let me just get that straight, so you, you took classes over, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fifties [1950s], '57 [1957], '50s [1950s], '57 [1957] and '58 [1958].  You see when you get old, what happens to you, but anyway I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: No, no, they still could have bad policies back then.  Okay.
Speaker 1: A correction, no '57 [1957] and '58 [1958], they integrated in 1960.  The first nurse that went there that finished, got her degree from the University of Miami, was Jessie Trice.  Got her bachelors of science in nursing from the University of Miami, but I couldn't go on campus back then.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But it was 1997, when I was asked to serve as a trustee at the University of Miami.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so I'm still a trustee there.
Speaker 2: So two places that denied you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The two places that denied me, so, again it goes back to saying about getting angry, you know, can get angry and never, never get any rewards.  If you can keep going, and my husband [Theodore Roosevelt Gibson] always said, "If you sit around the tent, you gotta be on the inside to know what's going on.  If you stay out there and be angry, you don't know what's happening on the inside.  So if you're inside you can help change take place."  And so I serve with the idea that you know, you'll open doors for other people, to be able to come and serve because you were there.
Speaker 2: And that's important to you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so it's been a rewarding kind of thing, to know that I lived long enough to compensate for the days when I couldn't go as a student, but could go as a trustee.
Speaker 2: Well how did that make, how does that make you feel just, in comparing that time of segregation to--
Speaker 1: It shows you that you could live through some of the things that you think that you can't live through.  And if you don't mind working, if you don't mind continuing to do what you need to do, you could accomplish things that you never dreamed you could, you know.  I'm a dreamer, but I never dreamed of being on the University of Miami's board.  Because the first thing when they called me to ask me to serve, I said, "I don't have any money."  You know 'cause the first thing you think you think of you know everybody's got a building named after them.  And you know they give millions of dollars and I knew I didn't have that kind of money to give.  So I didn't want to go and be so poor that I couldn't do what other people were doing.  They said, "Oh no no, you have something else to offer."  And so because I had been on boards with some of these same men, Jay Weiss being one of them, who was really a good friend, who just died a year ago, January.  But Jay was determined that you know, you're the kind of board member that we need.  And "Woody" Weiser [Sherwood Weiser] and David Weaver [David R. Weaver], are the two men who called me.  Said, "Oh yeah, you know we need you."  And again you know why it is that they need you, and I say to people, using goes both ways, you use me for one thing, I've gotta use you for another.
Story_ID: 317728
Speaker 1: One thing I found really interesting in researching you is how many things are named after you actually, there is a Thelma Gibson Health Initiative [Miami, Florida], there's the Thelma Gibson Award of Excellence.  Now here now you're a very modest person, but there's a reason why these things just--but I want to ask you about the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Well I founded the Women's Chamber of Commerce of Dade County [Women's Chamber of Commerce of Miami-Dade County], back in 1984.  And it was a group of Hispanics, non-HHispanic whites and blacks, and we started and we've had our ups and downs.  And we've continued over these twenty-two years and the women, I continue to go the meetings.  So they, while I won't take an office they list me as the founder of the Women's Chamber of Commerce.  And so when they decided to give the Award of Excellence they named it for me, primarily because they felt that I was the founder.  So, there is the Thelma Gibson Award of Excellence, it's given by the Women's Chamber of Commerce.  The Thelma Gibson Health Initiative was started by two young women, Merline Barton and Cherry Smart.  And they came with the Gibson--they came to me to ask me if the board would allow them to start a health initiative that would work with homeless people.  And they had both been involved with drug addicts and substance abusers and HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] and AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] people.  They had been in the community, Merline worked at the LDC [local development corporation] and Cherry also worked with family youth and intervention center.  And she's a clinical social worker, and Merline is the economic development person.  And they were about to give out monies at the LDC, and they were looking for jobs.  And so they decided that they would start their own agency.  But they wanted to come under the Gibson Memorial Fund [Theodore Roosevelt Gibson Memorial Fund], because they felt that we were already a 501(c)(3) organization, and they could work with us.  And so they talked with me about it, and I went to our board, and they agreed that we could do it.  And I had no idea that they going to name it the Thelma Gibson Health Initiative.  But I guess because I had some name recognition and could help them get some of things that they needed to get to get started, they decided to name it the Thelma Gibson Health Initiative.  But not because of anything that I did that was so great.  It was just a matter again of being used, and I say to people, you know when you're being used, but you also know how you can use people.  Because by doing that we're able get more recognition for the Gibson Memorial Fund, because people see the Gibson house as a place where we're helping people, with all kinds of things.  And what we were doing was just giving out Christmas baskets and helping the hungry and giving out food and that's sort of thing.  But nothing programmatic wise, except to have that one dinner a year, where we're honor three people in the community, one Hispanic, one non-Hispanic White and one African American, who we feel are doing something to help unite the community.  Ours is about unity, and our mission is to foster.  That's among Dade's [Dade County, Florida] multiethnic communities.  You have to remember when my husband [Theodore Roosevelt Gibson] was on the commission was when the Hispanic, Cubans especially started coming in.  And he was about helping to make them a part of this community.  And so with the Gibson Memorial Fund, I thought that was something that we ought to continue to do.  Is to try to see that people continue to want to work together and make it one great community and not always be separate.  Even though we're still separate in our ways of doing sometime.  But we don't be that way in our communications and, and getting along with people.  And so what the Memorial Fund was doing was just fostering the oneness among Dade's multiethnic communities, with the health initiative it gives us the opportunity to help a great number of people.  We have an HIV testing site, we're the only testing site in this part of the the city, in Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida].  We've been approved by the health department [Miami-Dade County Health Department], to test for HIV.  And so we get people into treatment and we give--let people come and baths and get change of clothing.  And we give them meals and right now we're getting all the meals that they don't use at the school, they're given it, and so we're able to give in the community some of the homeless, some of the shut-in people (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So from your, from your charter school?
Speaker 2: We send them their lunch from the charter school, we're able to send lunch to some of the people who are shut in.  And so I think we do a service that's worthwhile, that we would not have not done if we'd not had the Thelma Gibson Health Initiative.  And with then with the charter school, the charter school was supposed to be the Theodore Gibson Charter School.  And Frank Cobo [Frank J. Cobo] who was on the school board at the time, said that Thelma Gibson's [HistoryMaker Thelma Gibson] doing all the work.  "I will not approve a school if does not have her name on it."  And I said to him, "Mr. Cobo, I really don't want my name there, it's for my late husband."  And he's the one who really, Ms. Virrick [Elizabeth Virrick] felt that a learning center should be in his memory, not mine, I'm still living.  He said, "No, no, gotta have," so, the board said, "Okay, we want the charter, so it has to be; Thelma, you gotta let us use your name."  So that's how the Theodore R. and Thelma A. Gibson Charter School [Miami, Florida] got my name put in there.  Just by virtue of a member of the board knowing what he thought I was doing, out here.
Story_ID: 317729
Speaker 1: Even last night, what did you get an award for?
Speaker 2: Well, the city [Miami, Florida] was giving the ICON Award.  And it's interesting, and as I told the commissioner, this little commissioner, Ms. Spence-Jones [Michelle Spence-Jones].  Commissioner Spence-Jones, has not been on the comm- got on the commission in November.  And when she was running for office, she called me and ask me if I would help her, and I said, "Oh yeah I'll help you."  And then she wanted to take a picture with me, I said, "But I can't take a picture with you."  Now there was a reason for that: the young man that she running against's mother is my sorority sister.  She was a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], and his grandmother was a good friend of my late husband [Theodore Roosevelt Gibson] and mine, and she was also a Delta.  And couldn't openly go out and go against Reverend Dunn [Reverend Richard P Dunn II], who was the grandson and son of my sorority sister.  So I said to her, "I will do what I can for you, but I can't take no picture with you."  And this young lady decided that I should be one of the icons in this city, since she knew all that I had done, and I told her that she's gone beyond politics.  So she's not gonna be a politician, she's gonna be a stateswoman--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --who can go beyond politics.  Now, nobody in the world would, now I shouldn't say that, nobody, not many people in the world in politics will help you if you don't really get out there and help them.  I've been told, you know, that there's certain things I don't get, because I didn't help certain politicians.  And I don't mind that you know, I know when I do it that I know who I feel be in place so I help those persons that I think should be in place, so I don't mind when persons can't help me because I didn't help them.  But this young lady, Commissioner Spence-Jones recommended me to be one of the icons of the city.  And I'm not in her district even, you know I'm in a different district.  Her district is Overtown [Miami, Florida] and all the north end.  I'm in a different commissioner's district out here, she has district five.  But she was brave enough, and I say that, and said it last night, that she was brave enough to nominate me to be an icon of the City of Miami, because she knew of the work.  And I said, "I get credit for work that other people do."  And again, I accept some of it, because I don't mind getting out there and letting my name be used for certain things.  And I really wish her well and did make some phone calls and, and say to people that I thought she would make a good commissioner.  And, but I didn't take a picture with her and get out there, rah, rah, rah with her, for her to get to win that election.
Speaker 1: Right, you had to be diplomatic, but I wanted to ask you, I was envisioning you as a little girl playing marbles and on your skates.  And, did that little Thelma [HistoryMaker Thelma Gibson] think that she was gonna be an icon of the city?
Speaker 2: No way in the world, no way in the world; nowhere my childhood did I think that I would grow up, and do some of the things that I'm doing and especially to be married to an Episcopal priest.  You know I was wild, I was out there doing all the things that anybody else would do in the world.  Having a good time and going anywhere I wanted to go and doing what I wanted to do.  And to end up being married to an Episcopal priest and who would later became a commissioner, and getting involved in politics.  Now I always dreamed of traveling and I always dreamed of having a big house and all that, I really wanted a house.  The house I wanted was gonna have a garage apartment, so that when my friends came or my guest came, they wouldn't have to live in my house.  I would have place for them out over the garage somewhere.  Now, I never got that; now, that dream was never fulfilled.  But I was happy after I realized, having been in nursing and seeing what happens to people.  I knew that once you got older, you were not going to be able to keep up a big house.  And you were not going to be able to do all the things.  And so I was really to settle for a small house and a small yard.  And I said to my husband, "Who's gonna keep up the yard?"  He wasn't gonna get out there and do anything in the yard.  And so I felt that these were things that I would be doing, and so I settle for that.  But my dream was really to have this big house with the garage apartment and all that for my friends to come.
Story_ID: 317730
Speaker 1: But all of my dreams pretty much have been fulfilled except for the school, if I could build that school I really will be happy to say, okay.
Speaker 2: That's pretty (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that wasn't my dream either, that was because of somebody else who wanted it.  But because I put so much into trying to get it going, I'd like to see it finished.  I would also like to see the GUTS project finished, I--
Speaker 2: Now, what is--
Speaker 1: The GUTS project, Grovites United to Survive, is the other group that we started that had the other land on Grand Avenue [Coconut Grove, Miami, Florida].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We have just one block of all of Grand Avenue, which, is the only commercial area that we have, that's the Grand Avenue commercial area, the developers had bought it but everything up to Plaza Street.  So the blacks own, except for the store on the corner, blacks own from Plaza to Douglas [Road], and most of its owned by Gibson Memorial Fund [Theodore Roosevelt Gibson Memorial Fund] and GUTS.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: And then you have Lair Hall, who owns the bank building on the corner, 3600 Grand Avenue.  Where they'll have some commercial, and people living upstairs in apartments.  And then the Coconut--the Urban Empowerment, it used to be the Coconut Grove Local Development [Coconut Grove Local Development Corporation, Miami, Florida], which is now the Coconut Grove Urban Empowerment [Coconut Grove Urban Empowerment Corporation, Miami, Florida], owns two buildings.  And we're trying to buy one of those from them, to be a part of the whole thing for the GUTS project, so that we could do the affordable housing and some commercial on the bottom.  And so that's where we are.
Speaker 2: Well, that's a pretty amazing thing that someone gets to live to see like all their dreams come true.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it surprises me, I never dreamed I'd live so long, and when you hear me boosting about this being my year to be eighty.  Since last year I was telling everybody, next year is my year to be eighty (laughter), so when I had a birthday in December most people thought I was eighty.  'Cause I kept saying this since last year.  You know, next year's my year to be eighty, but I never dreamed I'd live this long.  My mother [Sweetlon Albury Anderson], died at seventy-three, of course papa [Thomas Anderson] lived to be ninety-four, but I just knew I was gonna be dead by seventy-three.  So when I started writing my book ['Forbearance: Thelma Vernell Anderson Gibson, The Life Story of a Coconut Grove Native,' Thelma Gibson], my nieces and nephews were, every time they'd come home, they'd be asking me what happened and who was this and what.  So I started writing and I put it all together and I said, "I gotta get this done before I'm seventy-three."  Because I just knew I was gonna be like mama, everybody said I'm so much like mama.  That I just knew I'd be the one that'd be dead at seventy-three.  So it's been, it's been wonderful, to live beyond seventy-three and to get to be seventy-nine, my oldest brother [Thomas E. Anderson] died at seventy-nine, he turned seventy-nine January 21st and he died January 27th.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: So you know, this bit of being eighty this year gets to be a real thing, and I may not make it.  But I'm looking forward to it, and I keep boasting about it.  Because I'm hoping that I'll live to December 17.
Story_ID: 317731
Speaker 1: When you think about your life, and that you surpassed some of those, those milestones.  What legacy do you think you are leaving for other Grovites [residents of Coconut Grove, Miami, Florida] in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't even, I really don't even want to to know that I've left a legacy, I really, I don't want a eulogy when I die, said, everybody just come and sing some hymns and have a good time.  I want them to have communion service and have a service, but no eulogy.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Because I don't think it's worth, you know, you do things not to be, not for people talk about, you just do 'em because they need to be done.  And I just think that, this is my community, I was born and reared here, I'd like to see a better place here.  And if it's better when I die, that's all that's necessary.  Nobody has to talk about that, I really don't think that needs to be talked about.  That fact that I wrote my book ['Forbearance: Thelma Vernell Anderson Gibson, The Life Story of a Coconut Grove Native,' Thelma Gibson], I said, look in the book you'll see all these names of all these family members you don't have to read that first chapter if you don't want to.  'Cause there're not so many names there, even though I left out a lot of names I found out more family since I wrote the book.  That said, oh yeah, you know I'm so and so child, I'm this and I'm that, and you left me out.  You know, so you miss some.  But the only thing I want to have everybody know is that I love life.  I did the best I could in life and I love people.  And if they remember that, that would be all I need to have remembered about me.
Speaker 1: That's good.
Speaker 2: And I love family, I really love family, and I love friends and I love this community [Coconut Grove, Miami, Florida].  And so between family and church and friends and whatever I could do to help somebody, to me that's all that life should be about.  Not for any riches, not for any gain, just that you lived a good life and tried not to hurt people.
Story_ID: 317732
Speaker 1: That's my brother, going from right to left I guess, my brother Percy, Percy Garcia Anderson [Percy Anderson], and in front of him his son Daniel, Daniel Sharkey Anderson.  And in the middle is my brother Billy, William Anderson, we called him Billy, he has since died.  And I'm in front of him and next to him is my grandson Charles Anthony Gibson.  And in front of him is his daughter Devone Vernell Gibson.  And this is a group picture that was taken at the church [Christ Episcopal Church, Miami, Florida] approximately five years ago.  Because Billy's been dead three years, so this was probably the year 2000 or 2001.
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-seven [1947], when I heard that I had passed the state board, North Carolina State Board of Nursing.  I had been working at Jackson Hospital [Jackson Memorial Hospital, Miami, Florida], was on my way home, that's on Charles Avenue.  And one of my classmates called out to tell me that we had passed the boards.  So that's Thelma Gib- Thelma Anderson [HistoryMaker Thelma Gibson] then.
Speaker 1: Okay thank you.
Speaker 2: That's Thelma Gibson, Thelma Anderson Gibson, then of public health, no I wasn't Gibson yet.  That's 1955, '56 [1956] at the health department [Dade County Health Department; Miami-Dade County Health Department].  I had just started working at the health department, 1955.  And this was at a school down in Goulds [Florida] at Mays Senior High School, Hubert Thompson [ph.] took that picture of me.  And the Red Cross pin, I think I had been on the Red Cross [American Red Cross] for five years then, and you get a pin at five years, ten years, and in five year periods.  But I'm glad to see my nurses' pin, 'cause I don't where it is, that's the only pin that I had that I cannot find.  I can still find all the Red Cross pins.
Speaker 1: And that's my graduation picture back in January of 1947.  We took pictures for graduation, of course that's a pin up on the collar, that's the nurses pin.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's my oldest brother Thomas Eugene Anderson, that's when he graduated from Maine College [sic.] in Pulaski, Tennessee.  Must have been '51 [1951], '50 [1950] or '51 [1951].  I was out of nursing school when he finally when to college.  That's the oldest one, Thomas Eugene Anderson.
Speaker 2: That's my brother who's next to me, William Theodore Anderson, we called him Billy.  And Billy died three years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a much younger picture of the same brother.
Speaker 1: Hold on, let me get my hand out of the frame, then you can.
Speaker 2: Yeah that's a younger picture of my brother Billy, that's the same one you just saw, older picture and a younger picture.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Percy, my brother Percy Gus Anderson, that's a younger picture than the one you saw earlier.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's my brother Donald, Donald Renaldo Anderson.
Speaker 2: That's my brother Hubert [Hubert Anderson], it says 1961 on there, he was in the [U.S. military] service.  He's married, has three sons, lives in New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my brother Herman, Herman Lewis Anderson.  And Herman has a picture, I'm not sure, he finished from Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], but I think that's his high school picture probably.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's my brother Frederick, Frederick Matthew Anderson, Fred is dead.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's the youngest (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Get it set, and then we'll start talking 'cause our hands, okay.
Speaker 1: That's the youngest brother, and that's when he was in the service, and Alvin [Alvin Anderson] is twenty years younger than I am.
Speaker 2: So he was just born before your--
Speaker 1: He was born in '46, [1946], December 3rd of '46 [1946] and I was graduating January of '47 [1947].
Speaker 2: That's the youngest girl my sister Doris.  Doris Louise Anderson Woodard, and she's the mother of three.  She has a daughter who's an attorney and two sons.  One is a teacher, in Phoenix, Arizona.  And the other is an officer, he finished college, but he's criminal law so he's in Arizona.
Speaker 1: And that's my oldest sister Joyce, Joyce Prescola Counts.  And Joyce lives in Detroit [Michigan], has been there since 1944.  And she's the oldest of us, she's eighty-four, turned eighty-four January 3rd.
Speaker 2: That's mother, mama, Sweetlon Albury Anderson.  She died at age seventy-three and according to that, this picture was taken in 1962.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's a picture of papa, Thomas Theodore Anderson, and that's down in front of our house in Richmond Heights [Florida].  That's my sister behind him over there, that's Doris.
Speaker 1: That's a group picture of us as a family when my sister's husband was killed in Vietnam, back in 1969.  And we all came down to Richmond Heights after the funeral.  He was buried up in Winter Park [Florida], he was, he was from--Joseph Woodard, was from Winter Park.  And so all of us was here and so my oldest sister is standing there next to my baby sister Doris who's in the black and white.  And my brother Fred is behind my sister Joyce, my brother Hubert is there in the picture.  I can't see mama, mama was sitting at the table but I can't see her from that angle, this angle.  But here I am down at the bottom and the twins Tedra [ph.] and Todra [ph.], and Alvin's little boy, little Alvin, Alvin, Jr. [Alvin Anderson, Jr.] was a baby then.  And this is, mama's back here, and this my sister-in-law Addie [ph.].  And this is her little girl Kay [ph.], down at the bottom, I mean not Kay, Kay is Doris's little girl.  Well this is my brother Billy right here, and this is Percy and that's Doris, I don't know whether you could really, see them all.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Those are the twins, Tedra and Todra, and they're now doctors, and this is Kay over here, who is Doris' daughter.  And why am I not calling my niece's name?  Vanessa [ph.], this is, this is Vanessa's mother Addie my sister in law.  That's my oldest brother Thomas's daughter.  And she's holding little Alvin, Alvin was just about, Alvin was born in October of '69 [1969].  And this picture was taken in '69 [1969].  But I don't know where that was, papa, Thomas Anderson.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, can you point mama and papa again?
Speaker 1: Mama here and papa here, my sister Joyce, my brother Fred, my sister Doris, my brother Hubert.
Speaker 2: I think we're--
Speaker 1: Then my brother Percy, Tedra and Todra, Thelma and Addie.
Speaker 2: Those are my brothers when they were little.
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: You know, oh my brother, Donald was ten years at the time.  This is Donald my brother and this is one of his friends Kenneth Sands [ph.], fortunately I did write on the back of that one.  This is Donald at age ten.
Speaker 1: So what year was that?
Speaker 2: He was born in '36 [1936], so that was '46 [1946].  Oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: No, I didn't put it the right way, okay.
Speaker 2: So this, this must have been 1947.
Speaker 1: Well.
Speaker 2: So Fredrick would have been four and Alvin six months or so, 'cause he's sitting up as a baby.
Speaker 1: Is that like 'cause--
Speaker 2: Alvin's the youngest and Fred's next to him.
Speaker 1: Is it in your backyard I see these huge like--
Speaker 2: Yeah this is in the backyard of Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida] over when we lived up here on Charles Avenue.
Speaker 1: And what are those huge like--
Speaker 2: Those are coconuts.
Speaker 1: Those are coconuts, okay?
Speaker 2: And that's another of Alvin when he was a baby.  Just sitting up, so it's '47 [1947].
Speaker 1: Grouping of papa sitting with Daniel, Daniel Sharkey.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And then that's my brother Percy and my brother William and me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my grandfather, Daniel William Anderson.  And it's captioned our Dan, it was done in 1895.  And according to the Munroes, Daniel posed for this picture.  So it's not a, it's a drawing.  And he was the captain of their ship, so I guess that's why his in uniform.
Speaker 2: And what, their ships traveled from where to where?
Speaker 1: They used to go back and forth the Munroes, to Key West [Florida] and around, and it does have who it was done by and he has the '95 [1895] there but I can't read J.A., look like J.A. Brosler [ph.], but I can't read it.  But this was hanging over the, the fireplace in their home.  And Arva Moore Parks McCabe came and saw this picture, and she said, "I've seen that picture somewhere else."  And she had seen it in the Munroes book and diary.  So that's, I should know that was my grandfather.  But my grand- but my aunt found that, had that picture in her Bible, so we were able to get copies of it.
Speaker 2: The Reverend Canon Theodore Roosevelt Gibson, and then it shows one of the two of us on the bottom, it's just his picture, and I think it was at his twenty-fifth anniversary, twenty-fifth anniversary as a priest of Christ Episcopal Church, the one of the two of us.
Speaker 1: This is a grouping of the women who were honored at Florida Women of Achievement and I was one of those.  This is Arva Parks McCabe, this is Leona Cooper, Marjory Stoneman Douglas, and I'm not sure who this is.  And that's me in the center there, and I know this person, but I don't think the names are on here.  Ana Azcuy, this is Ana, Ana Azcuy and JoAnn Morgan [JoAnn H. Morgan].  This is JoAnn Morgan, and Ana Azcuy, who was a local television person and Marjory Stoneman Douglas on this card.
Speaker 2: This is a picture during one Black History Month down at Frank C. Martin Elementary School [Frank Crawford Elementary School; Frank C. Martin International K-8 Center, Miami, Florida], and that has been maybe three or four years ago.   And this was a group of students that I was talking to during Black History Month, at Frank C. Martin Elementary.
Speaker 1: This was our church, the church that I was baptized in and confirmed and married.  And the church where my husband served for thirty-seven years, thirty-six and half years.
Speaker 2: Picture back in 1967, it was probably taken in March of '67 [1967], 'cause I was married April the second of '62 [1962], of '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Reception for Antoinette Silver Simmons [ph.], so that's her wedding and her husband.
Speaker 1: Who's (unclear)?
Speaker 2: And I don't remember his name, but I know its Simmons.
Speaker 1: Who's Antoinette?
Speaker 2: Antoinette Silver is the bride.
Speaker 1: And is she, is she a relative?
Speaker 2: They were members of our church who, my husband performed the wedding, and they're longtime friends.  Her mother and I grew up in the church together pretty much.
Speaker 1: A picture of my husband in his clerical vestments, so it had to be taken at the church.
Speaker 2: Picture of my life story, 'Forbearance,' ['Forbearance: Thelma Vernell Anderson Gibson, The Life Story of a Coconut Grove Native,' Thelma Gibson], it's the life story of a Coconut Grove native, and I have the Coconut spelled with an A in it.  Because the map, the cover's made of the map of Coconut Grove, you see 1896, and this is really the map of Coconut Grove and when Coconut Grove was first founded it was found spelled with an A, Cocoanut, like the Bahamians spell coconut.
Speaker 1: And that's me in my public health uniform and you have another picture of that.  I always point out my pin that sitting there, because I don't have it, anymore.  So I always see what it looked like from the picture.
Speaker 2: I was giving up on the Public Health Trust [Public Health Trust of Dade County], and that's the mayor, Penelas [Alex Penelas], giving me a citation, and they'd made that Thelma Gibson Day.
