Story_ID: 259901
Speaker 1: My name is Regennia Williams, and I am the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer today is Matthew Hickey.  And we don't have any observers for the interview.  And I'd just like to get started by asking if you would please state your name and include, if you would, your first, middle and last name, and spell all three.
Speaker 2: Sheila Denise Grimes [HistoryMaker Sheila Grimes], S-H-E-I-L-A, Denise, D-E-N-I-S-E, Grimes, G-R-I-M-E-S.
Speaker 1: And would you also state the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: February 24th, 1958, in Tuskegee, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And would you please state today's date for the record?
Speaker 2: March the 16th, 2005.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview, with the address?
Speaker 2: Reynoldsburg, Ohio at the Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory [Ohio Department of Agriculture], 8995 East Main Street, Reynoldsburg, Ohio, 43068.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  And also, would you please tell us what your profession is?
Speaker 2: I'm a veterinary pathologist.
Story_ID: 259902
Speaker 1: In this next section, we like to ask what we describe as five People magazine-ish type questions.  And the first one asks, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Chocolate.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer, I like it warm (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, and how about a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Home: Alabama.
Speaker 1: And how about a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't know that I have a favorite phrase.  I'll have to think about that.
Story_ID: 259903
Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother.  What was her name and where was she born?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Julia Mae Moss Grimes.  She was born in Tuskegee, Alabama--actually, maybe she was born in Notasulga [Alabama], 'cause she might have been born at home.  And she grew up in Notasulga all her life, which is about ten miles from Tuskegee, Alabama.  She was actually raised right next door to her husband, my father [George Grimes, Jr.].  And she went on from Notasulga to go to cosmetology school.  And she married my father at the age of twenty, and then traveled around the world with him, 'cause he joined the [U.S.] military.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother share with you any special stories about growing up in Alabama?
Speaker 2: Her father once threw--not her father, her brother [Charlie Moss, Jr.] once threw her in the fire.  She was just a baby, and her brother--her mother had left the room, and her brother was left in the room with her.  And her brother was a year or two older than her.  And he was not supposed to touch the baby, of course.  So he picked the baby up.  My grandmother came back in the room.  And he tossed her in the fire.  So she has a burn on her face from where he tossed her in the fire.
Speaker 1: Oh my, sibling rivalry at that young age?
Speaker 2: No, I just--no, not rivalry.  He just wasn't supposed to pick her up.  And so, when she came back into the room, he was like, oh, shouldn't be holding her, and he tossed her.  So, also, she was one of three children, one of four children, actually.  But the youngest one was born fifteen years after her.  So there were three of them growing up, for the most part.  And she was the type of child that would save her Christmas presents, like the fruit bag that they would get, she would save that.  Well, her sister and brother, her older brother and her younger sister would go hunting for her fruit that she'd save for Christmas to eat it.  So she wouldn't have anything.  So, they were the ones that I think--they picked on her (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what are their names, please, your aunt and uncle?
Speaker 2: My uncle's name is Charlie Moss.  Her younger sister, immediately after her is Juanita Moss Brown, and then the baby sister is Calvesta Moss Simpson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And all of them you said came of age right there in Alabama?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how about your maternal grandparents?  What are their names?
Speaker 2: Willie Mae Moss is my grandmother, and then Charlie Moss is my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Are they also natives of Alabama?
Speaker 2: Yes, they are.
Speaker 1: Same community, basically?
Speaker 2: Same community.
Speaker 1: All right--
Speaker 2: And they're both currently deceased.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You said Nogaloosa [ph.]?
Speaker 2: Notasulga, N-O-T-A-S-U-L-G-A.  It's an Indian [Native American] name.
Speaker 1: Okay, but it's near Tuskegee?
Speaker 2: About ten miles from Tuskegee and about fifteen miles from Auburn [Alabama].
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, there are a number of things that you mentioned that make me want to ask other questions that aren't necessarily in the guideline here, but you said something about Christmases and bags of fruit.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so what were the holidays like, especially Christmases for your mother and your aunts and uncle?
Speaker 2: Well, definitely not like today.  I mean, they didn't get a lot of toys.  They would get, you know, an apple and an orange and some nuts and some peppermint.  And that definitely made the holidays.  She got a tea set once, a glass tea set, which she still has, which was blue.  So the gifts were few, but they had fun times, I think.  You know, there was a lot of love in the house.  And, again, my mother's mother and father were together until my grandfather died.  So, almost fifty years they were married.
Speaker 1: Now, when I think of Tuskegee, I think first and foremost about the university [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  But what was the town like during your mother's childhood.  Was it a rural community or pretty urbanized?
Speaker 2: Notasulga was very rural.  I mean, Tuskegee was the big city to them.  When they would go to town, they would go to Tuskegee or Auburn.  So Notasulga is really rural.  It was segregated at the time, so they actually attended high school in Tuskegee, though they lived in Notasulga, ten miles away.  So they weren't able to participate in after-school activities because you had to catch the bus home.  So.
Speaker 1: So even in the segregated system, there was transportation provided to--
Speaker 2: --to the black high school in Tuskegee, for the black school in Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: Okay, was that school affiliated with the university at all?
Speaker 2: It's called Tuskegee University High School [Tuskegee, Alabama], but it's not really affiliated with the university.
Speaker 1: But it's a public school?
Speaker 2: It's a public school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I wonder also about other stories that she might have shared about growing up, even attending school.  What education was like in that system?  Was it separate and unequal or a pretty positive experience for her?
Speaker 2: It was definitely separate.  They didn't integrate the high schools in Alabama until I was in the seventh grade.  So it was definitely separate.  I don't know that it was--and I'm sure it was unequal in some ways in terms of the textbooks they had.  But I think the teachers that they had were definitely dedicated instructors.  One of her teachers was Ralph Abernathy's wife [Juanita Abernathy].  So, you know, I think they had some good instructors.  So, and I do remember her saying that one of her instructors was Ralph Abernathy's wife.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this is the same Ralph Abernathy who worked with [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --during the Civil Rights Movement.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So, she taught in Tuskegee for a while.
Story_ID: 259904
Speaker 1: I'd like to ask at this point about your father.  What was his name and we already know that he was born in Alabama, but what was his name please?
Speaker 2: My father's name is George Washington Grimes, Jr.
Speaker 1: And do you remember when he was born in Alabama?
Speaker 2: I believe he was born in Notasulga [Alabama].  I believe he was born at home.
Speaker 1: And the approximate date of his birth?
Speaker 2: He was born June--I always forget their birthdays.  I think, it's June 6, and he was born in--twenty-two years older than I am, so he must have been born in 1936.
Speaker 1: And your parents are about the same age, both of them born in the '30s [1930s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother [Julia Moss Grimes] was born in '38 [1938], I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And for your father, do you remember your paternal grandparents' names?
Speaker 2: My paternal grandmother Eula Mae Grimes, Eula Mae Tinsley Grimes, and then my paternal grandfather was George Washington Grimes I.  And he actually was never around when I was growing up.  He left the family early on, after my grandmother married him.  So, he had a different upbringing from my mother in that my mother had both parents present.  And my father was raised by, just by his mother and his grandmother and relatives.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you remember your great-grandmother's name, since she's such an important part of your father's--
Speaker 2: Rosie Mae Tinsley.
Speaker 1: Okay, Rosie Mae?
Speaker 2: Tinsley.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And she was part Indian [Native American].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your father share any special stories about his memories of growing up there near Tuskegee [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Oh, my father would steal watermelons (laughter) when he was growing up.  I remember him telling tales, like he was mischievous.  He always loves farming; he loved farming.  So he worked with Mr. Jim [ph.], we called him, in town, and learned how to farm and enjoyed that greatly.  His career was not as a farmer, but he does farm now.  I remember that he loved his--his grandmother raised him, basically.  His mother worked in New York, and she would send money home to him and his siblings to be raised by the grandmother.  So I remember him talking about she had somewhat of a colorful language.  And I remember him telling stories about her and when she'd get upset and the things that she would say.
Speaker 1: Okay, I won't you ask you (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --to say any of those things (laughter).  But you did mention that he had siblings.  So would you mention their names for the record?
Speaker 2: Rosie Mae [Grimes] Seymour and then Roger Grimes, and Roger Grimes is deceased.  He's the younger brother, the younger child.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, now, did he also attend the high school in Tuskegee?
Speaker 2: Yes, he attended Tuskegee [University] High School [Tuskegee, Alabama].
Speaker 1: All right.  Did both your parents graduate from high school there?
Speaker 2: Both of my parents graduated from high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they talk at all about post-secondary education?  Was that part of their training as well?
Speaker 2: My father went to a year of college at Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  He did not complete college at Tuskegee, but later on, he got an associate's degree after completing the [U.S.] military.  My mother attended cosmetology school.
Speaker 1: Now, you said you mother travelled the world with your father, because he was an enlisted man?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he went right into the military after that first year of college or how did that work?
Speaker 2: I think probably right after that first year of college, he went into the military, because, let's see that would--maybe a year or two later, because I was born when he was twenty-two.  And he was in--stationed in Hawaii initially, maybe before they were married.  So, yeah, maybe a year or two later.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And you said, he was a career man in the military?
Speaker 2: Correct, he spent twenty years in the military.
Speaker 1: And so from that, the first--you said he was stationed in Hawaii.  What other places did they live as a young couple?
Speaker 2: My father was also stationed in Alaska, but I was--he felt that I was too young to go to Alaska.  So he didn't take us when he went to Alaska, but we lived in Germany, North Carolina, Tennessee, Kentucky, Washington State, Alabama, those were the primary places.
Speaker 1: So what was--
Speaker 2: Texas.
Story_ID: 259905
Speaker 1: So, what was that like for you, being on the move as a young student?
Speaker 2: I actually enjoyed it.  I always thought that each new place, I could be a new person.  You know, you could change your personality, and you could be more outgoing, or whatever.  But I enjoyed visiting new places, and I miss that now, because I'm kind of stationary.  So.
Speaker 1: So did you spend a longer period of time in any one of those communities, one that felt like home and semi-stationary as you were growing up?
Speaker 2: My father [George Grimes, Jr.] moved almost every year that he was in the [U.S.] military.  Fortunately, the last two years of high school [at Fort Campbell High School, Fort Campbell, Kentucky], I was able to stay in the same location, and that was Kentucky.  So I spent my junior and senior year in the same location.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What community was that in Kentucky?
Speaker 2: Fort Campbell, Kentucky, near Clarksville, Tennessee and Hopkinsville, Kentucky, right on the line.
Speaker 1: All right.  And did the military base have a high school for the students, for the children, though?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was one of the rare--generally, military bases do not have the high school present on the campus--on the post.  But in Kentucky, during the civil rights era, they put Fort Knox [High School, Fort Knox, Kentucky] and Fort Campbell, they put these high schools on the bases, because of the issues with segregation and civil rights.  So those are the two rare locations that have the military high school.
Speaker 1: So, this is in the 1970s then, that you're attending--
Speaker 2: Yes, I graduated from high school in '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we have--and this isn't reality, but 'That '70s Show' on television is where--and for the students who might watch this interview, is that anything close to the experience that you had in the 1970s as a high school student?
Speaker 2: The clothes (laugher).
Speaker 1: The clothes?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I don't know that I was as wild as that.  I used to come home right after school.  So, but the clothes do fit (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, how large was that school?
Speaker 2: There were a hundred people in my graduating class, and I think it went tenth, eleventh and twelfth, so about three hundred or four hundred students were there.
Speaker 1: Pretty diverse student body?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so but all--but all children of military personnel?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay and was--your mother [Julia Moss Grimes] was not in the military at that time.  She was just the spouse of an enlisted man?
Speaker 2: Correct, she was a housewife when I was in high school.
Story_ID: 259906
Speaker 1: I want to ask also about your graduating from [Fort Campbell] High School [Fort Campbell, Kentucky] and whether or not you had decided at that point in your life that you definitely wanted to be a scientist?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had.  Actually, about ninth grade, I decided that I wanted to be a veterinarian.  And then about the eleventh grade, I decided I wanted to be a veterinary pathologist.  So I was directed early on in life as to what I wanted to be.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, is that direction coming from a teacher or are you just drawn to the sciences on your own?
Speaker 2: I liked medicine, and I liked science.  I had no sympathy for sick people, so I knew I didn't want to go into human medicine.  And I saw a television show once that had a pathologist present on the show.  And I thought that would be cool--I love animals, and I thought that would be cool.  So I decided I wanted to be a veterinary pathologist.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers who were especially influential once you made that decision, and sort of keeping you on track as far as the training is concerned and preparing for college?
Speaker 2: I had some excellent female, science teachers that I think helped to prepare me to go on to college.
Speaker 1: Was it especially as a mentor or just that they were good teachers and--
Speaker 2: They were good teachers--
Speaker 1: --concerned about everyone in the class?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of their names?
Speaker 2: No, 'cause I had so many teachers, 'cause I changed schools every year.  So, no, I don't remember her name.  I can see her, but I don't remember her name.
Story_ID: 259907
Speaker 1: We've talked a little bit about education, but I wonder if you could talk also about some of the earliest memories you have, just about growing up because the family unit is intact throughout all of your school years.  But holidays at your house, no matter what city you were in, what were those like?
Speaker 2: Well, holidays were always spent in Alabama.  And that's why that's home, that's vacation to me.  When we were, would have time to, in the summer in the--during Christmas, we would always go home.  So we traveled to Notasulga [Alabama].  So there'd be this long trip from wherever we were to Notasulga.  And then we'd--my grandparents were right next door to each other.  So I was very fortunate in that when we were home, I just went from one house to the next to visit either grandparent.  So we would spend, usually at my grandmother's house, my mother's grandmother--my mother's mother's [Willie Moss] house, we'd spend the evening there.  And then I would, through the day, we'd go back and forth between the houses.
Speaker 1: And how about the Christmases from your mother's [Julia Moss Grimes] generation to yours, still fruit and nuts?
Speaker 2: I actually did get that.  I didn't--it didn't make a difference to me 'cause I got it every day, but they actually did give me fruits and nuts.  But that was a great aunt.  She used to pack up fruits and nuts, but I was an only child for most of my life, for seventeen years.  So I got a lot of--I got a lot of clothes, and my mother's and father's [George Grimes, Jr.] siblings had only children.  So they tended to get a lot of gifts as well.  So I was very fortunate growing up.
Story_ID: 259908
Speaker 1: Now, I'm wondering also about other institutions that might have had an impact on your life, in addition to your positive classroom experiences, especially with those female science teachers and the fruit and the nuts on the holidays and just visiting with relatives.  Are you active or is the family active in any fraternal or benevolent organizations or churches or the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], anything like that?
Speaker 2: My father [George Grimes, Jr.], my mother [Julia Moss Grimes] and father are very active in the church.  And that has always played a strong role in my life.  When I was growing up, I remember them forcing me to go to church, and I'd be in tears lots of times.  But when I moved away from home to go to college, it was like a welcoming presence to be in church.  So the church has played a very important role in my life.
Speaker 1: Well, with the family moving around, I guess it's probably not fair to assume that there was a family church.  But is there one particular denomination that played an important role in shaping your world view and your thoughts or religion?
Speaker 2: I'm Baptist, and actually, there is a family church.  The family church is in Notasulga, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is the name?
Speaker 2: Macedonia Missionary Baptist Church [Notasulga, Alabama].  They grew up, they--actually, my grandmother went to school there.  So the school for my grandmothers [Willie Moss and Eula Tinsley Grimes] was in this church.  And then my parents were baptized there.  I was baptized there, and they attend that church--my father's a deacon at that church.  So, they currently attend that church.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so both your parents settled, once again, in Alabama--
Speaker 2: Right, in Notasulga--
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: --about, oh, a mile from where they grew up.
Speaker 1: All right, and, now, did you say both your grandmothers went to the church school?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, so is this a K [kindergarten] through twelve school that's affiliated with the church?
Speaker 2: No, I think it went to like sixth grade.  So my grandmothers did not finish high school.  They didn't even go to high school, I believe.  They did elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay, but the church is still there.
Speaker 2: The church is still there.
Speaker 1: Macedonia Baptist.
Speaker 2: Macedonia Missionary Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 259909
Speaker 1: You said you graduated from [Fort Campbell] High School [Fort Campbell, Kentucky] in--
Speaker 2: Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what year was that again?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 1: All right, and did you decide right away or even before graduation what college you wanted to attend?
Speaker 2: Well, I was very fortunate in that Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] had a veterinary school [Tuskegee School of Veterinary Medicine, Tuskegee, Alabama].  And it had a very good veterinary school.  So I decided that's where I was gonna apply, and that's where I attended.  Actually, I didn't even apply there.  I received a National Merit Achievement Scholarship [National Achievement Scholarship, National Merit Scholarship Program], and Tuskegee sent me a letter of acceptance.  So I never filled out an application even.  They just accepted me, and I showed up at their doorstep that first day.
Speaker 1: Okay, so if those things are happening for you, then I don't need to ask if you were a good student.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So you're--high scores on standardized tests and also good grades, is that correct?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, valedictorian?
Speaker 2: No, I was actually seventh in my high school class, but I was number one in my veterinary class.
Speaker 1: Okay, but in the top ten percent of the graduating class?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Now, how does that training work for veterinarians?  You get a bachelor's degree first and then go on to medical school, or how does that work?
Speaker 2: You can be accepted into veterinary school after two years of education or up to four years--usually, it's four years of education.  You have a bachelor's [degree].  But I got into veterinary school after going to school for two years.  And then veterinary school is four years, and you receive your D.V.M. [doctor of veterinary medicine].  And I also got a bachelor's at the same time, and then I went on to graduate school [at Michigan State University College of Veterinary Medicine, East Lansing, Michigan] after that.
Speaker 1: So is there a period of residency or an internship beyond the classroom experience where you practice without necessarily being paid?
Speaker 2: You can do an internship after veterinary school or a residency.  I actually went on straight to graduate school so I took a Ph.D. route as opposed to a residency route.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was that also in the South?
Speaker 2: That was at Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's--not a world away, but quite distance from Alabama.  Why Michigan State?
Speaker 2: I got a scholarship there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There are quite a few veterinary graduates that have attended Michigan State's graduate school.  They have an affirmative action program for black graduates.  So, they recruit, very heavily, Tuskegee graduates.  So I attended there.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was that also a positive experience, being up north for education for the first time?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I went to school everywhere, so I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At the post-secondary level.  I stand corrected.
Speaker 2: It was a positive experience.  I've been very fortunate in my life that I haven't had--I've had negative experiences, but generally, things have worked out for the best for me.
Speaker 1: Now, once you earned a Ph.D. in Michigan--and what year is that?
Speaker 2: I received my doctorate in 1982.  I actually went to vet--went to graduate school, received a master's [degree] in 1984, and then received my Ph.D. in 1988.
Speaker 1: Both at Michigan?
Speaker 2: Both at Michigan State, yes.
Speaker 1: Michigan State, okay.  And at that point in time, did you know where you wanted to practice or what kind of practice you wanted to have?
Speaker 2: Again one of those--life just falls for me.  They offered me a position on the faculty at Michigan State University.  So I actually taught at Michigan State University for seven years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I took the easy route versus going looking for a job (laughter).  They offered me a job, and I just stayed there.
Story_ID: 259910
Speaker 1: You're leaving Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan] in what year and where are you headed after that?
Speaker 2: I left Michigan State in 1995, '96 [1996], and then I came to Ohio, the Ohio Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory [Ohio Department of Agriculture, Reynoldsburg, Ohio].  Academia was not the right career for me.  In fact, I remember telling a student, a classmate of mine in vet [veterinary] school that I would never teach and that she could pay me a thousand dollars--I would pay her a thousand dollars if I ever taught.  So I still owe her a thousand dollars (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh (laughter) okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I enjoyed teaching, but I wasn't heavy into grant writing.  So I enjoyed the teaching part, and the administrative part, but I wasn't big on writing grants.
Speaker 1: And was that for your own research, the grant writing, or something for the department--
Speaker 2: Yes, for my own research.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, were you able then to focus on your research here in Ohio?  Was that one of the--part of the draw, part of the attraction?
Speaker 2: Well, in Ohio I'm actually a diagnostician.  So the primary responsibility that I had is a diagnostic one, and I had to perform necropsies or autopsies on animals.  And then I have some administrative responsibilities.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you've been doing basically those things since coming here?
Speaker 2: Correct.  I have an adjunct appointment at the university, at [The] Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio], so I do do some teaching.  But it's primary a service-related job that I have here.
Speaker 1: Okay, and no grant writing?
Speaker 2: No grant writing--a little bit, maybe assisting someone in writing a grant, but no, but not where I'm the principal investigator.
Speaker 1: Okay, have your experiences here in Ohio been primarily positive?  It's--when I think pathology, I think immediately disease, sickness, death--
Speaker 2: That's what you're supposed to think of (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And you're smiling.  So I guess there are rewards that go hand-in-hand with being a pathologist.  Could you talk a little bit about what a typical day is like in the life of a pathologist here?
Speaker 2: Well, when I come in, in the morning, if I'm on duty, which means that I'm one of the persons performing the necropsies that day, then I will talk to the owners of the individual--owners of the animals and discuss their case with them.  A farmer might bring an animal to us if they have pigs that have diarrhea, and the veterinarian has been treating those pigs and has been unsuccessful in treating them.  So we'll--I'll take the history from that owner and see if, you know, what kind of diarrhea they had, how long have they had diarrhea?  Have they been treated?  Has it been successful?  Then the animal will be taken to the back of a lab, and we'll perform a necropsy on that animal.  And a necropsy is similar to an autopsy in that it's an examination of the body after it's dead.  So, we'll open up the carcass and look at all the internal organs, and take tissues from that carcass.  And then those will be prepared for a microscopic examination.  So I spend a lot of time at the microscope looking at the slides and then tests are performed in various labs, the bacteriology lab and the virology lab, serology lab; tie all that data together, and come to a conclusion as to why the animal died.
Story_ID: 259911
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Sheila] Grimes, we had just started to talk about your work here in Columbus [sic. Reynoldsburg, Ohio] with the [Ohio] Department of Agriculture, and, basically, you were saying you perform autopsies on animals (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In animals, we call them necropsies.
Speaker 1: Necropsies, thank you for correcting me.  But why is that such an important function of this division.  This is a government agency.
Speaker 2: Right, this is the Ohio Department of Agriculture.
Speaker 1: Yes, and why is the government then concerned about animals and why they're dying?
Speaker 2: Well, agriculture is a big industry.  It's number one and number two in the State of Ohio.  And it's big in the U.S. in general.  And when you have large groups of animals that become ill, and you aren't successful in treating them, it's important to figure out what's wrong with them so you can successfully treat them, because it's a big economic loss if the majority of the animals in that flock or herd die.  So, for an economic purpose, it's essential that you find out why animals are dying, what's the most appropriate therapy to treat them with.  There are also individuals that they own pets that are concerned about why their pet died, you know, what type of cancer did it have?  Was it poisoned by their neighbor?  So, for personal reasons and for economic reasons, it's important to have a necropsy done in some cases.
Story_ID: 259912
Speaker 1: I know in recent years, there have been a number of really, I guess, hotly debated issues related to animal health and diseases.  And first and foremost, I think in my mind would be the mad cow disease [bovine spongiform encephalopathy] and what would happen if the food supply in the United States were somehow polluted or, is it, infected; if livestock in the United States began to die, to suffer and die from mad cow disease.  Was that really a period where there were alarms sounded here in the [Ohio] Department of Agriculture?
Speaker 2: Well, that's still a period here, actually--
Speaker 1: Oh, so we're still in it?
Speaker 2: Yes, we actually, at this laboratory, test for what I refer to as transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, which mad cow disease is.  We test for scrapie and for CWD [chronic wasting disease], the TSEs or transmissible spongiform encephalopathies.  We collect samples for mad cow disease at this laboratory [Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory, Reynoldsburg, Ohio] and send them to another laboratory for testing.  So we're currently even testing for mad cow disease at--taking samples for testing at this laboratory.  And the U.S. is trying to collect samples from about 280,000 cows over the next eighteen months to see if mad cow disease is a problem in this country.
Speaker 1: Now, can you tell me what's involved in testing that many animals?  Can the animals live?  Can you--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --take the tissue samples?  So that you have to slaughter the animal?
Speaker 2: It's a test on the brainstem of an animal, so it has to be a dead animal.  There's no live animal test for mad cow disease.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And there are thousands, you said, that have to be tested?
Speaker 2: We're trying to prove to the remainder of the world that we don't have mad cow disease in this country, that we're not a high-risk country.  So they're testing cattle that are most likely to get mad cow disease.  It should be cattle that are--have neurologic disease that are down, unable to rise, or those that are very aged.  So, for that reason, we're testing those cattle in that group that might possibly have mad cow disease.  And to pick up one in 10 million animals that might have that condition, we need to test about 280,000 animals.  So we're trying to do that in the next eighteen months.  Actually, we're all--we're more than halfway there.
Speaker 1: And for folks who will look back at this interview, say a generation from now, and maybe mad cow disease won't be an issue, what is it about the disease that really is so alarming for a lot of people who eat meat in the global community?
Speaker 2: The problem with mad cow disease or any transmissible spongiform encephalopathy is that once you get that condition, it's terminal.  You're going to die.  So, there's no treatment for that disease.  So, that's the major concern.  There're not a lot of people, probably it's like 130 in the world that have died from the disease.  But once you acquire it, you are going to die.  There's nothing they can do for you.
Speaker 1: So, it's the threat to the lives of the animals, the livestock, and then it can be transmitted to human beings?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how would human beings get the disease?
Speaker 2: By ingesting parts of the cow.  Primarily the central nervous system:  the brain, the spinal cord, are the primary sites.  But there is some concern that maybe muscle was involved, which is why people were afraid to eat meat.  To date, they have not proved that it is present in the muscle of cattle.  But they have shown it to be present in the muscle of other animals.  So probably ten years from now, we'll say it was in the muscle of cows.  I'm predicting that.
Story_ID: 259913
Speaker 1: And I know, also, in recent years--in fact, in recent months, there's another alarm sounded about the poultry industry, primarily in Asia, I believe, and concerns with chicken being slaughtered there, even--and I don't think this was a rumor, talk of KFC [Kentucky Fried Chicken] in Asia, serving fish rather than chicken because of the fears of consuming poultry that was infected.  What was that about?
Speaker 2: I believe you're referring to avian influenza [bird flu].  And actually for cooked poultry, you can't pick up the virus.  But the virus has certain antigens on its surface that can combine with human viral antigens and cause the flu in people.  So there was a concern about the avian strain of flu infecting people and causing disease in people.
Speaker 1: Was that a legitimate concern?
Speaker 2: It is.  It was a very legitimate concern, and it's still a concern today.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, there have been episodes of flu in the world that cause massive death losses, and so it's a very legitimate concern.
Speaker 1: Now, is that something that you test for here [at Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory, Ohio Department of Agriculture, Reynoldsburg, Ohio] in Ohio?
Speaker 2: Yes, we do test for avian flu here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not the exotic type that's present in Asia.  We're--well, we test for it, but it's not present here.  But we do test for it.
Story_ID: 259914
Speaker 1: Now, how do you safeguard the global community against those diseases among animals being somehow transferred to the human population?
Speaker 2: One way to safeguard is via diagnostic laboratories like the one [Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory, Ohio Department of Agriculture, Reynoldsburg, Ohio] that I work at.  What we do is we not only test for diseases that are present in animals, but we do surveillance work.  So by testing animals that appear to be healthy or that may be ill just due to some other cause for diseases for avian flu [bird flu] or bovine spongiform encephalopathy [mad cow disease], we ensure the world remains safe.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I know that something I grew up with, the stamps from the, I think it's USDA [U.S. Department of Agriculture], the meat is safe to consume (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --if you see this stamp on the meat in the grocery stores.  Is it still something that the Department of Agriculture really prides itself on is being there, you know, on the frontline, in the grocery stores, where the butchers are working, but certifying that the food is safe for human consumption?
Speaker 2: It is, and it's something that people are--have a lot of faith in.  I was recently at a talk given by a woman, and she was talking about mad cow disease, and she was talking about, they asked the public who they had the most faith in.  And the government was number one, in terms of, if the government said that, you know, this food is safe to consume, and people believe them.  And it's really important that the government maintain that trust that the public has them by not lying to them.  So.
Speaker 1: How long has this been a part of the American experience, these pure food and drug laws that protect us now?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think for many years.  There was a book called--what is it called?
Speaker 1: Well, I have one in mind.  Maybe yours is different.  But I'll mention it anyway.  'The Jungle.'
Speaker 2: Yes.  By Sinclair.
Speaker 1: Yes, Upton Sinclair.
Speaker 2: Right, right, and where he raised an issue in regards to the slaughterhouses and the concern about, you know, treatment of the people that work there and also the carcasses that were being slaughtered in terms of diseased animals and, et cetera.  And since then there's been a strong push for, you know, the safety of our food supply.
Speaker 1: Now, that one, I think was set in the early 20th century in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: I just wanted to mention Chicago, because the archive is there (laughter).  So a lot of Chicagoans may be watching this.  But again, that city again, playing, at least in that fictional account, a special role in helping to make the food supply perhaps safer for us here in the 21st century.  But, again, has the government become more vigilant in recent years in the wake of these threats posed by mad cow disease and other things that are happening in Europe and Asia, or has it been pretty steady?
Speaker 2: No, I think they've become more vigilant.  There are certain rules in place.  One of them is called HACCP [hazard analysis and critical control points], which are critical points that they analyze the food that's going through slaughterhouses.  So there's definitely increased vigilance in the federal system for food safety.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They're--are currently establishing networks throughout the U.S. where various labs for the various states are connected.  And one of the networks is the Food Emergency Response Network [FERN].  And the Ohio Department of Agriculture is a part of that network, just to ensure that our food supply is safe.
Story_ID: 259915
Speaker 1: Now, I know there was a lot of fear expressed in the wake of 9/11 [September 11, 2001] about possible contamination of the food supply in the United States and also the water supply and perhaps even the air.  Were any of those fears or charges founded on anything, scientific, that you've noticed in your research?  Is there a real threat to the health and safety of the United States and her citizens, posed by any terrorists or any other groups who might somehow contaminate the food supply or water supply?
Speaker 2: I believe there is a threat.  I mean, there's a potential terrorist threat as you mentioned, but currently, we use a lot of antibiotics, you know, for people as well as animals.  There's a lot of pressure on microbes, bacteria and viruses, to change in response to the antibiotic use.  So just the fact that bacteria and viruses are changing and becoming more resistant, that poses a threat, just naturally, besides the terrorist threat that may be there.
Speaker 1: So I imagine then that the research must be ongoing--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --as these mutations--is that the right term?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Appear in the viruses.  Then there has to be a new way of treating people or protecting them--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --against those threats?
Speaker 2: For example, AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], recently they've found a new strain [of HIV, human immunodeficiency virus] that, you know, is much more potent.  So, as viruses change, we need to be able to respond to those changes and recognize those changes.
Story_ID: 259916
Speaker 1: I don't wanna call you a military brat (laughter), but I--
Speaker 2: Oh, everybody does (laughter).
Speaker 1: --I know that--everybody does, okay but I don't want to do like everyone else.  But I know that the [U.S.] military did play an important role in your family's history.  And since the nation is at war now, and people are talking about threats and who our actual and potential enemies are at this point in time, I want to go back to the Vietnam [War] era, and especially the 1970s where you're coming of age and eventually graduating from [Fort Campbell] High School in [Fort Campbell] Kentucky.  What was that like, even though supposedly, the battles are being fought on battlefields in Southeast Asia, what was it like to live during that time of real war where there's certainly a clear and present danger to the enlisted men and women who were in Vietnam, compared to perhaps what we're dealing with now in 2005 with the war in Iraq [Iraq War]?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a much more personal experience for me because my father [George Grimes, Jr.] was in Vietnam, and he was actually in Vietnam two years.  He went when I was in the fifth grade, and then again in the seventh grade.  So--and I think he still has repercussions from that.  He still has nightmares at night.  He was exposed to Agent Orange, so he has prostate cancer associated with that agent.  So, I definitely felt the immediacy of war and death, because my father was away for two years.  And he was injured and has several Purple Hearts associated with that war.  So, I mean, war is real regardless of if you have a family member involved in it or not, but it was very real to me.  So, I do worry about people that are in the military and have military families that have people that are away in Iraq that are dying or exposed to the possibility of dying every day.
Speaker 1: You made a really important statement, that war is real, you know, whether you have relatives there or not.  But it seems to me that the way that America fights her wars, and I guess, this is something that's true of war in the global community, those ways, those ways of waging war have changed over time.  And science and technology had a major impact on how we fight our wars.  Agent Orange, as you mentioned, was something that did a lot of damage to the vegetation, certainly, in Southeast Asia, but also, unfortunately, to the men who were serving.  But can you tell us, since you're a scientist, what was it about Agent Orange that proved to be so damaging in the long run to the veterans in Vietnam, particularly Vietnam?
Speaker 2: Well, again, it's been proven to be a carcinogen.  So, a lot of them, besides the mental injuries they suffered or the physical injuries, are now suffering from cancer such as prostate cancer, associated with that carcinogen.  So, it has proven to take its toll.  So, it's not just the war that caused problems, but some of the chemicals they used in association with that war.
Speaker 1: And I know also more recently since Vietnam, there's talk now of a Gulf War syndrome, also chemically induced?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I actually have a cousin that was involved in the Gulf War, and had some concerns about him having a, you know, changes associated with that.  So.  And one wonders what the people that are serving in Iraq will suffer, you know, not just from the war itself, but from chemicals that might have been used to fight this war or vaccines that may have been given to veterans that went to war.
Speaker 1: I had an opportunity a few weeks ago in Cleveland [Ohio] to hear Shoshana Johnson, the first African American [female] prisoner of war from the Iraq experience, talk about the experience of being captured and being a prisoner of war, and (laughter) they paraded her to various cities in Iraq as sort of trophies.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, but generally, being treated well.  But she talked about the gas mask and the importance of that, and still the ever-present threat of chemicals in a warfare that is currently underway in Iraq.  As a scientist, are you ever torn (laughter) that people are developing these kinds of weapons, that technology when it does so much good in protecting the food supply can also do so much damage, and that scientists are sort of making it possible for the damage to be done?
Speaker 2: There's always going to be evil.  I mean--
Speaker 1: And maybe it wasn't a fair question, but I wanted to get your opinion--
Speaker 2: And Agent Orange was initially developed as a benefit, as you said to kill vegetation.  So, one never knows--even though they do research on chemicals or drugs prior to their release.  Until it's been used for ten, fifteen years, you don't know all the side effects that may occur.  So, and people will choose to use things for negative purposes and positive purposes, and I don't think you should stop doing research and science progressing with a concern about what's the negative impact going to be.
Story_ID: 259917
Speaker 1: As a scientist, what would you say have been some of the most important scientific advances that have come out of research associated with the work of pathologists, say it in the last generation or so?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) The work of pathologists--
Speaker 1: Or even in the last century?  We don't hear much about TB so I suppose tuberculosis isn't the threat that it once was.
Speaker 2: Well, actually, it's reemerging.
Speaker 1: Oh, is it.  Then I'm glad I mentioned it.
Speaker 2: Particularly in AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] patients.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, emerging.  It's an emerging--reemerging disease.  Any, actually, any disease, there's usually been a pathologist who's played a role.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, from AIDS on to, you know, any disease, there is a pathologist involved.  So we're very important.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you say that TB is reemerging, how do we account for that?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: And I thought, incorrectly, that basically, it had been wiped out or eliminated or at least reduced, to the point where we don't have the massive death from tuberculosis, especially in urban areas where poor black people were living during the Great Migration.  Why is it coming back now?
Speaker 2: Well, AIDS patients are immuno-compromised.  So, they're more susceptible to them, and there's again that antibiotic pressure on bacteria.  So the organism is reemerged.  It's resistant to a lot of antibiotics we used to use, like Isoniazid.  I remember I was exposed to a child that had tuberculosis when I was growing up.  So I was on a preventative medication for a year.  So a lot of the medication that used to treat TB has caused it to become more resistant, and therefore, it's reemerging as a disease of concern.
Story_ID: 259918
Speaker 1: Are there risk also associated with being a pathologist, and how do you protect yourself so you can continue your work and keep our food supply healthy?
Speaker 2: There are a lot of diseases that are referred to as zoonotic, meaning that people and animals get them.  So there're quite a few disease that I could come into contact with on a daily basis that could cause disease in a pathologist.  You wear protective clothing, protective eyewear, et cetera, when you're worried about those types of diseases.  Pathologists, veterinary pathologists in particular, feel like we're invincible.  So, we don't worry about disease like some people do.  I mean, but we do wear protective clothing and gloves and masks when appropriate.
Speaker 1: Now, when I met you today, you were in a clean, well-lit office.  Is that where you do most of your work or are you in the laboratory a lot of the day, looking at the slides or doing other kinds of lab work?
Speaker 2: I actually look at the slides in my office, but when I'm on the pathology or necropsy floor, then there's a lot of blood and guts, so.  And that's about--that's probably 20 percent of my time.
Speaker 1: Now, for young people who are interested in this career field, are you able to mentor them?  Are they able ever to see the blood and guts, so that's something that's on the table (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Well, I actually have a travelling road show.  I visit some elementary schools and occasional high schools and give talks about what I do.  And students that want to come to the lab [Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory, Ohio Department of Agriculture, Reynoldsburg, Ohio] and visit for a day or a longer period of time are welcome to, to see what we do.  And occasionally, I've had some people in elementary school, maybe fifth or sixth grade.  And I actually let them do the necropsy.  I let them cut the carcasses open and--'cause there's nothing like actual experience to figure if that's what you want to do.  And then you remember better if you it yourself, so.
Speaker 1: And have you won any converts over the years to pathology?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Young physicians--or, you're not old, but younger physicians (laughter).  It was the sight of blood and guts that convinced me (laughter) that this is what I wanted to do with my life.
Speaker 2: Oh, it's exciting, when you--particularly, when you talk to fourth graders, they love blood and guts.  I mean, I take them all kinds of strange things, and they get the biggest kick out of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, is that something then that you're really concerned about, the reaching out to young people and telling them exactly what it is that pathologists do and why it makes a positive difference in the world?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, and not just pathology, but just science in general, you know, and exposing them to various career opportunities.
Speaker 1: We--I talk about the headlines, and so much of the news is bad.  But I hear so much about American students, and how they lag, certainly, behind Asian students in studying math and science.  And do you see--well, from your vantage point, any real effort on the part of American educators to sort of correct those problems and to do something about that deficit in math and science education?
Speaker 2: I think until we're willing to pay teachers what they're worth, we're not going to see a major change in our science and math abilities.  I think it's very important to pay them what one might pay--maybe not to the same level--but a physician or a dentist, because they are very important.  I mean, and my dad [George Grimes, Jr.] is a teacher, and he loves kids, and I think it's imperative that they get the best education possible.  That's the background and the basis of your education when you're in elementary school and high school.  So if you get to college and you haven't had a strong background, you're not gonna be successful.  So I think you have to give them the strongest basic background that you can, and teachers need to be paid to accomplish that.  And right now, people aren't going into the teaching profession because they're not gonna get paid a substantial amount.  You know, they're going to start out making much less than an engineer, and so they might--the brighter individuals might choose to go into engineering as opposed to people that say, "Okay, well, I'll teach," 'cause they don't have quite the ability.  I know some wonderful teachers, so there's some people that I have met that I would love to, if I had children, to have them attend their class, because they're just--they love kids.  They work very hard at their job.  They spend a lot of extra time after work, you know, getting their classes ready.  So until we get a lot of teachers that are like that, that are doing it because they love it and are getting paid an adequate amount of money, I don't think there's gonna be a big change in our science and math abilities.
Story_ID: 259919
Speaker 1: During the 1970s, because of the Civil Rights Movement, some of the high schools for the children of [U.S.] military personnel were located on the base.  Could you explain that, please, how that was somehow connected to the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: There was--this was before, actually, it was in the '60s [1960s], I guess, that they had built the high schools.  So, in the '70s [1970s], the crisis wasn't there, but in the '60s [1960s], where there were segregated schools and unequal schools, and there were marchings and uprisings and people standing in the door so you couldn't attend, they built those high schools on the posts in Kentucky.  So, it wasn't in the '70s [1970s] that it was actually occurring, but in the '60s [1960s], the concern was there.  And those high schools were built so that there wouldn't be the separation of blacks and whites.  And as I said, when I was in Alabama in the seventh grade I attended a public school in Notasulga [Alabama], and that was the first year they integrated that school.  And I remember getting on the school bus.  And I always attended schools with blacks and whites, so it wasn't new to me.  But I remember getting on the school bus, the first day of school, and it was extremely quiet.  I mean, you could hear a pin, I mean, really, you could hear a pin drop.  Nobody was saying anything, because they'd never been combined, blacks and whites on the school bus before.  So it was a really strange feeling.
Speaker 1: Was it a peaceful desegregation effort in Alabama?
Speaker 2: Pretty much, in Notasulga it was.  A lot of the white parents chose to send their children to private schools that first year.  But, as it became very expensive to send them to private schools, they came back to the public schools.  So, I think in Notasulga, it was pretty peaceful.  My father [George Grimes, Jr.] told me a story though when I was home this past week about when they first talked about integrating the schools, that three white gentlemen in the town--they were certain they knew their names too, went to the school and actually lit a fire or a bomb, so that blacks couldn't attend.  So, I guess initially there was some turmoil, because there was a bomb lit in the school so the blacks couldn't attend it.  But when I was going to school, that first year, it was pretty quiet.
Speaker 1: It's interesting that you say that, because Alabama has a really bloody history--at least, those are the stories that are usually recounted in the general textbook studies of the civil rights era, with the Birmingham [Alabama] bombings, the multiple bombings and especially the one from September 15, 1963, with the four little girls who died in the church bombing [at 16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama].  But your Alabama years were not filled with bombings, I take it, or were you aware even that that was part of Alabama's history, as you were growing up there, or moving around, but being from there?
Speaker 2: I was aware, but, again, because we did move around, actually, I wasn't growing up in Alabama with the segregation.  I do remember when we'd go home, and there was a segregated elementary school.  And I remember being told I talked white, because I'd, you know--so I was aware that there was turmoil.  I remember when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] died, we were actually in North Carolina, there--then.  And I kind of associated the bond, but not until I was grown did I realize all that went on.
Story_ID: 259920
Speaker 1: You stated that you remember to this day where you were when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell us about that experience, your memories of that day?
Speaker 2: I just remember watching TV and seeing them report his death, and then remembering my parents [Julia Moss Grimes and George Grimes, Jr.] being very sad.  And we were in Texas, actually, when [President John Fitzgerald] Kennedy was assassinated, so it was just kind of like--seeing two people assassinated during your lifetime.  It was kind of strange.
Speaker 1: So, now, you were born, again, in 1958, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But you remember the 1963 Kennedy assassination?
Speaker 2: I think I do, yes.
Speaker 1: But, so what was that like?  Was there the same reaction on the part of your parents?  Were they also saddened by that?
Speaker 2: They were saddened by that as well.  I mean, I was much younger then, but being in Texas made it more real, you know, having it occurring right while we were there.  But I definitely remember the sadness when he died.
Speaker 1: I know in Cleveland [Ohio], they made us watch the funeral on television.  Was that part of your experience as well in 1968 when Dr. King was assassinated?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  I'm sure I did watch it because, you know, it was--but I don't remember.  I just remember the day he died more strongly than anything else.
Speaker 1: And you were where?  You were ten (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In North Carolina.
Speaker 1: In North Carolina.  I know that, especially, in the urban North, there was widespread rioting after Dr. King's assassination.  Was that true of communities in North Carolina as well?
Speaker 2: I don't remember that occurring where I was.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  For a lot of people, the modern Civil Rights Movement or at least the heyday of it, it really starts in 1955 with the Montgomery Bus Boycott and just following the Brown [v. Board of Education, 1954] decision.  And for a lot of people, it either ends or changes dramatically after the assassination of Dr. King in 1968.  But does that periodization work for you as well when you think about the Civil Rights Movement?  Is it ending in '68 [1968], or does it continue?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think it continues.
Speaker 1: Okay, and why is that?
Speaker 2: I think people, regardless--it's just human nature that they're always going to have some prejudices and some racist natures, and I think there continues to be a struggle, particularly, for black males.  I have a brother [George Grimes III], and he's a big gentleman.  But he's a very gentle gentleman.  But I realize that, were he to get on the elevator with someone, they would be concerned about being in that elevator with him, even though he's the nicest person in the world.  So, people continue to have their prejudices, and I know several black males that feel they haven't been as successful as they could be, because they're black males.  I don't know that it's necessarily always that case.  But I know that they feel that way.  And in my lifetime, when I was at Michigan State [University College of Veterinary Medicine, East Lansing, Michigan], I received a faculty appointment after completing graduate school.  There were several black males that had received Ph.D.s prior to my completing my Ph.D. at Michigan State University, and there were positions available at that time that they could have accepted, had they been offered the position.  And they weren't.  And I think that part of it's because they were more comfortable with the black female being in that position than a black male.  So. I think there's still racial incidents that occur in this world, and I'm afraid that that will always be the case.  I would like to think that we'll have a color blind society, as Martin Luther King wished.  But I don't know that, just based upon human nature, that's gonna occur.  If it's not color, it's going to be hair, it's going to be body shape.  It's going to be something.
Story_ID: 259921
Speaker 1: You said that when you went to Michigan State [University College of Veterinary Medicine, East Lansing, Michigan], you were recruited as part of the university's affirmative action program.  So do you believe that affirmative action is--I almost said was--is a good thing, that it's the kind of initiative that we need to have in order to diversify experiences at the post-secondary level?
Speaker 2: I do.  I think it is a good thing.  I mean, I feel that I was qualified regardless of whether or not I was black.  But sometimes people have negative attitudes about HBCs [HBCUs], historically black colleges.  So even though I was number one in my class, without affirmative action, they may have considered that I had gone to an inferior institution [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], and therefore was not qualified for that position, even though I excelled when I was there at Michigan State.  But without affirmative action, I don't know if I would have been accepted at other institutions as easily.
Speaker 1: Now, since we've had a little time to think about the Michigan case [Grutter v. Bollinger, 2003] where, I believe, the [U.S.] Supreme Court was still saying, yes, to diversity.  And the nation is still saying no to quotas, and I think incorrectly associating those with affirmative action.  Do you believe that affirmative action will continue to shape policy, admission policies, especially at the post-secondary level in this first decade or so of the 21st century?  Think that's gonna continue?
Speaker 2: I think it will continue to some extent.  I think there is a push, though, for it to play less of a role, you know.  But I think it will continue to some extent.
Story_ID: 259922
Speaker 1: Are there new frontiers now for scientists of the 21st century, new challenges that you're facing and things that the sciences have really targeted in a major way, things that they want to conquer in the 21st century?
Speaker 2: Cancer is a big one.  I mean, I think that there's a definite push to find new drugs to treat cancer, to find genetic means of treating cancer.  So that's a strong push for science.  There's also all the mutations we talked about with bacteria and viruses.  There's a need to know why viruses and bacteria mutate and then how to have effective therapies available when they do change.  So there're always new frontiers to cross in medicine.  I mean there's always something new on the horizon.  The transmissible spongiform encephalopathy, TSE, that's caused by not, what we know as a virus or a bacteria, but a protein.  So, as diseases like that continue to occur, we'll have to figure out how to fight those.  As I said, it's not a treatable disease, because it's not a known agent that we're familiar with.  It's been discovered in the last thirty-four years.  So it would be nice if new agents like that didn't arise, but as they have come on the horizon, we're gonna have to learn how to fight those.
Speaker 1: Okay so space was not the final frontier (laughter)?  You said there are new (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Still things on the earth that we have to fight.
Speaker 1: Okay, new frontiers, that need to be pushed back in the 21st century.
Speaker 2: Right, and as we go out into space, I mean we may come into new microbes.
Story_ID: 259923
Speaker 1: I want to ask also about your work here [at the Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory, Ohio Department of Agriculture] in [Reynoldsburg] Ohio.  I know you came here in the mid-1990s.  But did you come into the position that you currently occupy, or did you--
Speaker 2: I initially was the, a veterinary pathologist and then, in the first year, I became a pathology section head.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's the title that you currently have?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, and now what's the difference then, between the first appointment and the appointment that you have now?
Speaker 2: The first appointment I was primarily doing just necropsies and microscopic examinations, just the diagnostic service work.  And the latter appointment, I'm more of an administrator.  So, there's like--it's supposed to be 50-50, but probably 75 percent of my work is administrative, and 25 percent is diagnostic now.
Speaker 1: And what about professional organizations for pathologists?  I know in the academic community, it's always publish or perish.  Get the right publications in the right journals.  And then you get tenure or you get the right book published by the right press, and you get tenure if you're a good teacher or competent teacher, and you serve your department and your college and your university.  But what is that you do as a pathologist to remain abreast of those issues that are of greatest concern to your colleagues in the field, and how do you share new knowledge about innovations in the field?
Speaker 2: As a pathologist, a veterinary pathologist, after you receive your Ph.D. or whatever graduate training you receive, your residency, one of the certificates that you receive or try to receive is a diplomate in the American College of Veterinary Pathologists [ACVP].  So there's an exam you have to take.  And it takes about a year of hard study to acquire that degree.  And then you become what's referred to as an ACVP diplomate.  And there're about, oh, about twelve hundred of those in the country.  And they have an organization that you belong to.  So, there are national meetings that you attend, and there's a national journal [Veterinary Pathology] associated with that field.  And then there's the American Veterinary Medical Association which is just an association of veterinarians throughout the U.S. and Canada.  And then there are local organizations, veterinary organizations that I'm involved with.  But keeping abreast of literature, by reading journals and textbooks is very important.  And the Internet is very important now-a-days too.
Speaker 1: So many of these journals, I might imagine are published online?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, are there associations of African American veterinarians or women veterinarians, or isn't the profession stratified that way anymore?
Speaker 2: The biggest association of African American veterinarians is Tuskegee Veterinary Medical Alumni Association.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, in fact, if you meet a black veterinarian, more than likely, they graduated from Tuskegee [School of Veterinary Medicine, Tuskegee, Alabama].  There are rare ones now-a-days that finished at Michigan State [University College of Veterinary Medicine, East Lansing, Michigan] or [The] Ohio State [University College of Veterinary Medicine, Columbus, Ohio], but most black veterinarians are Tuskegee graduates.  And that's the largest black veterinary alumni association.
Story_ID: 259924
Speaker 1: Well, can you tell us a little bit about Tuskegee's [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] role in training veterinarians of color in the United States?
Speaker 2: I believe that they established the veterinary school [Tuskegee School of Veterinary Medicine, Tuskegee, Alabama] in the '40s [1940s], and most of their faculty were trained at Kansas so that the initial faculty at Tuskegee was Kansas-trained.  And Alabama is a unique state in that they have two veterinary schools.  They have Auburn University veterinary school [Auburn University College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn, Alabama] and Tuskegee University Veterinary School, which are about fifteen miles apart.  So, it's unusual that one state would have two veterinary schools, much less be fifteen miles apart.  But they were required--they were not allowed to segregate the--to integrate the veterinary schools.  So Tuskegee was only allowed to accept black veterinary students, and Auburn could accept white.  And one year, I was told that they accepted a student that was white, that arrived on the campus, and they had to turn him away, because they weren't allowed to accept him.  So, it was established for the training black veterinary graduates and still currently is the major trainer of black veterinary graduates.
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned that Tuskegee is an HBCU, historically black college, black university, but white students or students or other races currently enroll at Tuskegee?
Speaker 2: Yes, in fact, the veterinary school is probably 50-50 right now, in terms of classes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  How large is the student body at Tuskegee?
Speaker 2: When I as in veterinary school, there were about sixty students per class, and I believe that's about the same.
Speaker 1: And you said it's a four-year program?
Speaker 2: Correct.  The university is probably about two thousand students.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, may I ask a little bit about the early history of Tuskegee, and how that institution has changed over time because we give credit to Booker T. Washington--
Speaker 2: Rightly so.
Speaker 1: Rightly so (laughter).  I don't think that institution--we teach, in 1881, okay, for the freed men or their children who wanted to pursue education and perhaps subscribe to his thoughts on the value on working, combining work and school.  Is there still that big push for works and study combined at Tuskegee, or is that a thing of the past?
Speaker 2: I think that's a thing of the past.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were like bricklaying students and, et cetera, you know, a lot of the initial buildings were built by the students.  So there was a lot of works involved, as you said, initially.  But now it's more of an academic environment.  You know, there's an engineering school [Tuskegee University College of Engineering, Tuskegee, Alabama], a veterinary school, a nursing school [Tuskegee University School of Nursing and Allied Health, Tuskegee, Alabama].  So I don't think the works part is as strongly stressed.  Though, in the veterinary school, the veterinary students at Tuskegee probably perform more hands-on works than at other colleges.  So maybe there is still some of that present.
Story_ID: 259925
Speaker 1: Well, if the curriculum has changed or the emphasis on work is not as great anymore as the emphasis on the academic side of the undergraduate experience [at Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], what about the legend of Booker T. Washington, the great accommodator.  And many people suggests that the T in Booker T. stood for [Uncle] Tom (laughter), had such a--
Speaker 2: I have never heard that.
Speaker 1: Oh, they say that in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Probably not in Alabama, but in Ohio.  And you never heard that?
Speaker 2: Not the Tom part.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  It's not a compliment (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, I know it's not, but I've never heard that.  I mean, he was a great accommodator, but I think that was appropriate for his time.  I mean, there was W.E.B. Du Bois on the other side, and there was Booker on one side.  And I think for what he was planning, trying to accomplish, that was appropriate.
Speaker 1: Okay, and as a Tuskegee alum [alumna], what do you think Booker T. Washington was trying to accomplish, in accommodating racism in his time?
Speaker 2: Well, he wanted blacks to be educated and successful.  And if he was able to do that and still allow--because, see, I think he felt it would have been harder to do if he tried to push for an integrated society and blacks being educated and successful, than to just leave that part alone, 'cause that was a--the social part was the harder part to accomplish, and to just do the education part separately.  Then he could accomplish that easier.  I mean I think maybe in today's time, you might think differently.  But during that period of time, in the early 19th century [sic.], I think that was the appropriate thing to do.  There was--
Speaker 1: Nineteen hundreds [1900s], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and in terms of education, particularly, in the South.  So, I don't fault him.  You know, it's like [President Abraham] Lincoln said, if he could save the Republic by freeing all the slaves, he would.  If he could save it by freeing part of the slaves and other slaves.  So you do what you have to do to be successful, and I think that's what Booker T. felt he had to do to accomplish what he wanted to accomplish at Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: Now, I have to say, I've never visited the campus, but I've seen lots of pictures of this statute of Booker T. Washington--
Speaker 2: Lifting the veil.
Speaker 1: --lifting the veil of ignorance from the face of the wooly-haired slave.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, is Mr. Washington still revered or honored or respect, at least, in Tuskegee [Alabama]--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --for what he tried to do?
Speaker 2: Definitely.
Speaker 1: In a word, definitely (laughter).  End of discussion.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, unfortunately, Tuskegee's a very small town, and it's dying.  And, were it not for the university that he founded, I don't think there would be much to say about Tuskegee.  So, he definitely is well-respected.
Story_ID: 259926
Speaker 1: The Tuskegee experiment, the syphilis experiment [Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis in the Negro Male]--can you just tell us about that or, for the record, just to recount the story, and tell me whether Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] has been able to live that down, at this point in its history?
Speaker 2: The U.S. had an experiment where they--black individuals that had syphilis were not treated.  They were told that they were being treated, but they were actually not treated to see what the effects of syphilis were on the human body.  So, we were human guinea pigs.  And many people died for the lack of treatment for a disease that was treatable.  So, I know people that actually were part of the syphilis experiment, that lived to a ripe old age, that received a monetary settlement, because they were in that experiment, which was a horrible thing to do to people, you know, to purposely use them as human guinea pigs.  That was a horrific thing to do.  And Tuskegee now has a, actually, has a [National] Center for Bioethics [in Research and Health Care, Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] based upon what occurred with the Tuskegee experiment and then us trying to make sure that that never occurs again.  So the Center for Bioethics is to ensure that that never happens to a person again, to be treated as a human guinea pig without your knowledge.
Speaker 1: Now, of course, this was the subject of 'Miss Evers' Boys,' and so the play and then the made-for-TV movie, staring Laurence Fishburne, Jr.  And so a lot of people, I suspect, who watch this tape will think that they know something about the story, or maybe that they actually know the facts of the story.  But one of the most disturbing parts of the story, at least for my students, is that black healthcare providers, cooperated with the federal government to mislead those black men who were part of that experiment, and this idea that the goal was to move them toward autopsy, so that you could see how much damage the syphilis did when it was left untreated.  Did I get it right?
Speaker 2: Correct, correct.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, do you know of any of the individuals, the African American nurses and doctors who were part of that program who participated in that, who explained or tried to explain why they went along with the program?
Speaker 2: I've never actually met any of those medical personnel.  I've met, as I said, people that were part of the experiment, but not any of the people that were actually, quote, treating the individuals that had syphilis or not treating the individuals that had syphilis.  And I can't explain why someone would choose to do that to a person without feeling the need to tell them, you know, that this is going on.
Story_ID: 259927
Speaker 1: What is it about stem cell research that bothers people so much or troubles them?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think that they feel that you're interfering with human life because it, those stem cells come from embryos.  And to acquire the stem cells, you have to destroy the embryo.  So there's a matter of life and death, and if you're taking a life to acquire those stem cells.  But it depends upon where you think life begins, you know.  And so many advances in science would not occur if someone hadn't taken a risk and moved forward.  I mean, five hundred years ago, to open a person and do surgery was heretical, it was a horrible thing.  It was against the church.  So, a thousand years from now, probably this will be routine.  So it's a matter of where we are in our beliefs about science at that--during the current decade or century because, like I said, things that we do currently, even surgery, simple surgery, would have been forbidden five hundred years ago, a thousand years ago.
Speaker 1: I think one of the--probably the most popular examples is the work of Galileo in suggesting that the earth was not at the center (laughter).
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: No, the earth revolves around the sun--got into lots of trouble with the church officials of his day.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so you think there'll be a time when stem cell research is not as controversial as it is now?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay, how about cloning?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't even--I figure fifty years from now, that'll be routine.  So--
Speaker 1: Some people have described it as just another way of--
Speaker 2: Immortality?
Speaker 1: No, not immortality--procreation, (laughter) it how I've heard it described, or reproduction.  That's in the North (unclear) in Cleveland [Ohio], I've heard those words used.
Speaker 2: Possibly, I mean, the problem with cloning right now is that, like with Dolly, there are--
Speaker 1: Oh, tell us, please, who Dolly is for the record?
Speaker 2: Dolly is the sheep, the first cloned animal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was a concern that you'll die early if you're cloned, because there'll be some genetic defects that are magnified with cloning.  So, until they can perfect that, then there'll be a problem.  But I assume with animals--now maybe not with people, but with animals, I think cloning will be routine in the next fifty years.
Story_ID: 259928
Speaker 1: I need to talk about the administrative duties that you perform in this office, since that's what you spend the majority of your time on.  As a ScienceMaker, were you able to make that transition to, is it fair to say, desk work more so than laboratory work, successfully?
Speaker 2: Even in academia, I did all that desk work, but yes, I have made that transition.  The big thing about being an administrator is that there's a lot of interpersonal skills required, a lot of the time is spent managing people and not necessarily the job-related things, but personality conflicts and disagreements.  So that's the hardest part of the job.  But, like currently, we're doing a construction project which you probably saw when you drove up.  And so I've become part architect, part engineer (laughter) as a part of that construction project.  So you're always learning.  And then there's new diseases or new crises that are arriving in agriculture that state veterinarians are continuously coming to my office and asking me my advice on.  So, I'm always looking up things and answering questions in regards to that.  And then there's a lot of interaction with the public.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you say we, do you work with a team of scientists, and if so, how many and how do you divide up the tasks for the team members?
Speaker 2: In the laboratory [Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory, Ohio Department of Agriculture, Reynoldsburg, Ohio], we're headed up by the director, and there's--there are four sections.  There's a bacteriology section, a virology section, serology section, and a pathology section.  I head up the pathology section, and there are nine people in that section.  And I supervise eight of those people (unclear) by myself.  And there are two histotechnicians that make the slides for us to examine.  There's a laboratory assistant that works on the necropsy floor, cutting up the animals and disposing of them.  There's a secretary section, and then there are three other veterinarians, two pathologists and one diagnostician.  So, they're given their daily assignments, and then I oversee their work.
Speaker 1: Now, we're in the conference room, so I don't suppose it's inappropriate to ask about the role of conferencing and discussing what the individual scientists are discovering on their own?  Are there times set aside during every work day when you come together or is that something that's done?
Speaker 2: Generally, once or twice a week, in terms of a conference with the people in the laboratory.  But there are telephone conferences with various individuals throughout the week as well, with the people on the federal level nationally and sometimes internationally.
Speaker 1: So with being a government-funded operation, how do you share your information or release our discoveries to the general public?
Speaker 2: Through our media person (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we don't make any direct contacts with the media--in terms of the media, unless we go through the person in the administration office.  In terms of everyday activities, that would be done through our record, our (unclear) system.  So through the computer or possibly through the mail.  And--
Speaker 1: And is that office here, at this complex or--
Speaker 2: The communications?
Speaker 1: Yeah, is it a public relations kind of (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, they're at this complex.  They're at the large building next door.
Story_ID: 259929
Speaker 1: Since you came here [Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory, Ohio Department of Agriculture, Reynoldsburg, Ohio] in--was it '95 [1995] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ninety-six [1996], I believe.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ninety-six [1996], okay when you came to Ohio.  Has the computer had a major impact on how you do your work or at least in how you communicate your--the findings of your research to other folks?
Speaker 2: Yes, it has, because, I mean, all my work, pretty much is done on the computer in terms of the relay of information to practitioners and other agencies.  It's pretty much done through the computer.  I mean, email is integral to my day.  So, it has definitely made a difference, and I--when I was in school--young, only women took typing.  But now it's imperative, because of the computer, that everybody know how to type, so.
Speaker 1: So it's basically the word processing then that you would use the computer for?  No complex math formula (laughter) or anything?
Speaker 2: Predominantly word processing.
Speaker 1: Word processing, okay.
Speaker 2: We do have a laboratory information management system that's slightly varied from word processing that we also use, too.
Speaker 1: Okay, and are there other forms of technology, in addition to the computer and information science, that really are important to the way you conduct your research here in Columbus [sic. Reynoldsburg, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Well, the microscope is very important, and there's a lot of new changes in the microscope in terms of photography, particularly.  So you can capture images with a camera and then relay those images to other individuals throughout the country, via the computer.  So, the microscope is particularly important in my everyday work.
Story_ID: 259930
Speaker 1: Now, you said the Internet is also important to get new information--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and also to share information with other people.  Do you trust it?  Are the articles edited as carefully before they're published online as perhaps they might be before they go into a scientific journal?
Speaker 2: I usually go to abstracts that are actually in scientific journals.  So when I go to a non-refereed site, I'm a little cautious, but my primary references are articles that are actually in scientific journals, the abstracts.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, can you explain that whole refereeing process?  How does that work with scientists?
Speaker 2: When you complete your research prior to the getting the article published, you submit it to a journal.  That journal will submit it to people that are specialists in your field.  They'll review that article, see if it seems factual, if the research is sound, if you've done the appropriate controls.  And then, they'll say whether or not it's eligible to be published.  And so you have some confidence that the data that you're reviewing or reading is correct, because it's been reviewed by your peers.
Speaker 1: Okay, and with the team of scientists that you work with here, are there recent publications that perhaps the viewers of this interview could go to and find out more about the work that you've done in recent years?
Speaker 2: Most of us have published some articles in the past few years, yes, so there are publications.
Speaker 1: Are these coauthored publications?
Speaker 2: Yes, they are.
Speaker 1: Okay, so we could check for your name as one of the authors--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --for this.  Okay, and what journals primarily would we see your publications in?
Speaker 2: Journal of [the] American Veterinary [Medical] Association, JAVMA, Veterinary Pathology, I think there's a Toxicologic Pathology.
Story_ID: 259931
Speaker 1: Are there new frontiers for you as a scientist--and maybe I shouldn't ask that, but there's nobody else in the room (laughter)--are you happy here [Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory, Ohio Department of Agriculture, Reynoldsburg, Ohio] or is there something more that you'd like to do as a scientist interested in veterinary medicine?
Speaker 2: I get the seven-year itch.  So, I've actually been here seven years (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I like what I do.  I'm happy here.  I find that every seven years, I like a little change too, though.  So there may be something.  I mean I've worked for academia, for state government.  So industry or federal government might be something that I'd be interested in the future.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how do you keep, how does the work remain challenging for you?  There are thousands of animals and sometimes, I suppose, you're running the same tests on the same tissue, it's not like that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No--well, you do, but you never know, when you open up an animal, exactly what you're going to find.  So it's always a mystery.  There's something always exciting about opening up a carcass.  I mean, it may be routine, but it may be something odd.  And, at least once a week, something odd comes up.  And just before you came in, I actually was looking at something odd on the slides.  So, there's always something new and exciting going on.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we're gonna have to wait for the publication of that article to find out what it was (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it won't get published (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, can you say at this point?
Speaker 2: No, it was just a cat had some neurologic disease, and it has strange lesions in its spinal cord and its brain.  And it probably has more than one thing going on.  But it was--it's not a routine lesion that I would normally see.  And, and that makes the day exciting.  I mean you have to look stuff up, and learn new things.
Story_ID: 259932
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything else that you would like to include in your story as a HistoryMaker that I failed to ask you about?
Speaker 2: One of the things that I think is most important in my success is that I have a strong family, not only my parents [Julie Moss Grimes and George Grimes, Jr.] and my brother [George Grimes III], but my extended family.  And I think that has made me a more confident individual, knowing that I'm loved and cared for.  And as I said, I mean I can't say that I had major trials and tribulations.  I've had them, but they haven't been as bad, because I have that strong family background.  So I think that's important to stress, that the people that you love around you, supporting you is very beneficial in your success.
Speaker 1: So your father, with that strong [U.S.] military background, was not disappointed that you didn't go into the [U.S.] Army.  He supported your decision to pursue a career in science?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think he would have wanted me to go into the army (laughter).  Not his daughter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So.
Speaker 1: Now, how about his son?
Speaker 2: He never brought that up to my brother.
Story_ID: 259933
Speaker 1: May I ask about your brother?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I do have a sibling, and he's seventeen years younger than I am.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what's his name, please?
Speaker 2: George Washington Grimes III.
Speaker 1: I think you did mention (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mentioned him, but I--you didn't really bring him up.  So.
Speaker 1: Because when you mentioned Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], I thought, she's gonna say George Washington Carver.  But you didn't.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you didn't.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  George Washington.  All right.  And he's a teacher you said?
Speaker 2: Yes, he is.
Speaker 1: Okay, what grade?
Speaker 2: He's a P.E. [physical education] teacher.
Speaker 1: Oh, all right--
Speaker 2: He's not currently teaching, but he's a P.E. teacher.
Speaker 1: At the elementary level?
Speaker 2: At the elementary level.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And are there other members of that extended family who played an especially significant role in shaping your world view as a scientist?
Speaker 2: I have two aunts that--well, as a scientist, no, but as a person, I have two aunts, an Aunt Juanita [Moss Brown] and an Aunt Sis, that played a particular role.
Speaker 1: Would you like to comment further on that, the positive difference that they made?
Speaker 2: Both of them are very, kind, generous individuals.  And my Aunt Juanita has been very successful in business.  Actually, she was the secretary for the C.E.O. of Lockheed Martin, but she's always had that very human touch, always been very down-to-earth with whoever she met.  So her success has made me strive for success in life.  And then my Aunt Sis has the most generous heart.  She'd give to anyone the shirt off her back.  She truly is that kind of person.  So she's made me a kinder, gentler person, just knowing her.
Speaker 1: Okay, Aunt Sis.  Is that her given name?
Speaker 2: Aunt Rosie [Grimes Seymour].
Speaker 1: Aunt Rosie, okay.  Nicknames are interesting too, but she's not the only sister, right?  Are these sisters, the two aunts that you're telling me about?
Speaker 2: Actually, they're not.  They're my mother's [Julia Moss Grimes] sister and my father's [George Grimes, Jr.] sister.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, and aunts--
Speaker 2: My mother is Sister too.  Her name is Sis, Sis.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they call her Sister (laughter).
Story_ID: 259934
Speaker 1: At this point in history, what are, in your opinion, the greatest challenges facing African Americans in the 21st century?
Speaker 2: I think our financial stability is very important.  Currently, with this social security issue, I'm very concerned about our elderly and how they will survive financially without social security because they don't have retirement plans.  Many of them have been--what's the word I'm looking for--they've worked in the homes as--
Speaker 1: Domestics.
Speaker 2: Domestic service, so they don't have retirement plans.  You know, they don't have the ability to choose appropriate investments.  So I worry tremendously about the elderly in our society, particularly, poor, black elderly people and their financial stability, as well as young people.  I mean, it is very hard to be successful in this life.  And we don't have, as black people, we don't have--we always joke that we're happy when someone dies, and we have enough money to bury them, 'cause we don't have a legacy in terms of money to leave them.  So until we can start to acquire wealth that we can pass along the generations, I think that I'm going to be concerned about our race.
Story_ID: 259935
Speaker 1: What do you hope that your legacy will be for the next generation?
Speaker 2: I want young people to know that if they strive to accomplish something that they can do that, and that whatever barriers they might see, it's possible to overcome those barriers, to accomplish your goals and even little ole me from Notasulga, Alabama was able to be relatively successful in life.
Story_ID: 259936
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Zora Neale Hurston, 'Their Eyes Were Watching God,' she mentions Notasulga [Alabama] in her story.  So, actually, her parents [Lucy Hurston and John Hurston] were from Notasulga.
Speaker 1: Well, that was gonna be one of my questions off camera.  Is that the town that--
Speaker 2: Yes, that's the town.
Speaker 1: --Zora Neale Hurston was born?
Speaker 2: Well, her parents are from there.  I think that's where she was born.  Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, this--it's, I'm glad that you brought that up because that made-for-television movie, 'Their Eyes Were Watching God' starring Halle Berry was just on TV--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: -- a couple weeks ago (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it was.
Speaker 1: --on a Sunday evening, co-produced by Oprah [Winfrey] and some other folks.  But, again, this great writer, black female writer from the Harlem Renaissance period, has Alabama roots.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Which I didn't find out about until later, because she talked so much about Eatonville [Florida].  Yeah, now what is it about this Eatonville that was so fascinating for Hurston.  You think there was some shame about the Alabama roots or greater pride in Eatonville (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, no, she brought it up in her book.  She mentioned, you know, she mentions, actually uses the word Notasulga in 'Their Eyes Were Watching God.'  I think it's in the first chapter.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: So, and there's a Plainter [ph.] mill that she talks about, which my grandfather worked at.  So there were places in the book that I recognized.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, but she lived longer in Eatonville probably, so.
