Story_ID: 616631
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Henry Louis Gates, Jr. [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.], H-E-N-R-Y, L-O-U-I-S, G-A-T-E-S, J-R.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I am the Alphonse Fletcher University Professor at Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and the director of the W.E.B. Du Bois Institute for African and African American Research [W.E.B. Du Bois Research Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.
Speaker 1: It's--
Speaker 2: April 29th, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In the Du Bois Institute.
Story_ID: 616632
Speaker 1: Before we get into depth, there are five li- lightweight questions that I am compelled to ask anyway, even though we don't have a lot of time, that only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Spaghetti--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --with meat sauce.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Navy blue--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --which is like sapphire. It's my birthstone.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: All right, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: What you talking about?
Story_ID: 616633
Speaker 1: So I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Henry Louis Gates, Sr.], but we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Pauline Augusta Coleman Gates [Pauline Coleman Gates], Pauline Augusta, is standard, Coleman, C-O-L-E-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 17th, 1916 and she was born in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: All right. Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what are the stories from that side?
Speaker 2: Oh, I can trace my family on both sides back to my fourth great-grandparents. So, my mother's third great-grandfather was John Redman, he's my fourth great-grandfather, and John Redman mustered into the Patriot army, the Continental Army, on Christmas Day, 1778 in Winchester, Virginia, and was mustered out in April, 18--April, 1784, and he got a pension from the United States government for his service. He was a free Negro and because of that, my brother, Paul [Paul Gates], and I are members of the Sons of the American Revolution.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He died about 1819, I think. On the same side, we can identify two sets of fourth great-grandparents. They happened to have lived in the same county, Hardy County, Virginia, which is now West Virginia. Isaac Clifford is my fourth great-grandfather. He, too, was a free Negro. He--we have an interesting paper trail on him because--both of these men were born about 1760, we guess, because a white man named Riley [sic. James Ryan], who lived down the road from Isaac Clifford, captured him and tried to make him a slave on his farm and Isaac actually sued for his freedom and half a dozen white men testified on his behalf in the court case in seventeen seventy- 1795 and 1796, and he was freed for wrongful imprisonment, which is a legal term for, when a free person, among other things, when a free person is, someone tries to impress them back into slavery. So we have a very extensive paper trail. My family owned property, they were free on that line from the middle of the 18th century. They owned property. Some of the property my family, my cousins still own, and they never moved. You know, these are ancestors who were born 250 years ago and they lived thirty miles from where I was born and this, I was born in the Alleghany Mountains of, in the Potomac River basin, halfway about, between Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Now, for some reason in the haste of this, I forgot to ask you your date of birth and place of birth.
Speaker 2: September 16th, 1950, Keyser, West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, so when the world's best genealogist in my family tree, the people who do the family trees, my guess on finding your roots, I was astonished. I mean, I was floored. We knew a lot about the, the Gates side of the family, but nothing, really, about either side of the family. Not, considering the irony that all these records were in two courthouses thirty miles from where I was born, it's amazing. So American history and Gates family history, in my mother's case, Coleman family history, were inextricably intertwined, through paper.
Speaker 1: So do you think if you had not been Henry Louis Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] looking for this, would you, you think there--would have been likely that you would have found any of this information?
Speaker 2: Oh, since the revolution in the digitization of records, anyone would have found it now but we found it when I was doing my first PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] series on genealogy and genetics ['African American Lives'] and that was, we were doing the research in 2005. One genealogist, Johni Cerny, found three sets of my third great-grandparents and then a fourth genealogist, going into the archives in, the local archives in Hardy Co- excuse me, a fourth genealogist named Jane Ailes [Jane E. Ailes], going into the archives in Hardy County, Virginia, found the next layer but there is a detailed paper trail. No one had really looked before until digitization. Now we can do it in seconds, what it would take months and months even years to do and a lot of money, someone with a lot of leisure time and great patience, looking page by page, record by record, my god, and now you just go to the computer, type in a name, and your ancestors pop up on the ancestry.com database.
Story_ID: 616634
Speaker 1: Now is there--there's another aspect of ancestry I want to ask you about. Is that most people don't know anything about their African ancestors. Do yo- you at least have some sort of a genealogical fix on where they might have come from, right?
Speaker 2: A genetic fix.
Speaker 1: Genetic, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: We were talking about the genetic research--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah. No African American can find a genealogical connection to Africa. It's impossible. The records have been destroyed, but the closest you can get is to trace yourself back to the actual original ancestor who got off a boat and there's a woman named Polite [Thomalind Martin Polite] in South Carolina--there's a woman named Polite in South Carolina who is descendant of a slave named Priscilla and Priscilla was purchased by Elias Ball [Elias Ball II] in 1756. We know what ship she came on, the Hare, and we know where it came from, that's as close as you can get. So we go back to the port but then, where in Africa, what tribe, but through DNA, now we can tell. Some firms claim they can identify the tribe you're from, others, the region (yawns). That four o'clock thing, man, it's hitting me (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I always just, I just wonder, when I hear, you know, people talk about genetic research, I just wonder like how close they can come and I'm kind of skeptical (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, you can get the, yeah, oh you can get, it's, it's about, it's the fact that basically cousins sleep with cousins so you share mutations. If you have those mutations and a person who's Igbo has those mutations, you're descending from an Igbo. It's not rocket science, it's fascinating, it's really accurate. So, for a person like me, I'm genetically 50/50, European and Sub-Saharan Africa but they did a test, some genealogist, I'm sorry, put some geneticist to the test for the first series ['African American Lives'] and they said I'm most, closely conformed with and clustered to the Yoruba people. Only about 2 to 3 percent of the, our ancestors who came from Africa during the slave trade period came from Yoruba land but I have an affinity for the Yoruba people. I like their culture, their food, their literature, the music. One of my best friends is Yoruba and I've been to Nigeria a zillion times. So that doesn't surprise me, it makes me feel very good.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: But my great-great-grandfather, through my father [Henry Louis Gates, Sr.], was white and an Irishman and that's also been established. We knew that was true just by looking at ancestors in my oral lore but it's been confirmed by DNA. As the brothers say, "DNA don't lie."
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: You should take the test.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when it's affordable (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's ninety-nine dollars. Go to 23andMe [23andMe, Inc.] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, that's not bad.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's really not bad, I'm surprised.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's, 23andMe.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: That's the test that'll give your admixture. The company that claims to tell you your tribe, they are more expensive. They're three hundred dollars.
Story_ID: 616635
Speaker 1: So moving forward through the Civil War period, what were your ancestors doing on your mother's side? Can you give, do you have any idea?
Speaker 2: Well, on my, those two sets (cough), those two sets of fourth great-grandparents on my mother's side, we can also identify one set on my father's side, my father's mother's side, and that was Joe [Joseph Bruce] and Sarah Bruce. They're my fourth great-grandparents, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, I'm trying not to get them mixed up, these two sides mixed up.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the first sides, the Redmans, the Redmans and the Cliffords are my fourth great-grandparents on my mother's side. My mother was, again, Pauline Coleman [Pauline Coleman Gates]. On my, but her mother [Margaret Howard Coleman] was a Redman, and her grandmother [Lucy Clifford Howard] was a Clifford, so you could see how it works. On my father's side (yawns), I need an espresso, on my father's side, it's four o'clock, man, I've got to get that caffeine sugar thing, on my father's side, through his mother who was a Redman, she's descended from the Bruces. Joe and Sarah Bruce are my fourth great-grandparents. We actually have the will, we actually know who owned them. They were slaves owned by Abraham Van Meter and in his will in 1823, he freed them and, one of their children, and then promised to free the other children upon the death of his wife, Elizabeth [Elizabeth Van Meter]. She died in 1836 and all of them were freed. So, again, we have a tremendous paper trail and they all lived near each other. All these people knew each other and their descendants. They all lived in the same county [Hardy County, Virginia; Hardy County, West Virginia] and there was a handful of black people up there in these hollers with all these white people and I'm a Redman on both my mother's side and my father's side (laughter), 'cause there's so few black people there. On the Civil War, several members of my family fought in the United States Colored Troops. My [maternal] grandmother's uncle, J.R. Clifford [John Robert Clifford], was the first black lawyer in the State of West Virginia and he's on a stamp, United States postal stamp, in the pioneers of the Civil Rights Movement series. He was a member of the Niagara Movement with Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] and, in fact, was the host of the 1906 meeting at Harpers Ferry, West Virginia. Harpers Ferry is about two hours, I guess, east of my hometown [Keyser, West Virginia]. So--
Speaker 1: So, so was he connected to Storer College [Harpers Ferry, West Virginia] there?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Everybody was around there, but he had a law practice and he had his own newspaper. He was a newspaper editor and publisher, it was called, the Pioneer Press. These are my genes, man, that's where I come from.
Speaker 1: Okay, there are writers and, Pioneer Press, okay. So, okay, so moving forward to your grandparents, I guess. What were they doing?
Speaker 2: My paternal grandparents--
Speaker 1: No maternal.
Speaker 2: My maternal grandparents, my grandfather died in 1945. He was a janitor, a laborer, not a jani- he was a laborer at the Westvaco paper company [West Virginia Pulp and Paper Company; Westvaco Corporation]. His name was Paul Coleman and my grandmother was a housewife, she had twelve children. On my father's side, his father [Edward St. Lawrence Gates] was, had his own business, and his grandfather [Edward Gates] did. They had a chimney sweep business and a janitorial business and he, my grandfather was the janitor at the First National Bank [First National Bank and Trust Company of Western Maryland] in Cumberland, Maryland, and my grandmother, Gertrude Helen Redman [Gertrude Helen Redman Gates], was a housewife.
Speaker 1: Well your father's name is the same as yours except a senior [Henry Louis Gates, Sr.], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what was your father's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My father was born June the 8th, 1913 in Patterson Creek, West Virginia.
Speaker 1: And that's close by?
Speaker 2: It's all there (laughter), in that same thirty miles.
Speaker 1: All right, all right. Now did, can you go back as far on your father's side as you--
Speaker 2: I already did, remember through my father's mother's side.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and my father's father's side, we could go back to Jane Gates, who was a slave, who was born in 1819. This is the only side that we can trace on my family tree where the person was not freed before the end of the Civil War. Jane's children were all fathered by the same man, she said, that's what she told her children. Her children all looked white and according to the DNA analysis, he was an Irishman because I have the O'Neill haplotype, my Y DNA, and it comes from, well, it's very common in Ireland. About 10 percent of all the men in Dublin [Ireland] have the same Y DNA signature.
Story_ID: 616636
Speaker 1: What did your mother [Pauline Coleman Gates] say about growing up? What was her description of growing up?
Speaker 2: Of what?
Speaker 1: Growing up? What are the stories, or what stories did your mother talk about or what do you know about her growing up in--
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was a very brilliant woman. Everyone always said that and I knew her for a long, long time and she was, she was very superior, smartest kid in her class. She wasn't able to go to college. Her family was too poor. She worked in order to help her brothers and sisters go to college and several of them did. One, two, three, four of her brothers went to college. One became a university professor, professor of biology at a historically black [HBCU], Prairie View A&M [Prairie View State Normal and Industrial College; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas]. One went to BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], became a minister, a prominent Methodist minister and two took associate degrees and worked at the Westvaco paper company [West Virginia Pulp and Paper Company; Westvaco Corporation] where my father [Henry Louis Gates, Sr.] worked. My mother's family were very poor because they had twelve kids and my grandfather, Paul Coleman, was a laborer at the paper company. One day he rose quickly, hit his head abruptly against something and he died that night. So he probably got a clot, aneurism and stroked out.
Speaker 1: So I suppose the family suffered financially, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, they had so many people they all went to work. This is 1945 and they were, remember my mom was born in 1916. These were people who were adults. So they had, they had a big house and, well they had to, but they're, they were thought to be, probably as a group, the richest black people in Piedmont, West Virginia. They did well, they had a lot of stature. The Gates lived very well. They owned property. Jane Gates bought her own house, the first bit of property in 1870, five years after her life as a slave ended. We speculate that that money was given to her by the white man who fathered her children but after that, they, they owned businesses and owned property. My father was born on our farm, two hundred acre farm, in Patterson Creek [West Virginia], which the family sold in 1926, but there'd been, the Gates' have had continuous home owning since 1870.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they were all mulattos. They had light skin privilege, very prominent family in my father's hometown, Cumberland, Maryland. Cumberland, I should explain that the region in West Virginia where I was born is literally on the Maryland border. So if you just, you could throw a stone over to Maryland. It's just a small bridge that's connected, it's on the Potomac River.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, that region when you're trying to go from, west of D.C. [Washington, D.C.] to D.C. through there, you go Maryland, Pennsylvania, West Virginia, you can, you know, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Used to go on [U.S.] Route 50, used to go on Route 50 from Columbus [Ohio] to Washington. It goes right through Keyser, West Virginia, where I was born, and now there're interstates that go very near there.
Story_ID: 616637
Speaker 1: So these are the standard questions you ask everybody in HistoryMakers? It's great (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: How many people in the archives?
Speaker 2: About 2,500.
Speaker 1: That's great. Just black people?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's fantastic.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then they just sit there in the archives, I mean, these interviews?
Speaker 2: Well there's a, there's a system for their use. I mean, some are, well the whole collection's going to the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Oh good.
Speaker 2: And then there's a, they're fed through a program, the Carnegie Mellon [Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] device, where you can search everybody's interview--
Speaker 1: Oh, great.
Speaker 2: --for specific names, dates, place, geographic locations and stuff.
Speaker 1: And that's why you standardize the--
Speaker 2: Concepts things, yeah, so we try to, you know, ask the same, similar, same and similar questions on the, I guess on an outline form and then we zero in on specific things that the person is doing in their career or--
Speaker 1: That's great.
Speaker 2: --you know, that's how it goes.
Speaker 1: We got to go. You got one more question. I've got to be interviewed by the students upstairs, but we'll pick up. I mean, just tell them that I don't, I didn't know it was three hours or I wouldn't have let you come.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I can do it over the summer after I'm filming. So get your last question in.
Speaker 2: Well what do you think about The HistoryMakers archive (laughter)? That's where--I think that's a good sound bite for this or--
Speaker 1: Okay, this would be great. Whoever thought of The HistoryMaker archive, HistoryMakers?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Whoever thought of The HistoryMakers archives should get the Spingarn Medal from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. It is a brilliant, brilliant way to preserve our generation's history. Just think if we have had, could possibly have had the transcript of interviews for Frederick Douglass and, and Paul Cuffee and Richard Allen and Phillis Wheatley. I mean, my god, just the simplest questions, and the value of this is that it establishes, in a searchable order, the facts, or at least the memory of facts that prominent people, history makers, have about their ancestry, as well as the other things that you guys ask. It means that our generation will never be lost, that the history of our generation will never be lost. Every scholar of African American studies spent so much time trying to resurrect the story just to analyze it. We have to resurrect the tradition before we can explicate it and what you're doing is interrupting that, that terrible process of broken testimony, broken memory, and I admire it. I'm honored to be part of the archive.
