Story_ID: 76694
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Brenda Gaines, B-R-E-N-D-A, G-A-I-N-E-S.
Speaker 1: And is that, that your, your birth name?
Speaker 2: Yes it is.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: July 22nd, 1949, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Financial Services.  I'm the President and CEO [Chief Executive Officer] of Diners Club North America.
Speaker 1: Okay and one time I think it's important to mention you were Deputy Mayor of the City of Chicago.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Under--
Speaker 2: Under Harold Washington, Mayor of the City of Chicago.  I served in two positions with the mayor, Commissioner of Housing and Deputy Mayor.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is January 24th, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Chicago, Illinois, at The HistoryMakers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's good enough.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 76695
Speaker 1: Before we get into depth, there are five "People" Magazine-ish type questions we always ask, and they just require a short answer.  And we do this to everybody.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first question is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I'm ashamed to say but it's, it's, it's really junk food.  It's Chicago hot dogs and cheeseburgers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring and Fall I would say are the favorite times of the year.  Chicago's a beautiful city and particularly I think in the Spring when everything's starting to bloom.  And in the Fall when the leaves start to turn.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Anywhere warm, actually.  I love Maui in Hawaii, and I love Los Cabos in Mexico.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I really don't, I don't.  I don't think I say anything all of the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Not a quote from anyone that you--
Speaker 2: No, I don't, I don't.
Story_ID: 76696
Speaker 1: All right well I wanna ask you about your family tree.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: How far can you go back, what do you know about your distant relatives and do you--does it go back to the 19th Century?  Have any stories from slavery?
Speaker 2: I don't.  I do have, I do have some information on my, on my mother's side and on her paternal side of the family that go back to slavery.  I did not bring that with me, so I don't have that right here.  But we did do some research on there.  I don't have any other genealogy information.  They were from, they were from Tennessee, from the eastern part of Tennessee.  A little place called Cleveland, Tennessee.  And I do name--their name was Spriggs.  My grandfather's name was Anderson Spriggs and his father's name was Anderson Spriggs, I.  And he, his slave name had been Murphy.  And his father changed their name from Murphy to Spriggs.  So I do know that.
Speaker 1: Now that's significant, you know.  It shows, you know, someone, you know exercising some self determine--out of that situation.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes it does.
Speaker 1: Trying to change their life, you know, some of them.  Anything else, I mean at all?
Speaker 2: No, not that I can, can think of offhand.  I do know--I, I can trace kind of a--you know we have it in writing, how you trace that side of the family.  But beyond that, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Nothing on your father's side at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Were they from Tennessee too?
Speaker 2: No.  My father was born in North Chicago, Illinois, which is about forty miles north of here.  And his parents were from Kansas.  But really not a lot of information about them.
Speaker 1: Kansas is significant.  A lot of people you know, they didn't get to Kansas until after--well the majority of the black folks didn't get there till after the Civil War, you know.  But--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And they migrated to Illinois probably in--let's see, my dad was born in 1926, and they had been in Illinois a long time.  So probably I would say in--around 1915 or so, came to Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now did you know your grandparents?
Speaker 2: I did, I did.  Again, my mother's parents, both her mother and father, were from Tennessee, from Cleveland, Tennessee.  I knew his mother and my grandmother's mother, they were still living till I was in high school; grade school/high school.  So I, I did know them as well.  My father's side, I knew my grandparents, but not their, their parents.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you knew your great-grandparents on your mother's side.
Speaker 2: I, I knew my great-grandmother on my mother's side.  Her name was Ida Hoyle.  She was from Tennessee as well, and she had three children.  And they--she came to Illinois probably--let's see my mom was fifteen.  Probably around 1940 or so.
Speaker 1: Now how do you spell Hoy?
Speaker 2: Hoyle, H-O-Y-L-E, yes.
Story_ID: 76697
Speaker 1: All right.  Well tell me about your father.  What--can, can you give us his name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His name is Clarence, C-L-A-R-E-N-C-E Gaines, G-A-I-N-E-S, Junior.  He was born on August the 16th, 1926 in North Chicago, Illinois, and he is still living in North Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what kind of person is he and what is he--what does he do?
Speaker 2: He's a wonderful person, a gentle man.  He worked at the United States Steel Mill in Waukegan, Illinois until the steel mill closed, which was probably early '70s [1970's], early '70's [1970s].  He is--was an Alderman in the, in North Chicago, Illinois for many years.  And is very much involved in civic activities.  He's very involved in starting a cultural center in North Chicago.  Is, you know, very involved in the black Navy veterans in North Chicago and they're trying to get a memorial established for them even as we speak.  So just a very giving person, very involved in First Corinthian Church in that community as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now North Chicago is the home of Great Lakes--
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: Naval Training.
Speaker 2: That's it, that is it, and that's the place I grew up.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.  So there's a lot of--I know black men and women who wanted to be in the Navy, you know, went there from all over the United States at one time.
Speaker 2: Yes they did.
Speaker 1: Lot of people.
Speaker 2: They do, and they still do.  It's not as large as it used to be, but they, they still do.  My father actually was in the [U.S] Marines and you know just, just involved in making North Chicago a better place.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was a Marine at one time.
Speaker 2: He was, served in World War II.
Speaker 1: Okay, did he serve overseas?
Speaker 2: He went to Guam.  He wasn't, you know, at the front or wasn't engaged in fighting, but he was in Guam.
Speaker 1: Guam was a--
Speaker 2: He was.  But he didn't--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a--yeah, specific campaign, but he really, you know.  By the time he was there, the war was almost over, so--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you know where he went to school and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: He went to Waukegan Township High School.  At the time that he and my mother were growing up, there was really only one high school, North Chicago High School had not been built then.  And so everyone in that area went to Waukegan Township.
Speaker 1: So this was an integrated school?
Speaker 2: It was, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How many--I mean what's the percentage of, would you guess of black folks to--
Speaker 2: Now I would say in North Chicago, I'm really guessing.  But I would say either 50/50 or sixty percent African Americans to forty.  It's changed significantly.  It was probably the [unclear] when I was, was growing up.
Speaker 1: But, but for a long time it's been a significant group of black people.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes there have been, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you and your father close, or you interact a lot with your father?
Speaker 2: I did.  You know I'm an only child, and so I interacted a lot with both of my parents.  And they are very supportive.  Were very supportive then, they are now and I talk to them virtually every day.  If I'm traveling for more than three days, then I talk to them at least one time while I'm gone, so we're very close.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father calls me every, every weekend at 10:30 a.m. promptly, no matter where he is.  And he waits till 10:30 just to make sure I'm up.  So--.
Story_ID: 76698
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well tell us about your mother.  What is her name and how do you spell it?
Speaker 2: Her name is DeLoise Gaines, it's D-E, capital L-O-I-S-E, G-A-I-N-E-S.  She was born March 15th, 1929 in Cleveland, Tennessee.  She came to North Chicago [Illinois] when she was about 15.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was she a Spriggs before?
Speaker 2: She was a Spriggs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was a Spriggs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And well tell me about her, you know, what, what--what does she do?
Speaker 2: Again, she's a very determined person, very nice, very giving.  She, she's retired now.  She worked at Fort Sheridan, which was the Army base that was there, it was closed probably, what, ten years ago or so.  But she retired before it was closed.  And then she sold real estate in the Lake County area.  But she's retired again and does volunteer work.  She teaches computer skills at the senior citizens home there, and she serves on one of the boards or commissions for the city of North Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so was she working most of the time when you were--
Speaker 2: All of the time.  Both my parents worked, and you know because my father worked at the steel mill, there was--his shifts changed.  So sometimes it's seven to three, three to eleven, eleven to seven.  When I was young, my grandparents you know, were very close.  So I could stay there.  And then after that, it wasn't--either he typically would be home when I came home from school, so--
Speaker 1: All right now, now did your parents ever tell you about how they met?
Speaker 2: They met in high school.  When my mother migrated from Tennessee to North Chicago, they were going to high school together.  They weren't married right then, they were married later.  But that's how they met, in high school.  And they were friends and I've seen photos of them and their friends.  Actually I knew most of their friends later in life 'cause North Chicago is a very small town.  And they actually built a home right next to my mom's best friend.  And so I grew up with my mom's best friend and her husband and their kids.  So very, very small community at that time.
Story_ID: 76699
Speaker 1: Okay now I want you to reflect back, tell me about what it was like to grow up in North Chicago [Illinois], and what were the--some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up there.
Speaker 2: Well I, I guess when I think of North Chicago, I think of--I think of a very friendly community.  I think of the lake.  We did not live on the lake, the lake was very close just like Chicago 'cause North Chicago's on the lake.  I think of the steel mills which were technically in Waukegan, but I'm looking at the whole area because as I, you know was growing up, kind of the area was North Chicago, Waukegan and Zion.  So I'm thinking of the, the, of the steel mills.  I think in terms of North Chicago, it was very quiet, very quiet.  Very large trees, huge oak trees, Dutch Elm before Dutch Elm Disease came along.  Wide streets.  Not a lot of sounds.  I think of seeing sailors, you know because of the Great Lakes Naval Base.  If, you know particularly on Sheridan Road in North Chicago.  I think of going to school with a lot of, of children who were children of people who were stationed at the Navy, so who had a lot of experiences in living in other countries, which is very interesting.  I think of, of going to church then, because every Sunday I didn't--I went to church no matter what.  And I think of the big hats on women in, in church.  That's, that's about--in terms of sights and sounds, that's it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You, you remember the kind of food you all cooked at home, or--
Speaker 2: Kind of regular food, nothing out of--my, my father had a, had a heart attack, actually he was quite young, he was thirty-six years old and had a heart attack and thank, you know, I thank the Lord every day he hasn't had one since then.  So our diet changed significantly.  So we, you know I think of eating lamb and you know, skim milk and no fats and things then.  But that's all I can think of.  I can think of a story, though, an interesting story about grits, which my mother tells to this day.  And that's I was--because my grandparents were from Tennessee, every summer I would go to Tennessee with them.  And we'd drive down 41 and one, one particular summer I remember having grits at one of my grandmother's friends, and I just loved them.  So probably in about October or November I said to my mother, well you know I really wanna go back to Tennessee.  And she's like well why?  And I said because those grits were really good.  And she just kind of looked at me and said you wanna go to Tennessee for grits?  We do have grits here in North Chicago.  But I'd never had 'em at home.  And so she said don't worry; I'll go get grits for you.  But I was, I was the only one in the household who ate them.  In terms of, you know I today, I love grits, I love you know, collard greens, I love chitlins.  My mother never cooked a green until I was an adult.  I cooked them.  But we always had them at her friends' homes, so which was good.  My father, you know, was very basic, meat and potatoes.  That's the end of the, end of the subject.  But my favorite, my favorite foods when I think about that, probably in growing up was pinto beans.  And we have a joke about when something gets really rough and which happens, particularly you know in the workforce you have really bad days.  And I'll call my parents and I'll say do you have enough beans in the house, 'cause I may be leaving my job today.  And they say if there's always beans around, you don't have to worry about it, we'll always have beans.  So that's a family joke.
Story_ID: 76700
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you enjoy going down south?
Speaker 2: I did.  Well I had cousins there, and so it was nice being there.  The one thing, it was--particularly when I was young, and I actually only--I probably stopped going there when I was probably a sophomore in high school.  It was, it was very different and it took a lot to get used to because you know driving on 41, there were only certain places we could stop because in those days they still had signs, you know, "Coloreds Only" or "Whites Only".  And I remember there was a little place in Louisville that we would stop.  I can't--I have no I--I can't remember the name, but it was the same place that we would stop to get breakfast every year.  It didn't matter what--and I remember asking my grandparents why are we stopping at the same place every year?  And you know they said well this is really the only place that we can eat here.  And in Cleveland [Tennessee], it was different and my cousins always tried to kind of steer me in the right direction.  I remember going to movie theater and I actually just--in North, in North Chicago or Waukegan, I loved to sit in the balcony, so that was my favorite place to sit.  And I said to them, you know where, where do you wanna sit?  And they said well we can only sit in the balcony.  I said, I said well I love to sit--that's where I like to sit 'cause it's more fun.  And they said well that's all--the only place we can sit.  And I said well why?  Because I didn't understand that at the--when I first started going there.  So that was, you know, I didn't like that.  But what I did like is that there was a lot of family there and I had an opportunity to interact with family and I had a cousin around the same age as I am.  Actually has the same name.  Her name was Brenda Elaine, I'm Brenda Joyce.  So it was just kind of fun hanging out with family.
Story_ID: 76701
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what are the things that you liked to do when you were coming up?  You know what kind of a little girl were you?
Speaker 2: I studied.  I used to roller skate.  There are not, there are not a lot of activities in North Chicago [Illinois].  So you'd be out riding your bicycle.  When I was young I rode bicycles and hung out with the kids in the neighborhood.  As I got older, I went to--roller skating was probably the, the pastime.  We would go to a roller rink up in Zion, Illinois.  I would say--and then there were like little social clubs that, you know people, people had.  I was a member of that.  In junior high, when did I start--I guess junior high.  I used to play the clarinet and saxophone and competed in contest throughout the state.  And then when I got to high school, I decided I can't march, you know, I have other things to do.  So I could not be in the marching band.  A lot of studies to do.  I did the typical things, I mean and, and kind of in grade school and junior high.  I mean I had--I took ballet, music lessons and I guess that, that's it.  In high school, I was involved in drama class, which is very interesting because I liked it then; I don't particularly like doing things like this now.  So I'm not sure what happened.
Speaker 1: So, so you were in, into drama and then you wouldn't want to--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Not doing it now?
Speaker 2: No, I actually--there was a group called "Mask and Gavel".  And I actually used to compete in competitions around the state again, in terms of poetry reading, extemporaneous speaking and things like that.  But it's not something I enjoy now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Those are unique experiences.  Not, not everybody does those things, you know.  But some people do, but very unique.
Speaker 2: Well again, there are not a lot of things to do in North Chicago.
Speaker 1: You didn't watch television a lot or listen to music, or--
Speaker 2: Listened to music a lot.  And we had house parties, you know.  We, we used to call them quarter parties.  And people would have them in their basements with the red lights.  Of course my parents were always around and would keep a close eye on everything.  But that's what we--we did a lot of house parties, you know because there's really no place to go and that was fun.  And, and listened to--what we now refer to as "Oldies".  But listened to a lot of Smokey Robinson and the Miracles and the Temptations.  Those were probably my favorites then.  Used to listen to a, a radio station out in Nashville, a DJ [Disc Jockey] called Randy.  You're shaking the head, you know Randy.
Speaker 1: LAC out of Gallatin, Tenne--
Speaker 2: Gallatin, Tennessee.  And so we used to listen to that.
Speaker 1: Randy the Record [unclear].
Speaker 2: That's it, that's it.
Speaker 1: You can get it all over the Midwest.
Speaker 2: It was great, it was great.  But yeah I, I did not watch a lot of TV then, I really didn't.  Probably more into music.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and taping music on the, you know, eight reel tapes, which you can't you know, see anymore.
Speaker 1: It was a eight track?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, the reel, the reel-to-reel.  My dad had a huge reel-to-reel tape when we first started taping.  And then kind of progressed from that to--so--. Okay.
Story_ID: 76702
Speaker 1: So well tell me about school.  We'll start with grade school.
Speaker 2: Most of--
Speaker 1: Where'd you go to school?
Speaker 2: I went to grade school in--at Central, Central Elementary School in North Chicago, Illinois.  It was not a--it was an integrated school, however most of the--in the individual class, there was probably one or two African Americans at the most.  The same thing in junior high school, I went to Neal Junior High School.  And then at the high school level, there was one high school.  But it's Central--I mean in elementary--in junior high, there are very--well not various--there were two junior high schools in West Chicago.  And elementary schools, there are a few more.  Good experience I'd say in, in elementary school.  Grade school, for the most part.  I mean I had a couple of experiences in both.  One in eighth grade and then one in high school, which were interesting.  I think kind of changed my perspective on, on things.  There was a, a teacher when I was in eighth grade who said to me one time and called me--asked me to stay after class and said you know Brenda, you know why do you--I think I had received a B on an exam and I was very upset.  And it was a paper that he graded.  This was--it was an English class.  I was very upset.  And he said well, you know why do you think you, you know why are you upset?  You got a B, you know.  And I said because I, I really should have received an A on this and I, I needed an A.  Needed, myself.  And he said well you know, I kind of noticed that before, you're, you really--you think that you really need to be or do better than anyone else.  And I said well I do.  And I said I know I do 'cause my parents told me that.  They said as an African American woman, and then they said you know, as a, as a black woman growing up, you're going to have to be better or do better than anyone else.  I said I think that's true.  And he just couldn't understand that.  And later of course I went home and told my parents.  Of course they came to the school and had a conversation with him.  But later at the end of that year he said to me, you know I've never--he was from Iowa.  And he said I've never had any experience with, with black children before.  And this was very different.  And he said I now have learned something as well.  And then the next occurrence was in high school, and it was with my guidance counselor.  You know I was, you know a good student; had great, wonderful grades and clearly planned to go to college.  And I was discouraged from doing so.  And the guidance counselor actually said well I really think that instead of getting on the college track in school, you know you should probably be a short order cook.  And I couldn't believe it.  I ran home and I only lived, you know, ten minutes from the high school walking.  And my parents made a beeline to that school and had a conversation with the counselor.  But you know one of the things they said is you know, you will have people tell you in your lifetime that you can't do something or that you shouldn't do something.  You can't listen to that.  You have to be determined.  Anything you want to do, you can do.  And I think at that particular time it really hit me that everybody does not want me to succeed.  Everybody does not want me to do whatever it is I can do.  And that I really have to, I have to keep that in perspective and I do.
Story_ID: 76703
Speaker 1: Okay now was the composition of your grade school reflective of the neighborhood you grew up in?  Were you--did you more in terms of--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes, yeah.  But the neighborhood again, this is a small community we're talking about.  So it just--you know it just happened--how many grade schools were there?  I don't know, three or four.  I'm trying to remember.  Three or four grade schools.  So you literally could have more minorities, you know, two streets over going to another school.  I mean so--but what happened is because you know I lived on, you know Elizabeth, on this side of Elizabeth, I was at this school.  And so there weren't as many minorities that went to that school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wondered in, in high--
Speaker 2: Had more, more people who went to--before they actually built a grade school that serviced Great Lakes Naval Station, you had a--tended to have a lot more people going to the grade school I went to from Great Lakes.
Speaker 1: I just wondered, speculate as to--then--were there--did the high school population reflect the, the black population in the city?
Speaker 2: Yes, the high school did because there's one high school.  Yes, the high school did.  High school, well you know was a feeder for all of the other schools in the, in the community.  So everybody went to high school, to the same high school.
Speaker 1: But you just--I guess thinking about what was done to you as a top student, I mean--
Speaker 2: I'm sure it was done to a lot of people.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just wondered what happened to those who were not top students and if, if, if the dropout rate amongst the black students was very high, you know.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't have facts on that.  But I really don't recall a lot of black students dropping out on the Chicago high--I really don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, just wondered.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no I don't.  Now I would say that I didn't see a lot of black students going to college afterwards, after graduating from high school.  I mean there were some, but not a lot.  But I really don't recall a lot of people dropping out of high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is it--the culture in the black community one, where a lot of black students' parents went to coll--had gone to college or, or this sort of thing?
Speaker 2: No.  I mean you know my parents didn't go to college, and I would say the majority of the parents of children did not.  May have gone, you know, for one or two years.  My mom did, went for two years.  But, no.  Most--a lot of people worked in the steel mill.  There was a foundry in North Chicago where my grandfather worked.  My grandfather worked at the foundry and he was a--on my mother's side--and was a minister, had a church here in Chicago, Kendrick Memorial for many years.
Speaker 1: Did you all attend that church, or--
Speaker 2: No, just on special occasions, too far.  They did it every--I mean he and my grandmother lived in North Chicago, but he had a church here.  And you know, I said they could go down, you know, the Kennedy Expressway, you know with a blindfold on 'cause they were on that road so many times.
Story_ID: 76704
Speaker 1: So tell me about some of your teachers in high school.  Were there, were there any teachers that took a special interest in you and wanted to help develop you?
Speaker 2: No.  I can't say--no.  No there wasn't anybody who just you know, spent a lot of time or encouraged me in high school.  No, my encouragement comes from my parents.
Speaker 1: Now you were a top student and still you didn't--nobody--
Speaker 2: No.  I mean I, I--you know other than the--in terms of the guidance counselor I talked about, I can't say that anyone else discouraged me.  But I don't see anyone who just really you know, said Brenda, you know why don't you think about this or why don't you think about that or no.
Speaker 1: Did you have any black teachers in high school?
Speaker 2: I had two.  I had a biology teacher and a Spanish teacher.  But you know they did not as well.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  Did, did, did you take Spanish or biology from them?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: They still didn't?
Speaker 2: They did not.  They did not, no.  No, they didn't.  As a matter of fact I, I, I must say that there were a number of incidents between me and the biology teacher.  But I'm not sure it had anything to do with--there were a number of incidents between him and a number of people, so--
Speaker 1: What was the problem?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well did you have any encouragement for many, any, any other sources other than your parents?  Did they--were you a part of a church or, or a community group?
Speaker 2: At that time I was attending First Corinthian Baptist Church.  But, but again I think it was my parents and my grandparents were still living at that time on my mother's side.  And so my grandmother was always a source of inspiration, really to me until she died in 1977.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did, now did you--what, what were your favorite courses in school?
Speaker 2: I'd say English.  I did not like math, still don't.  Which is a little interesting given kind of the financial area that I'm in.  But I, I would say English.  I actually liked biology.  I liked--I liked it even though, you know, there were some challenges with the teacher.  But not--but that's probably it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you involved in many social activities in high school?
Speaker 2: I was involved in the, in the speech activities that I talked about in terms of Mask and Gavel.  Drama, participating in high school plays.  We had a, a--kind of a social club of, of African American high school kids you know that we kind of did little parties.  We would have--throw little parties in different homes in the area.  And that, that's it.
Speaker 1: Were you central to the organization of those, of those parties?
Speaker 2: Central, I mean I was one of the members.  I don't know that was central.  They're small clubs.  I don't know how central I was.
Speaker 1: Some people [unclear].
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say--I think there--no, I think everybody was.  I mean it was--you know we kind of grew up together, some of us, so I think everybody was.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay so when it came time to graduate from high school, what were you--I forgot to ask you.  What was the outcome of the meeting?  Your parents going to school and--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Did he apologize?
Speaker 2: They apologized to my parents, yes.  You know the person was still there in the job, so it didn't change it, after they were still there.  And you know doing damage to some other child whose parents may not have gone there.  Or the child may not have said anything to their parents, you know, so--
Speaker 1: Was he an older person or, or a younger person?
Speaker 2: It was a woman.  And she was, I don't know, middle age like I am now.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Story_ID: 76705
Speaker 1: Okay. So when, when you were on the verge of graduation from--graduating from high school, did you know what you wanted to do with your life?
Speaker 2: I knew I was going to college.  At the time I, you know, thought I wanted to be an attorney.  And I attended University of Illinois in Champaign-Urbana.  And that probably changed probably after my freshman year.  And then I decided I wanted to be a social worker.  And of course that changed.  So I had a, a sociology and psychology double major at the University of Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what, what was that like?  Now that--you went downstate to Champaign.
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I tell you, it's a huge campus and I, I remember my first day I was totally intimidated.  I came from this little small town.  University of Illinois is as large as the community I grew up in.  But really after the first week it wasn't that bad because all the African American students who were on campus, campus kind of reach out to new students.  And so that was, that was nice.  And once you're there, you realize it's really just--it's smaller communities within the larger university community.  And so it, it wasn't so overwhelming.  The first semester I was actually in a dorm.  And typically at University of Illinois they will not let you pledge a sorority or fraternity until after your freshman year.  However for African American students, they would allow you to pledge or to, to move into a sorority or fraternity house earlier just because of the fact that there were very few African Americans at Illinois.  And so I did that my second semester, moved into the Alpha Kappa Alpha house on campus, and then pledged that sorority.  So you know again it was a very close knit I think group of students there.  We did--because there were only a few, I believe there were probably 300 out of what, twenty something thousand students at the time.  Three hundred African Americans undergraduate and graduate.  That year we--that year was '66 [1966].  That next year we sat in at the Chancellor's office to say what's the university going to do about bringing in more diversity into the school.  And there was a project that was started, Project 500, and Dean Shelly, Dean Clarence Shelly who I believe is still there, came into the university and they had a program that reached out.  Project 500 started reach out and, and encourage 500 additional African Americans to come to the University of Illinois.  And so they recruited all over the country for students to come.  And while I don't believe they, they have that program, they have had at least from my--what I hear, a similar program that reaches out to try to bring people into the, into the school.
Story_ID: 76706
Speaker 1: Now I just wanted to--this is so--the experience you just described is so much like the experience of so many people I know of this same age, you know.  How did they--I just wanna go back a little bit to, I guess to when you were a teenager.  Did you--were you paying attention to what was going on in the Civil Rights Movement on television with Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]?
Speaker 2: I was, absolutely.  And you know I was a member, active member actually, of the NAACP there [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and while certainly our experiences in North Chicago were nothing like what was going on in the south, there were still places in, in North Chicago [Illinois] or Waukegan [Illinois] where if you walked into a restaurant, you'd be sat by the kitchen.  And you know to this day, I have a thing about sitting by the kitchen.  You know in, in these days, people are--they have open kitchens with windows.  And I'm--I still don't want to sit anywhere near the kitchen.  Please show me to another table.  And so we, we would, you know we had marches down Genesee Street in Waukegan, the NAACP chapter.  And my other was involved in, in that as well.  So now I was--in 1968 when Dr. King was killed, I can remember I actually was in--over Spring break went to Atlanta [Georgia] and remember I left Chicago [Illinois]--I lived in North Chicago, but we were gone and I remember being in--the car broke down in a place called Calhoun, Georgia.  And I probably never been so nervous in my entire life.  The--they told us that they were not going to be able to fix it that evening.  And so we said well is there a place we can stay in town?  And they said well there's a Holiday Inn and kind of told us where it was.  But there was a, a black mechanic there who said you may not want to stay there.  You know if you can get to Atlanta [Georgia], you may want to do that.  And so we called--I was traveling with someone and we called his parents.  And they came and, and got us that night and we left the car there and, and went to Atlanta.  But, yes.  And it was amazing; I was watching one of the shows on Monday about Dr. [Martin Luther] King and it was just--saw some of the--some film that I had not seen before.  But what struck me is when I think about when he died and I, I kind of think about what's happened.  I think about so many things that aren't significantly better.  And that's tragic to me.
Speaker 1: What are some of those things that you--
Speaker 2: I think the, the fact that in many cases, you know people are still-we're still fighting for fairness in many cases.  And in little ways.  I mean I, I was in a store on Michigan Avenue just yesterday.  And a woman--there's a, a gift wrapping section, I was having something wrapped.  And it's a woman I see all the time.  And she said to me, you know, people are really upset here because they just hired someone to be a supervisor and there have been several, you know, black women in this store who've been here fifteen, twenty years, and they passed over.  And they said this happens all the time.  And she says you know, when will it stop?  Will it stop?  You know and when you think about that, here we are in 2003 and there's just not a sense of fairness.  And I, I see that and I hear that all, all the time.  I, you know I've seen it kind of in so many organizations that I've been in.  And I see it when you walk into a room in corporate America if you're in like a large group of--large room, you may be the only African American in the room.  Or maybe, maybe there's another person, but--you know.  This day and age, it shouldn't be like that.
Story_ID: 76707
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now can you remember now during the time that you were in college as a--the Civil Rights Movement had morphed--some of it had morphed into Black Power.  And how did that affect you?  Did you, did you--you became aware of that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean it's hard not to be.  I'm not sure other than to, you know, say I appreciate why and what.  And I think our, our attempts to sit-in was an attempt to, you know, say black power.  But I think that it was appropriate for the time, you know.  Certainly not some of the violence that was advocated by some of the groups.  But I think that the message in terms of having equal opportunities and, and having a right to be treated the same way as people and have a--having the right for economic growth, were the right messages.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you--do you remember the transition from being called negro to black?
Speaker 2: And then to African American?  You were black and--no, I mean the whole transition, the whole transition.  You know, yes and no.  I mean I, I remember that transition as being part of the black power movement, you know in terms of coming out of that.  But, but you know that's a--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a part of history that, that kind of fascinates me.  People don't have a conscious recollection of when it happened.
Speaker 2: No, it's just, it did.
Speaker 1: We weren't Negroes, we were black.
Speaker 2: We were black.  And I think a lot of the--I think a lot of the rhetoric and the--in that day in terms of some of the folks in, in--who were in the forefront of the movement, and a lot of the poetry and a lot of the songs, a lot of the music also helped drive that.  Because all of a sudden it was black.  And, and, and you know things talked about, revolution and, and black and not being a Negro, or not--so I think that kind of drove it into society.
Story_ID: 76708
Speaker 1: Now did you all have a black organization on campus?
Speaker 2: We did.  In 1960--probably 1967-ish.  But it, it was more in terms of--the only--my only involvement in that organization was in terms of getting more students to the university.  And that's kind of--kind of the biggest thing that that organization did.  There was also social portion to that organization.  But the social portion that I participated in was really on the Greek side of the organization.  So you know--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well the Greeks at, at that time were--it seemed to me and during those days it was a lot more consciousness about, you know, who we were on campuses.  And we needed to do, I guess as a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I, I think the reason the Greeks were large at Illinois was because of the fact that that was where, you know, you could have people, black people getting together in a social setting; it kind of brought us together.  And it also provided--particularly for those Greek organizations that had houses.  It also was a, a way in which you could relate to people and have a support network while you were going to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There's one more--I just wondered who, who came to campus to speak that you remember when--
Speaker 2: [HM] Julian Bond was there.  And he was very powerful and, and I got his autograph and he was--but he was very powerful and talked about you know, talked about the Civil Rights Movement.  Talked about responsibility in terms of this is not, you know, this is everybody's responsibility to make a difference and he impressed me quite a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember much about the cultural arts aspect of this?  Were you still involved in theater at all in those days?
Speaker 2: No, I, I really--after that I don't know what happened and I just, I didn't--after that I didn't like to speak, I didn't--I don't know.  I'm not sure what happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Nobody's doing like black [unclear] on campus or--
Speaker 2: No, not really, not then.  There was--we--there were black productions that would come on, on campus, Porgy and Bess came on campus.  But for, for--you know there was no ongoing--there were, there were, there are now and there were early '70's [1970's] there were as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  All right so what did you major in in school?
Speaker 2: Sociology and psychology, double major.  Came out of school in 1970 and started working.  And then in 1976, received a master's degree in public administration 'cause I was working for the federal government and received that from Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 76709
Speaker 1: Okay now, now you're working in the, in the interim between Roosevelt--
Speaker 2: HUD [Department of Housing and Urban Development].  Well I was working.  I graduated from college and went directly into HUD, US Department of Housing and Urban Development.  You know I thought I was going to save the world.  'Cause those were the days of urban renewal, community development grants, etc.  I learned I wasn't going to serve the world.
Speaker 1: Model Cities.
Speaker 2: Model cities, yes, yes.  And so Section 8 housing.  But I was there.  I was at HUD for thirteen years.  And it was from HUD that I joined the City of Chicago.  But in 1976 I was still working, I went to Roosevelt [University] part-time, went at night, which was interesting because I was still living in Waukegan [Illinois], I was married at that time.  And so I left work, went to Roosevelt and then caught a train to Waukegan.
Speaker 1: Now what was--what was HUD like in those days?  I mean there was a lot of [unclear] about trying to change, you know, the condition of the poor. [President] Lyndon Johnson, that was his, his primary--great society.
Speaker 2: A great society.
Speaker 1: War on poverty.  And I mean what did you--what, what was it like on the inside of that?
Speaker 2: I think for the first years, the first years I was there it was very, it was very exciting, very interesting because there was a lot happening.  I think in terms of the Model Cities Program, it did a lot to change cities.  Did a lot to provide--to, to revitalize areas that had been you know, that had suffered over the years.  I think later you know when obviously administrations change and money, you know, kind of goes away, that it was, it was more difficult.  I think that the, the--I was in--I actually started there in the Personnel Group or Human Resources.  That's where I started at HUD.  And one of the reasons, I was an intern to kind of had different rotations throughout the organization.  You go to Washington [D.C.].  You go spend some time with the community, you know.  And I decided at that time I wanted to be in the Personnel Group because--to increase the diversity 'cause kind of look around and you know, there were some diversity, but not a lot.  And so I wanted to be able to recruit other people into the intern program as I had been recruited.
Speaker 1: Now this was actually--I'm sorry, this was during [President Richard] Nixon's administration.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: [Unclear].
Speaker 2: Yes, yes it was.  Yes, Nixon's administration actually introduced Section 8 housing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So--and it was after his administration that you started--
Speaker 1: [Unclear].
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was after his administration actually that you started seeing kind of cuts.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That [unclear]
Speaker 2: No [unclear].
Speaker 1: So I mean what, what did you do for Housing and Urban Development, specifically?
Speaker 2: Well when I left, I had been the--I started off in, in Personnel and then ended up as the kind of--this was a five state region of HUD, the, the Region Five, which is a Midwest region.  Then went to, you know, being the Regional Personnel Director.  Then the person who was in charge of personnel, management information, general services, accounting, you know, broader responsibility for the region, and then Deputy Regional Administrator for the region.  Which also had program responsibilities.
Speaker 1: You went pretty, pretty far, pretty fast.  And you, you were very--
Speaker 2: Well thirteen years.
Speaker 1: Yeah I mean you were--
Speaker 2: I was, I was still young.
Speaker 1: In your twenties I guess.
Speaker 2: I, I--no.  By then I was about thirty, 'cause when I joined the city I was probably, what, thirty-two or three.  'Cause I remember the mayor saying something--
Speaker 1: [unclear] '83 [1983]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I left in '83 [1983], I left in '83 [1983].  And I, I was a--when I left, I was a Senior Executive--that's kind of how they grade in the career service of the government.  So I was in the senior executive service when I left federal government.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  That's still moving pretty good.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 76710
Speaker 1: Now, now why did you leave the federal government?  Now to--
Speaker 2: I, I was recruited, actually, by a search firm.  Jim [James] Lowry's Search Firm, to join.
Speaker 1: What's that firm?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Jim Lowry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Here in Chicago.  At that time, he had a search firm that recruited people.  And Harold Washington, the mayor had hired him to recruit people for various jobs in his administration.  And so I was identified in that process for the Commissioner of Housing in 1983.
Speaker 1: Now were you living in Chicago [Illinois] at that time?
Speaker 2: I was.
Speaker 1: All right, so you--
Speaker 2: I moved full time to Chicago in 1978.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were you involved at all in the Harold Washington campaign?
Speaker 2: In the first campaign?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: No, was not.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Not, not directly involved.
Speaker 2: Not directly involved, not directly involved.
Speaker 1: Now did you, did you vote for him?  Did you think he was gonna win?  I mean did you--
Speaker 2: I thought, I, I hoped he was gonna win.  I mean in terms of thinking he was gonna win, it was kind of like it's going to be a stretch.  It's going to be a stretch.  But clearly hoped to be.  That, that was you know, major history.  And I was glad that he did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did, did, did you have a sense of something big was going to happen during that--I mean it was such a--being around Chicago.
Speaker 2: My gosh, it was, it was just--it just kept building and kept building up.  And I kind of--after hearing the stories 'cause I really, I wasn't--first of all I couldn't take part in the--I was a federal employee.  And under the Hatch Act you can only do certain things.  But, but really then I would say I still had a lot of relationships outside of Chicago you know cause I was from North Chicago, Waukegan [Illinois].  Really hadn't, you know, built a lot of friends up in Chicago.  Most of them still doing the commuting thing like I was, or like I had been doing.  So I really didn't have a lot of contacts in Chicago.  But when I kind of hear it and then after participating in the '87 [1987] campaign, I wish I could have been a part of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were recruited to serve in the Washington administration.
Speaker 2: I was.
Speaker 1: And what made you decide to go on and serve?  Was the, was the salary much higher, or you--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, not at all.  I can't even remem--I'm not--the salary may have been a little bit lower.  It very well may have ended up a little lower, I really can't remember.  No, it was because of the mayor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For this mayor.  He just--such a magnetic personality and just so passionate about Chicago and about the people and about fairness and it's, you know kind of once I met him, there was--it--I actually did it probably faster than I had intended to, 'cause I literally walked out of his office and I'm still thinking he's making up his mind, you know.  And they're like okay so we're going to take you over now to the Department of Housing.  I was like wait a minute, I haven't resigned yet from my other job.  So--but just--I--he, he--you were talking about the age.  I walked into his office, the first thing he said is "How old are you?"  And I was like "Excuse me".  You know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you're pretty--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --young for that kind of responsibility in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it was great.  Probably the best experience in my career.
Speaker 1: He must have really seen some, something in you to, to you know, move that fast to decide.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I mean you know I kind of had been through the due diligence, you know as they say, process.  I mean I--you've been interviewed by the search firm.  I'd been interviewed--Bill [William] Ware was the Chief of Staff, so I'd been interviewed by Bill Ware.  He had already checked with a number of the community organizations.  Because HUD [Department of Housing and Urban Development] interfaces with many community organizations, and the real estate community in terms of some of the commercial developers.  So he had all--I mean they had already kind of done those checks by the time he ever talked to me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so well--so you started with the mayor's office in '83 [1983] I guess.
Speaker 2: I, I started as Commissioner of Housing in 1983, in July of 1983.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I went to the mayor's office July or August, sometime in the timeframe of 1985.  And then during the election in 1987, I--he asked me to go over to CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] as the interim Director.  And so I served there for nine months in 1987.
Speaker 1: That's after [HM] Renault Robinson.
Speaker 2: Well it was ac--it was actually after Zirl Smith left.  Renault was a chairman, Zirl was the Executive Director.  So it was after Zirl Smith left and I was Executive Director.  And Renault probably left Chairman maybe, I don't know, two, three months after that.  I mean it probably wasn't even that long, it was probably a month.  And [HM] Reverend [B. Herbert] Martin became Chairman.
Story_ID: 76711
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well what was this experience like working for the [Mayor Harold] Washington administration?  I know that the--there was a lot of opposition to [unclear] doing and you know, can you tell us about some of those struggles?
Speaker 2: You know it's interesting.  Probably when I was in it, I said why am I doing this?  Unless I was in the mayor's office, then, then it was like I know why I'm doing this.  'Cause he would just really pump you up.  But now when I reflect back on it, it was--you know as I said before, it was really one of the best experiences I've ever had.  I guess for a couple reasons.  One, being able to work with him [Mayor Harold Washington].  Under all kinds of adversity, he kind of, you know he just kept going.  And he was just so positive and really believed that he could affect change and I think he did.  I think that some of the adversity brought us as a team, as a mayor's team, closer together in many respects.  Those first , first couple of years were rough, I must say.  In terms of the--what was going on with the City Council.  I can also say that I've really--I was very lucky because in terms of the position I was in as Commissioner of Housing, I actually had a--most, most times, a decent relationship with the City Council.  And so was able to get things done without a lot of, without a lot of hassle.  But it was, it was rough.  There were long hours.  You were always on.  I mean it didn't matter what time it was.  And you know I remember the community meetings that we would go to.  We would--the mayor started community meetings and all over the city, I mean every single community.  And we would go--I can't remember was it once a month or--I think it was once a month.  Could have been once every three--I can't remember.  But we would go and they'd start, say at seven or 8:00 at night, and many cases we were still there till 11, 11:30.  He'd have all of his commissioners lined up with him on a podium and we would just take ques--he would make a speech and we'd just take questions from the community.  And he--it could be 11:30 at night and he's still going.  He's--the rest of us are like okay, we're tired, we're tired, and he's still going.  But it was to me, it was a wonderful learning experience to learn about communities and the cities because I was from North Chicago, again.  To learn about it, to see people, to listen to them and to see how different the, the--to see, you know, a city like Chicago, how you can have so many different experiences in each community.  It's amazing to me that some people never been to downtown Chicago.  Had never been to downtown Chicago.  That's true.  They just kind of--here's my community; this is what I know and this is what I'm happy with.  And so I want this community to be the best it can, it can be.
Story_ID: 76770
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about--we were talking about specific things.  I mean things that happened during the [Mayor Harold] Washington administration and the struggles that you were all engaged in, some of the big [unclear].  I guess there were some defeats too I guess.  Being involved in that, in that exciting time, you know so.  What, what are some stories?  Do you have any anecdotes or stories about things that happened that you could share with us?
Speaker 2: I really don't.  I mean I can't think of anything that's not been, that's not been in the press.  I mean probably the, the things that strike me most rather than, rather than stories are kind of just this--how Mayor [Harold] Washington would drive himself so he made sure he didn't let anybody down.  You know I, I don't--you know there were certainly some celebrations, you know when the--in the election when the City Council changed.  You know and so that they were no longer--we no longer had the twenty-nine.  That obviously was, you know--
Speaker 1: The twenty-nine opposition.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the twenty-nine opposition, aldermen.
Speaker 1: They could outvote.
Speaker 2: That could outvote the other ones.  And so it was very difficult to get anything passed through City Council.  I mean that was a, you know, victory, a celebration, etc.
Speaker 1: Eight-seven [1987], when he won in '87 [1987] he got the majority.
Speaker 2: Right, well actually--I have to think about this.  He did get the majority.
Speaker 1: Yeah, '87 [1987].
Speaker 2: In '87 [1987].  And it was--that was a celebration and everybody was happy.  But you know I think probably more than that what I saw is kind of what he said to, to his--to people who worked for him in terms of, of focusing them on what they need to do in the city.  And I think when I think about kind of the one thing that he always said is you know, above all things, be fair.  You know and I wanna make sure that one ward gets anything more than another ward gets.  And you know I've seen--you know that, that has been the problem in the city and I wanna make sure that you know when you're look at what you're doing in your departments, that you're fair about it.  And so you know--kind of when I think about him I remember him saying to me when I first started, he--you know he says Department of Housing is going to be very difficult.  We've had a lot of problems there.  Do you think you can handle it?  And I said sure, of course, little did I know what I was getting into, but I said yeah, I, I can.  And he said you know--I said do you have any advice for me?  He said well yes.  He said, you know, you are going to hear many times people will come to you and say I want you to do this because the mayor wants it.  I'm a friend of Harold's, and Harold said do this.  And he said don't listen to any of 'em.  He says I tell you one thing.  If I want you to do something, I will call you and I will ask you to do something.  Anybody else, ignore them.  And he said just be fair.  And a couple of times, you know we were getting ready to make some very controversial decisions.  And you know I went to meet with him and I said I just wanted to let you know, you know here's kind of what I propose to do.  What do you think?  Is it okay?  He's like what do you think?  I said well I think this is what we ought to do.  He said go ahead and do it.  He said if you think it's the right thing to do, if it's fair, you know, do it.  And sort of just the--and he was consistently like that.  He was consistent.
Speaker 1: So he didn't try to micromanage.
Speaker 2: He didn't try to micromanage.  He didn't try to manage in terms of you know, friends or, or people who had given significant political contributions, or any of that.  I mean it was--you know if this is what we need to do to, to make this a better program, or if this is where we need to put city services, or you know, kind of based on need.  He was okay with that.
Story_ID: 76771
Speaker 1: What you're saying--and I can reflect about the time--back in those times and I mean with people in the black community, especially on the South Side would, you know, initially pushed for a black mayor, felt--some people felt strongly that he wasn't giving enough to the black community.  And they, they were upset.  Eighty seven [1987], some even raised--say well what has he done that's special that's really--and the reply, I mean the dialogue on the south side as well, he made things fair for the first time.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And even though he didn't make them lopsided in favor of the black community like many hoped he would.
Speaker 2: No, no that's true, though, though you're absolutely right.  'Cause that's what would come out in the community meetings.  Well you know, you know what about this, what about that?  And he--you're absolutely right; he made them fair.  He made--he gave everyone equal access to city services.  And he made sure that there, you know, that there were--if there was a sidewalk repair program or street repair program, that it was based on need and there was no one community who would get preference over another one.  And I, I just think that was very--and he, he consistently did it.  At the same time, I think he had a--he--when you look at kind of the commercial real estate development in the city, you know he, he, you know said to people you also have a responsibility to the community, you know.  So I think that's the, the one thing that I kind of think about in the city.  I mean obviously his, his, his speeches and the people, the interactions with people when he would walk into a room, it was like the whole room would light up.  That, that was something to see.  I mean it was just something to see.
Speaker 1: This is pretty, you know, people's testimony about him is pretty consistent about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He had that kind of way of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, didn't matter who he was with, where he was, it did not matter.
Speaker 1: Even amongst sworn enemies.
Speaker 2: Oh, abs--Yeah.  He--you know, it was hard--even, even his enemies liked him I think.
Speaker 1: It's really strange.
Speaker 2: Yes it is.
Speaker 1: Kind of concept.
Speaker 2: You know there's a--it's interesting.  I, I wouldn't say I would call it a first meeting with Harold Washington.  I walked past Washington when he was a Congressman and it was probably--I don't know, early '80s [1980's].  'Cause he had served one term.  I was at HUD [Department of Housing and Urban Development] and we were--I, I was there doing something, I was on Capitol Hill.  And I just walked past him--that's Congressman Washington.  And never in a million years would I have thought that I was going to end up working for him.  I told him that story.  I said you know we weren't paying any attention to.  He was clearly focused on something.  And I said and here I am.
Speaker 1: And on the other side of the coin is a lot of the, a lot of people in the white ethnic comm--communities around Chicago felt he was doing too much for black people by simply making things fair.
Speaker 2: Well I think by simply making things fair, and I think by having diversity in his administration.  'Cause it was the first time that there was any real diversity in the administration.
Speaker 1: It seems awfully--I mean it seems like i--ironic kind of a situation.  Black people expected him to tilt the whole thing over.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But he didn't do it.
Speaker 2: He really didn't.
Speaker 1: Just made it fair.
Speaker 2: Absolutely right.  He did, he did.  That's absolutely right.
Speaker 1: And you know, just by making it fair it seemed as though it was--I mean of great benefit to black people to have, have finally have, you know a fair chance to [unclear] contracts and other things that they never had.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, that's right, that's exactly right.
Speaker 1: So people, though they complained, you know, they knew--
Speaker 2: I think people knew.  I think they just said you know there's been so many years when we haven't had access, why don't you try to, you know, catch up?  You know and he was just--if it's fair, you compete, that's it.  You know.  Or if it's a city service, we're going to make sure that this is what--this neighbor--you know neighborhood on the South Side needs it, neighborhood on the North Side, West Side, they all, you know they're all important to the survival of the city.
Story_ID: 76772
Speaker 1: Now, now specifically about the [Chicago Housing Authority] Department of Housing.  What was the agenda of the Department of Housing then?  Is it--had it--did it have a different agenda that it, that it usually would have under other mayors, or was it--
Speaker 2: Well I, I think prior to Harold Washington, it was--it served very limited neighborhoods in the city.  The mission of the Department of Housing is to, to finance and rehab, provide financing for the development and rehabilitation of low to moderate income housing.  That's the, the mission.  They also do--it's interesting 'cause the Department of Housing does a lot of things, or at least did then.  'Cause they were also--it was also the agency that you would go to if you had a fair housing complaint, for instance.  And it was also the agency that would fund what we call delegate agencies, but agencies who were doing housing counseling in the community.  So it did a lot of things.  But most of those services were fairly, you know, segregated in certain political boards in the city, none of which were African American.  And there were, there were a number of, of people there, a good portion of people who were you know appointed because of who they knew.  When I got there, there were a number of people who never showed up for work and I kept trying to figure out well, you know, this says--because by that time, I came in July.  They actually had a, a reduction of people before I got there.  But there were over three--say 350 people there.  So when I got there--and I kept saying well where are they?  Well you know we have people, you know they're not in this office or here, or they're in the field, or they--so one day I just started walking around with a list.  I was like well where is this person?  Well where is this?  Well as I found out, they hadn't been there, you know, they were basically a ghost payroll.  You know so I started just, you know, cutting, cutting people.  If you're not here, you know, you don't need the job.  And so I can remember being questioned about it at the budget hearing in City Council.  Well what happened to so-and-so, and what happened to so-and-so?  And I said well they weren't here, lost their job.  And inter--I mean I didn't get a lot, you know I may have, you know, kind of little, you know--well what you do that for?  But, but no, you know, terrible, terrible outcry based on that.  I did find that there were a lot of people there who had been there, some of whom were trying to do a good job, but didn't really have the skills or tools to do it because no one really wanted them to do a good job before.  And so part of what we need to do was to be able to get people in there who could, who had the, the skills to do a good job, and to do the job that, that should be done, and to say it's okay to make a decision yourself.  A lot of people were--I mean knew, knew what they were doing, but were never allowed to make decisions or never allowed to really make a recommendation.  They were waiting for somebody from the top to say this is what you'll do.  And it was like no, you're in this job, you're the expert.  What do you think we ought to do?  So it was, it was very different.  And we need to be fair.  It doesn't really matter that so-and-so's calling here every day, I don't care.  What do you recommend, you know?  How can we make sure that we're getting you know, fair services.  How when we, when we rate a proposal for funding, are we sure that it's the best proposal to rate?  So, you know and I think that, I think you know the department you know was, was successful.  I think it is now even--I think that the current mayor you know has a, has a, an emphasis on housing as well.
Story_ID: 76773
Speaker 1: How did that take place--how did you become Deputy Mayor?
Speaker 2: How did I--Bill, let me just think about this.  When Bill Ware passed away, Ernie [Ernest] Barefield, who was his, who was the Deputy Chief of Staff, Bill [William] Ware was Chief of Staff, Ernie was Deputy.  Ernie, the mayor made Ernie Chief of Staff and then they asked me to come over to be Deputy Chief of Staff.  And I--I mean that's--and that was in '85 [1985], summer of '85 [1985].  And so that's--I mean that's how.
Speaker 1: Now all right, what did you--what was your--
Speaker 2: Responsibility?
Speaker 1: Yeah, again.
Speaker 2: I was responsible for kind of the day-to-day operations of, of--in the broader sense of the city, city agencies.  Ernie really concentrated on you know, budget and the comptroller's office, police and fire, and there were also liaisons in the, in the mayor's office as well that handled various city agencies.  And so I worked very closely with those liaisons to do that.  The commissioners had line authority over their own departments.  So it was really a, a matter of, of making sure that the mayor's strategy was implemented; being able to deal with any issues.  I also had a role as the head of the O'Hare Development Program because that was the time when O'Hare [Chicago O'Hare International Airport] was being renovated.  It was a huge--at the time it was the largest airport development expansion program in the, in the country and had run into some problems in terms of time and you know, being on schedule, budget, etc.  And so I was asked to also head that up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you tried to--you had to reorganize people?
Speaker 2: Well it wasn't.  I, I think that the challenge was you had various city departments coming together and a lot of what they were doing was with the help of outside consultants.  And it appeared that the outside consultants were the ones who were driving this.  And then of course you have the typical turf wars between different organizations, the same thing that happens in governments, it happens in private industry as well.  But you have people you know saying maybe in public works, saying the aviation, no, that's not the way we're gonna do it.  And you had fire saying something else.  So it was a matter of saying okay here, wait, hold it, time out.  You know what are the issues?  Here's the--what's the schedule, what's the budget look like?  And, and making a forum so people could express where the differences were and resolve them and move on.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well what--so the airport was a major task that you had to tackle.
Speaker 2: Um hmm.
Speaker 1: Now did, did you get involved very much in the politics of government when you were, were--
Speaker 2: The politics of government.
Speaker 1: Well I guess all the campaign [unclear].
Speaker 2: No, not in campaign strategy.  No, the mayor was very--he was very clear.  He wanted there to be a separation between government and political campaign.  So, no.  Now did I campaign with him in '87 [1987]?  Yes.  But in terms of campaign meetings, going to political campaign strategy meetings, no, no.
Story_ID: 76774
Speaker 1: Was there very much I guess opposition in the--within city government to--what the mayor [Mayor Harold Washington] was trying to do?  I mean once you got in.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I think certainly in the first term.  I think the second term--because things were no longer the same because to be fair, there were certain, certain wards that weren't going to get everything they got before.  So of course there was, you know, there was a lot of controversy about that.  The, the, the tragedy, I mean clearly the fact that the mayor, you know died and, and was a huge tragedy and you know he had just started his second term.  You know a term where he clearly had a mandate, where he clearly had the majority of the City Council.  And had won the confidence of the business community.  You know so the doors were kind of open for him to really make some long lasting--I think he clearly had changed the way the city did business.  But now he had a real--at, at that point a real opportunity to institutionalize those changes and you know it's, it's very sad.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  How did you--well I guess you didn't feel good, good about it.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: What, what were you thinking when all--when, when he, he died so suddenly.
Speaker 2: He did.  I was actually--I was in my office and I had an appointment with him actually, I, I believe it was at 11:00.  And they called me and said that the mayor was being taken to the hospital, that he just had a heart attack.  And I'm--I was, you know, just speechless as everybody was.  And then when we were informed he was dead, it was just, it was unbelievable.  He had just been out at a groundbreaking with the Commissioner of Housing at that time, Bess Donaldson was the Commissioner of Housing.  They had just been at a groundbreaking together.  And so it was just, it was just unfathomable.  And I remember walking into City Hall the, the first day after, you know, 'cause it was right before Thanksgiving that he passed away.  And walking into City Hall on the first day back in the office and I was there very early and there was nobody in City Hall at all.  I mean you know the downstairs area was just quiet.  And between the time I walked into my off--into City Hall and the time I made it to my office, it was on at that time the tenth floor.  I walked into the office and made a decision to resign.  And I called my parents and I said how many beans do you have?  And they said we have plenty of beans, and I resigned that day.
Speaker 1: So you knew pretty much that it was over with.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Well it was, it was--to me the reason I was there was because of him.  And it just seemed so empty.  And by then, you know all of the, the activity and fighting had started about who should be mayor, who mayor was--who the mayor was going to be.  It's like, you know, this job is too--takes too much out of you 'cause it really, it really is a 24/7 job, any job I think in the city working directly for the Chief Executive Officer of the city is a twenty-four by seven job.  And I said you know, I don't wanna do that for anybody else.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Cause we, we like to think from the outside looking into his office, that there was a movement and that you know, Washington was not simply a figurehead, that he was really the head of a reform.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the CEO, that's right.  And he--
Speaker 1: And, and I think that people were kind of--and I think there was a movement, but for some reason when he died, there, there wasn't a clear path to someone else who could--
Speaker 2: Who could take that on and go down the same path.  No, you're absolutely right, you're absolutely right.  Yeah, and which was just such a shame, it's kind of heartbreaking.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So how, how did you--did you--you have any--I guess you really didn't see anybody or, or see a path for anybody.
Speaker 2: No, I mean there was between, you know it was between you know, Eugene Sawyer and [Timothy] Tim Evans. You know my--I, I didn't have any--I wasn't clearly supporting either, you know.  I knew Tim, you know, Tim Evans had been very close kind of in the administration.  So I, I clearly knew, knew him.  But it was the process that just so turned me off.  Just the, the process, you know.
Speaker 1: It seemed undignified.
Speaker 2: Yes and just--there, there should have been a way, I think a better way, a smoother way to transition.  You know here is a man who really, who really was inclusive and, and fair, and really listened and appreciated the input of everyone.  And kind of the process around who was going to succeed the mayor certainly wasn't any of that I don't think, so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It didn't take you long to figure it out.
Speaker 2: No.  And a lot of it--and, and clearly I think the biggest reason was just the fact that this is a lot.  This just personally, you know, this is the time to, to leave.  This is the time to leave.  This is a time you're not going to, to put the same energy in working for anyone else.  And quite frankly if there's someone else here, they need to bring in whoever it is they feel comfortable with, working with.
Story_ID: 76775
Speaker 1: Now the, the time you left city government, I mean did you--well what were your prospects?  Did you have some prospects of--were you thinking at all at that time?
Speaker 2: I had thought about, you know kind of what kinds of jobs you know I would, you know would, would do.  Clearly you know I had come out of federal government, I knew I didn't want to do that.  Had some experience in terms of real estate development.  Thought about that.  Thought about going to a couple of investment banking firms.  And then I had been approached by Citibank as well.  And the, the thing that attracted me to Citibank is the person said to me, you know you came to me when you were in the Department of Housing saying that we ought to do more to invest in the city and in the communities.  And I did that with everybody.  And he said well you know now here's your opportunity to make that happen.  And so how could I turn that down?  So that's how I ended up with Citibank.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did they approach you with that?
Speaker 2: They did, yeah they did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so what did you do at Citibank?
Speaker 2: A number of different things.  I ran the mortgage lending operation for--in Illinois for Citibank.  And then I--after that I actually moved to Washington, DC with Diners Club running a--the, the government business for Diners Club in Washington, DC.  Then came back to Chicago with Diners Club.  Had the corporate business, and that's, you know, the business that, that provides a, a travel payment system to corporations.  And then after that, became president.
Speaker 1: Okay, you know but it seems you're probably summarizing a lot of detail that I can't--you know I'm not--
Speaker 2: Well actually that's all that's interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you know Diners Club.  I mean it's a, a three billion dollar budget.  Is that true?
Speaker 2: Diners Club International, which is the entire network, last year had 33 billion dollars worth of sales.  And Diners Club North America, but that's a--that, that's, you know, that's what, sixty, fifty-eight franchises.  I'm president of Diners Club North America and we done one third of the volume in the network.  We're, you know, so we're the largest franchise in the network, but it's one third of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well that's still a lot.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it still is.
Speaker 1: Impressive.
Speaker 2: It's a thousand people who are located in Chicago, Denver and Montreal.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you supervise a thousand and all right and those are, are top level--
Speaker 2: Yeah it--well it's--there's the front, what we call the front office, which is sales and marketing, finance and, and then we have you know, the back office where operations and technology.  So there are all of those people, you know, who do those things to take the cart, take our product to market, to service our product, to make sure the company runs well.  It's a full company.
Story_ID: 76776
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is it, is it as exciting as working for the city?
Speaker 2: No.  It's different.  I think the one thing in terms of working for the city, is that you really--you could see where--you could see if you had made a difference or if you'd not made a difference, quickly.  I mean you got immediate feedback.  Because if you're out there in front of that community organization, and they're either, either saying thank you, you know, for making you know, for building, you know 100 units of housing in my neighborhood and I, I received one of these homes and my life is better.  Or why haven't you been to my neighborhood, and why haven't you rehabbed that house that was standing on the corner?  You know, so there was some immediate feedback and you can see where you could make a difference, and you could make a difference.  In this job or any I think it's true with most corporate jobs, it's--in terms of your company, yes.  I mean you can see what the bottom line is.  And you can make a difference there.  You can make a difference in terms of, of people motivating people to do a job.  But in terms of the quality of life, I'm not sure that you can.  And so you know, and I miss that part of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But would I go back to government ever?  No.
Speaker 1: Not under these circumstances.
Speaker 2: No, well no.  I, I think you know, I think everybody should do, I really do.  I think it's an excellent experience and everybody should try it.  But no, not at this point in my life.
Speaker 1: It's too, too intense.
Speaker 2: It really is, it is.
Story_ID: 76777
Speaker 1: They say, everybody that's worked for the [Mayor Harold] Washington administration said it was very intense.
Speaker 2: Very intense.
Speaker 1: Those who work for, for [Mayor Richard M.] Daley now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely, absolutely is.
Speaker 1: Harold Washington, is it true that he would meet on Sundays during the football games and invite his staff over?
Speaker 2: Sundays, Sundays, late at night.  He, he did not stop.  I mean he really did not stop.  I mean and you could call him.  You could call him at 1:00 in the morning, he'd be up.  He'd tell you, he'd give you his home--you know if there's a problem, call me.  And the first time, you know I, I'm just like I'm not calling him at 1:00 in the morning.  And finally somebody said he's up anyway, it doesn't matter, you may as well.  And he was.
Speaker 1: So did he ever sleep?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  That, I don't know.  Not much.  He clear--he didn't have a lot of time in between then to sleep 'cause he was up early and out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you ever--now this is something--I keep hearing this around town.  But people speculated about his death.  I mean did you ever have second thoughts about what, how he died?
Speaker 2: No, I, I took it you know, on--based on the reports that he'd had a, had a heart attack and died.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Some people, I mean a lot of people have, you know, some people have written about it.
Speaker 2: I've, I've heard and I've seen it and I talked to people about it.  And you know, you know unless someone proves--says here it is, then you know I will continue to believe that he suffered a heart attack of natural causes and died.
Story_ID: 76778
Speaker 1: Right now though, you are one of the top fifty executives in the United States is what I've read.
Speaker 2: Well yeah.  The Fortune Magazine article's the top fifty black executives in the United States.  You know I take that with a grain of salt.  I mean I think it's won--I think it's great that I received that honor, you know but at the end of the day, it really doesn't--you know it's, it's just a--it's a recognition.  And you know I may or may not be there this year.  And it doesn't matter.  And I think that what I look at is--I think it will be great when there is--there are you know, fifty percent of the people that they have in terms of the top executives in the United States, are African Americans.  They don't have to say here are the top fifty blacks in, in America; here are the top fifty women in America.  That you have a list of the top fifty and you have diversity in that, in that.  Then I think it will be you know, be a different day.  I don't think I'll see that soon, but I think it's--that's where we need to go.
Speaker 1: What do we have to do to get there?
Speaker 2: I, I think that you--I think it's the leadership in the country.  I think it's the leadership in the, in, in corporate America.  People have to, to say--and I think you'll see there are a lot of companies, you know; diversity is important.  Citi, Citi, I mean the company I worked for, diversity is important.  But I think that people have to look at diversity in every respect of the way, you know.  So it's not only important to hire people in the company, it's also important to ask questions of vendors you do business with.  So if you're doing business with a law firm, or you're doing business with a search, an executive search firm, or you're doing business, you know, with an accounting firm.  You're trying to make a selection, question should be how many people of color do you have--
Story_ID: 76779
Speaker 1: All right now you were just--you were finishing up some thoughts about--
Speaker 2: Corporate America.  Yeah, yeah I think that the--really the bottom line is that, is that there, there needs to be diversity at, at many levels.  And I think just like I believe Harold Washington in Chicago [Illinois] or Maynard Jackson in Atlanta [Georgia] made a difference in terms of, of diversity in their cities, in terms of those people who were doing business with the city.  Because they asked those questions.  I think the CEOs in corporate America should ask, ask the same questions.  So if you're doing business with them, tell me what the programs of your companies look like.  Tell me how many, how many people of color and how many women you have in senior roles or partnership roles in your business, because that's important to me.  And so I think if you have--if, if that happens, then I think we'll begin to see a change.  And unless it happens, I think the, the change will be very slow.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you think about affirmative action?
Speaker 2: Well I think affirmative action is necessary.  I think it is, you know what's going on with the University of Michigan in terms of trying to stop affirmative action is inappropriate.  And I think that if in fact we're going to give children, young people of color, the opportunity and the equal opportunity to go to and attend top schools, you're going to need affirmative action.  You know I think I heard Congressman Jackson say that it's about--as much about education as it is affirmative action.  I would agree with that as well.  But quite frankly, unless and until you fix the schools to make sure that schools in all--in every city around the country that people of color are getting the same level of education as everyone else, you're not going to be able to fix it.  And they still will have opp--they will still have a difficult time being able to attend some of the top schools, you know.
Story_ID: 76780
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: I, I think that the, the--I think that the concern is that there's still a disproportionate number of black people who are jobless.  There's still a disproportionate number of black people who don't have decent, safe and sanitary housing.  There's still a disproportionate number of, of black people who are hungry and who struggle to make it day-by-day.  I mean that's a concern.  I think that the hope is that the community as a whole, and that's the black community, but the citizenry as a whole will begin to focus on you know what's important.  I think the fact that we still have people in this country who are hungry, is important.  And I, and I think you know the fact that if people focused on that and focused on the fact that everybody in this country, in 2003 ought to have a decent house.  You know that's my hope, that's my hope.  And I, I think there's a hope that the community itself, the black community will say you know just like in the '60s [1960's] and '70s [1970's], it's time to make a difference, it's time to change.  That's the hope.
Speaker 1: Do you think--what advice would you have for young black people trying to matriculate up into corporate America?  You know, what, what advice would you give them?
Speaker 2: Same advi--same advice my parents gave me.  And that's don't let anybody, you know, stop you.  Don't let anyone make you think that you're not good enough to do something, or anyone deter you from your goal.  And to also make sure that you don't forget from whence you came.  And that you give back to the community because unless you do, there's somebody else who won't be able to, to make it where you've made it.
Story_ID: 76781
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you look back over your career thus far, have you--you know, I, I don't know if you'd say so you've reached the top, but you have reached a top, you know, pos--position.  I mean it's pretty high up.  What, what do you see as your legacy, you know, at, at this point?  You know, you're still young.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I'm about ready to be on a beach somewhere.  I don't know whether it's a legacy.  I, you know, I don't look at myself as leaving a legacy.  I hope that I've been able to help young people, or encourage young people, or encourage people who are just coming into corporate America, people of color, young women who, who don't have a lot of coaches or mentors in the workplace.  I hope I've been able to help them see what their potential is and just see how they can not only survive, but thrive in corporate America.  And I hope that, that the young people that, that I see and am involved with in one of the local clubs, that, that, that they see that if I can do it, then, then they can as well.
Story_ID: 76782
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you see it--you see more of a--you see being a woman as being more of a barrier than being black?  Or can you tell the difference?
Speaker 2: It's hard for me to make a different--it's hard for me to separate it.  You know I, I can't.
Speaker 1: [Unclear].
Speaker 2: It really is, it is.  You, you do see you know I, I'd say over the past five to ten years, there's certainly more women in corporate America.  More, more Caucasian women in corporate America.  But in, in terms of me, it's very difficult to see whether--how I'm treated is because I'm African American or woman.  I suspect that it's because I'm African American.
Story_ID: 76783
Speaker 1: Tell me this.  Have you--what do your parents think of, of your success?
Speaker 2: They're thrilled.  They're thrilled and they--but you know they, they keep me going.  I just came off of a very, very tough weekend.  They're like there every day.  You can do it, don't let 'em get to you, you know.  Don't be deterred.  I mean they are the biggest champions, my biggest champions.  A rock, they're like a rock to me.
Speaker 1: In a, in a, in a world where a lot of black families are broken up and, and not you know, not fully functional.  I mean that certainly seems like a blessing to have you know, two parents that are--
Speaker 2: I'm truly blessed.  I, I, I must say Larry I've had a blessed life.  You know I've had two parents.  For a good portion of my life I had grandparents who loved and nurtured me and supported me.  I've been able to have experiences you know that many people have not had.  I've never--I could never say you know that I went a day hungry in my life.  You know although I think that, you know, you know clearly I just talked about the fact that we have people going hungry.  I have been blessed, and that's not happened to me.  And so--and I have been give the opportunities to succeed.  And that's why I think it's so important to be able to give everyone an opportunity to succeed.  What you do with that I think is kind of up to you.  But everyone needs the opportunity to succeed.
Story_ID: 76784
Speaker 1: Now this last question is similar to legacy, but they're not quite--and this--how would you like to be remembered, you know, in years to come?
Speaker 2: It's not something I, I've thought of.  I just hope that--because the only people who are going to remember me anyway are my friends and my family.  So I just hope that I'm remembered as someone who, who could provide love and comfort and friendship and support to them in terms of their lives.
Story_ID: 76785
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Do you still face challenges in the day-to-day workplace now that you think may be because of your race or your sex?
Speaker 2: Sure I do.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  And how--like what sort of situations and how do you deal with it?  [Unclear].
Speaker 2: I do face many challenges.  You know still when I, you know, walk into rooms, they're not terribly diverse.  You know it's still when I go into some of the organizations that I belong to, it's still predominated by white males.  And so--and I think it's in terms of making sure that your point of view is--gets across.  Making sure that your, that you, your opinion is as valued as everyone else's, and it's tough.  I mean it's not--I think how I deal with it is just you know being very persistent, you know.  But I know from years of experience, that will not change necessarily what they think and how they may interact with me or any other woman of color.  But it's something that, you know when it kind of builds up, it's, it's hard to deal with.  It's very difficult to deal with.  And I think the only thing that you can do is to do the best that you can and to--when you see it, say something about it, which I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
