Story_ID: 650538
Speaker 1: I'll begin by slating.  My name is [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Today is January 31, 2017.  We're in Newark, New Jersey (laughter) at the home of [HistoryMaker] Kenneth Gibson.  Would you, Sir, please you say and spell your name for me, tell me your date of birth and what you do?
Speaker 2: My name is Kenneth Gibson.  My date of birth is May 15, 1932, and right now I'm a retired public official.
Speaker 1: Can you spell your name for me?
Speaker 2: Kenneth Gibson: K-E-N-N-E-T-H, G-I-B-S-O-N.
Story_ID: 650539
Speaker 1: So, we begin with what we call People magazine type questions, easy quick questions, starting with, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh man, that's a good one.  Some seafood.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Generally, the easy parts of the seafood.
Speaker 1: Like what?
Speaker 2: Flounder and shrimp.  That's the only seafood I really eat.
Speaker 1: How about favorite color?
Speaker 2: Any dark colors--black, blue.
Speaker 1: And time of year?
Speaker 2: Oh, I love every time of the year, generally the springtime.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not really.  In public office I had to travel, and I don't really desire packing a bag and going to an airport and going anywhere.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2: Well, I have a couple.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I like to use the motto, "Wherever American cities are going, Newark [New Jersey] will get there first."  And a personal one is that, "There's no limit to how much you can achieve and what you can achieve if you don't worry about who gets the credit."
Story_ID: 650540
Speaker 1: Now, we're going to talk about your family.  Let's start with your father.  We'll go--do both sides of your family; and I'd love for you to tell me your father's name, his date of birth, where he was born.  Yeah, tell me about him, please.
Speaker 2: My father's name was Willie Gibson, born in Alabama.
Speaker 1: What town, where, what town?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: Well, mostly around Enterprise, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay, where you were born?
Speaker 2: Where I was born.
Speaker 1: And do you know your father's date of birth?
Speaker 2: May no, August 17, 1910.
Speaker 1: And what did your father do for a living?
Speaker 2: My father was a butcher.  He worked for the slaughterhouses.
Speaker 1: In, in Enterprise?
Speaker 2: While in Enterprise, we had to leave there under tough circumstances.  But when we arrived in Newark [New Jersey], he worked for Swift and Company.
Speaker 1: So, before we get to Newark--because you weren't--you're not born yet.  I want you to tell me about your parents even before you were born.  So, he grew up in and around Enterprise.  Did he have siblings?
Speaker 2: Yes, he had brothers and sisters.
Speaker 1: How many?
Speaker 2: Oh, one, two, three--four sisters, I believe, and about four brothers.
Speaker 1: And what did his parents do?
Speaker 2: They were--basically anything they could get to make a living.
Speaker 1: Was there farming in Enterprise?
Speaker 2: Some, not much.  But--
Speaker 1: So, what kind of--when you say anything, what kind of work would that have been?
Speaker 2: They worked for people who had land and who had businesses.  My father and mother [Daisy Shipman Gibson] worked with people who would hire them; almost like daily workers.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, and that included working in a business that--did it ever also include farming, or no?
Speaker 2: No, not real farming, because he worked at a butcher shop.
Speaker 1: When he was in Enterprise?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And his parents as well?
Speaker 2: His parents, I'm not sure what his father [Daniel Gibson] did.  His mother [Tiny Matthews Gibson] didn't work, she stayed at home and raised the children.
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your father's family?
Speaker 2: Just past my grandfather.  He left home with the girls, and he left the boys with my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Your grandfather left home with the girls?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Where did he go?
Speaker 2: To Newark.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, it was later that your father came?
Speaker 2: Right, my father came later.
Speaker 1: Why did he do that?
Speaker 2: I've been trying to figure that one out for a long time.  And I've come to the conclusion, just thinking about what happened in those days, that in order to protect the girls--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --from abuse, my father and my grandfather left home with the women, with the girls, and left the boys, because the boys could work.
Speaker 1: And also take care of their mother.
Speaker 2: And take care of their mother.
Speaker 1: How, how, how old was your father when his father left?
Speaker 2: My father was a teenager, he was a young boy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was no more than a teenager.
Speaker 1: When his father--
Speaker 2: When his father left.
Speaker 1: But it was your father, Willie, who was the butcher, correct?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Do you know how he got into that?
Speaker 2: He worked in a butcher shop in town.
Speaker 1: That was the job he got, and then--
Speaker 2: That was the job he got.
Speaker 1: --he became interested--
Speaker 2: And then he became--he had to do that in order to maintain his position as a working--and they called him a delivery boy.
Speaker 1: And was that his role at the butcher shop?
Speaker 2: He did everything.  He actually slaughtered, cut up, and then working in the shop; and then he had to deliver the food.
Story_ID: 650541
Speaker 1: Did your father [Willie Gibson] ever talk about race relations in Alabama?
Speaker 2: He never really talked about it too much.  But most black people in Alabama and every other southern area was exposed to the rules and regulations, the unwritten rules and regulations that dealt with race.
Speaker 1: And what did you understand them to be when you were a child?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was a child I didn't pay, I didn't pay much attention to it, but you would hear stories of black people being abused by whites in the towns.  Enterprise [Alabama] was not as bad as some other places, but you would hear the stories--
Speaker 1: And you would hear--
Speaker 2: --about what not to do, and what to do.  And--
Speaker 1: So, what were those kinds of things that you would hear, what you as a child should or shouldn't do?
Speaker 2: Well, you were told to--you'd have to go through the backdoor if you were going to somebody's--the white people's houses.  You couldn't go in the front door.  You had to say, "Mister," to kids.  The disrespect that was shown, and still is shown, frankly, in a lot of places came from the slavery days.
Speaker 1: Did you as a child ever consider not following those rules?  Was that anything you and your friends ever talked about?
Speaker 2: No.  Of course by the time I was eight years old, we arrived in Newark [New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you left--
Speaker 2: And even though things were still a bit segregated in certain places, we were not exposed to the abuse that you got in places like Alabama.
Story_ID: 650542
Speaker 1: So, we--we'll get to Newark [New Jersey] in a moment. Let--tell me about, tell me about your mother.  What's her name, when and where was she born?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Daisy [Daisy Shipman Gibson], D-A-I-S-Y.  She was born in Enterprise [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Also in Enterprise, okay.  And when was she born?
Speaker 2: In 1914.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: On June 16th.
Speaker 1: And Enterprise is a town of about how many people back then?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a good guess.  Probably ten or fifteen thousand.
Speaker 1: And do you know how your parents met?
Speaker 2: I think they met at a small school function, because my father [Willie Gibson] said my mother was playing the records.
Speaker 1: She was playing, she was operating the record player?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And how old were they when they met?  Well, how old was she?
Speaker 2: They had to be teenagers.  I was born when my mother was eighteen, I believe.  So--
Speaker 1: And where are you in the birth order in your family?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest son.  It's only two of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My brother [Harold Gibson] is two years younger than I am.
Speaker 1: So, you were born when your mother was eighteen, and he was born when she was twenty?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Tell me about--what did your mother do for a living?
Speaker 2: My mother stayed at home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father did not want her to be out working.
Speaker 1: And what about her family?
Speaker 2: Her family was large.  Her father [Harrison Shipman] died when she was young, and her mother [Alice Shipman] had a lot of kids.
Speaker 1: How many?
Speaker 2: Oh, I knew you were going to ask me that (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I don't remember how many, but I'll take a good guess and say there were at least four girls, and I think three boys.  There were at least seven.
Speaker 1: And so, her father died when she was young.  How did her mother care for the children?
Speaker 2: As catch as catch can, really.
Speaker 1: Did she work?
Speaker 2: She did domestic work.
Speaker 1: And your, where does your mother fall in the birth order of her family?
Speaker 2: My mother was the oldest child, I believe.
Speaker 1: So, then did she have to take care of the children?
Speaker 2: She had to help take care of the younger ones.
Speaker 1: Did she go to school?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure how many years she went, but it was elementary school at best.
Speaker 1: Because often, it would be the oldest child who would have a big responsibility to help.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Especially if mom was working.  At some point, was your mother a seamstress?
Speaker 2: Yes, at what we called the--but she didn't do a whole lot of seamstress work.
Speaker 1: But that was--she was doing that at home?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But she then met, she met and married your father when she was young?
Speaker 2: Right.  She was--I don't know when they met, but I was born when she was eighteen, so.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And they had been gotten married.
Story_ID: 650543
Speaker 1: So the- they married in Enterprise [Alabama], right, because you were born in Enterprise?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You lived in Enterprise until you were seven.  What were the circumstances that brought your family to leave to go to Newark [New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Well, my father [Willie Gibson], being as ambitious as he was, borrowed some money from my grandmother [Alice Shipman], my mother's mother, and built a house.  And we were the only family in that whole area that had indoor plumbing.  And his, my father's job got really angry with him because he didn't borrow the money from them, and they cut his pay.  And being, like I said, ambitious, he decided to quit and came up to Newark.
Speaker 1: How did he choose Newark?  Because Newark was--
Speaker 2: My [paternal] grandfather [Daniel Gibson] was here.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And his--
Speaker 1: Your grandfather came with the--
Speaker 2: And his sisters were here.
Speaker 1: And do you know why your grandfather chose Newark?
Speaker 2: I really don't know.
Speaker 1: Because when you look at the Great Migration, Newark, Newark is not one of the most common--
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: --places that you hear about.
Speaker 2: Not like--
Speaker 1: We hear Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Not like Chicago.
Speaker 1: --L.A. [Los Angeles, California], you know, but not--Newark is not often on that list.  So--
Speaker 2: I don't know why my grandfather chose Newark.
Speaker 1: But anyhow, he did.  And so your father and mother [Daisy Shipman Gibson] and you and your brother came.  What's your brother's name?
Speaker 2: Harold [Harold Gibson].
Speaker 1: Harold.  So, the four of you came to Newark after this incident with--
Speaker 2: Yeah, in 1940.
Speaker 1: Do you know if your father was able to sell the house?
Speaker 2: No, I think the house--I'm not sure what ever happened to that house.  I know it was still there.  In fact, I think it's still there.  I don't know if he ever really sold it.  It was being rented for a while.
Speaker 1: Do you know if he felt in danger when that happened, when his boss cut his pay?
Speaker 2: No, no.  My father decided to leave, that's all.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: There was no real danger of him leaving.
Speaker 1: But it was the disrespect.
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't really understand, but everybody has ambitions though.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And you can't talk too much about what you're going to do, if you're going to do it.
Speaker 1: That's true.  When your family moved to Newark, did you first live with your grandfather?
Speaker 2: No.  My grandfather and my father, they never got along.
Speaker 1: Ah.
Speaker 2: My father never forgave him for leaving. So we lived with his sister, my Aunt Rose [ph.], for a couple of weeks.
Speaker 1: A couple of weeks?
Speaker 2: Then we moved into a rooming house.  So, my father and my brother and my mother and I lived in a rooming house.
Speaker 1: And were the four of you in one room?
Speaker 2: In one room.
Speaker 1: After living in the house.  So, how was that for you?
Speaker 2: Well, at eight years old, you know, you go with your mother, father.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Story_ID: 650544
Speaker 1: When you think back to your childhood, what is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a good one.  I guess the earliest memories I can recall is living in this house that had outhouses in the back [in Enterprise, Alabama].  And I couldn't have been any more than about four years old.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about it?
Speaker 2: Oh, just a wooden house, and if it rained, you could hear the rain on the metal roof.  It had cracks in the floor, and if you dropped a penny and it rolled too far, it fell underneath the house.
Speaker 1: Were you ever able to crawl under there to get those pennies?
Speaker 2: Well, I was af- afraid to go down there. (Laughter) You don't wanna--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) What did you think was down there?
Speaker 2: I didn't know, but I wasn't going to take any chances.
Story_ID: 650545
Speaker 1: And in, in, in your growing up years in Newark [New Jersey], what are the sights, sounds, and smells that you remember in those early days?
Speaker 2: Well, Newark was, to me, coming from Enterprise [Alabama], a big city.  I went to school, and we were coming out of a colored school in Enterprise [Enterprise Academy; Carroll Street School], and we were at least a year or two ahead of the public school system in Newark, and Newark at that time had one of the best public school systems [Newark Public Schools] in the country.  That little colored school in Enterprise was more advanced than it was in Newark.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about that. This is in, in your small town--because Enterprise is pretty small.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It's segregated?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How many teachers were in that school?
Speaker 2: I don't know how many, but they had classes from what they called pre-primer kindergarten to about the fourth or fifth grade.  And when we left there, I was in the third grade.
Speaker 1: Were all of your teachers black?
Speaker 2: All of the teachers were black and all of the students were black.
Speaker 1: About how many children were in the class?
Speaker 2: There weren't many.  I'd take a guess and say maybe ten or fifteen at best.
Speaker 1: Are there any particular teachers that you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, the man who ran the school, his name was Donald [William M. Donald], he was a very interesting person.  He had, he had been to New York [New York] and gone to NYU [New York University].  He was far ahead of most people in that town, black and white.  And--
Speaker 1: Was he from Enterprise?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He started--
Speaker 1: And he went to NYU and then came back home?
Speaker 2: He came back home.  He started that school, and his daughters taught there.  One of them was named Beam [ph.], I think she taught the second grade.  He had another son that was a barber in town, and he had another son that was--he had a lot of kids.  But the girls--
Speaker 1: Donald had a lot of kids?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The girls were teachers and the boys were entrepreneurs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: His son was my barber, my first barber, right in the middle of Enterprise.
Speaker 1: In terms of Enterprise, the business area of Enterprise, how big is this?  Is it a block?  What are the businesses in those days?
Speaker 2: The businesses were the butcher shop, ice cream factory, a drugstore.  They had a lumber yard, they had a movie, one movie--segregated, of course.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And they had a courthouse [Coffee County Courthouse, Enterprise, Alabama], and I don't know if that was a town courthouse or a county courthouse, but it was a courthouse.
Speaker 1: And what about churches?
Speaker 2: Oh, they had a lot of churches.  They had a Baptist church and a Methodist church in the black community.
Speaker 1: Where did you go to?
Speaker 2: They went to the Baptist church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you all active in the church?
Speaker 2: My mother [Daisy Shipman Gibson] was.  My father [Willie Gibson] was not too much of a churchperson.
Speaker 1: And so since your mother was, did that mean you and your brother [Harold Gibson] were too?
Speaker 2: Well, we went when we had to.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah.  So, this Mr. Donald who ran the--he, he started the school and ran the school?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And he was a photographer.
Story_ID: 650546
Speaker 1: The level of education that you all received [at Enterprise Academy; Carroll Street School, Enterprise, Alabama] far exceeded where you were when you got to Newark [New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Well, Newark was, as I said, one of the best public school systems [Newark Public Schools, Newark, New Jersey] in the country.  And we were, my brother [Harold Gibson] and I were at least a year ahead of every child in our class.  I ended up teaching half the class, my third grade class.
Speaker 1: And did they accelerate you?  Did they advance you?
Speaker 2: They accelerated my brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My teacher wouldn't accelerate me, because she caught me stealing a piece of paper.
Speaker 1: Wow, what a penalty.
Speaker 2: But I was, I was still teaching the class.  I taught the other kids how to read.  My brother skipped twice.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: He graduated from high school [Central High School, Newark, New Jersey] at sixteen.  I had to hurry up and get out before he caught me.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) But the teacher was fine with you helping to teach the class?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  She was a great teacher.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Grace Baxter Fenderson.  Her father had been the first black principal in Newark.  His name was James M. Baxter.
Speaker 1: What's the last name?  Baxter?
Speaker 2: Baxter, yes.
Speaker 1: And the school, what was the school that you were attending in Newark?
Speaker 2: Monmouth Street School [Newark, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Monmouth Street School.
Speaker 2: Elementary school.
Speaker 1: And this is in what year that you started there?
Speaker 2: In 1940.
Speaker 1: And so this is, still this is a black school?
Speaker 2: No, no, it was--
Speaker 1: It's not a segregated school?
Speaker 2: It's not a segregated school.
Speaker 1: Because Newark had some neighborhoods that were integrated.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had--the white people that were left were usually Jews.  I had one Jewish girl in the class when I graduated from elementary school, from Monmouth Street School.
Story_ID: 650547
Speaker 1: Well, by the time you got there, already whites were fleeing the city?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah, that, the neighborhood was mostly black.  The girl that was in my class [at Monmouth Street School, Newark, New Jersey], her name was Claire Newman [ph.], and her family ran the local grocery store.
Speaker 1: This is the Jewish girl?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, how did blacks and Jews get along?
Speaker 2: They got along fine.  In fact, if it weren't for Jews in those early years, most black people would not have gotten a job unless they worked at a factory.
Speaker 1: Because they were primarily the merchants?
Speaker 2: They were the merchants.
Speaker 1: And so in your, in your childhood in Newark [New Jersey], you were--in the neighborhood where you lived, where was that neighborhood?  Where did you grow up, what street?
Speaker 2: It was Monmouth Street.
Speaker 1: And was this after the rooming house?  When did you leave the rooming house?
Speaker 2: I didn't leave the rooming house until 1947.  We lived in that rooming house for at least six years; I believe it was seven years.
Speaker 1: So, how did the rooming house work?  You have a room, and is the bathroom down the hall?
Speaker 2: Yeah, down the hall, and everybody in the place used it.
Speaker 1: And were you able to use the kitchen?  Was it a community kitchen?
Speaker 2: It was a community kitchen.  Everybody used the kitchen.
Speaker 1: How many people lived in the house?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a good question.  One, two, three, four--I can only count the rooms.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: On the first floor, there were two rooms.  On the second floor there were two rooms, and on the third floor another two rooms.  So, six--well, six rooms.
Speaker 1: And in your room, there're four people.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So is that typical, that there were whole families?
Speaker 2: No, no most of them were couples.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And were all the people black?
Speaker 2: Yes, in the rooming house they were all black.
Speaker 1: And who owned it?
Speaker 2: There was no--Mr. White [ph.], his name was.  There was no integration, housing wise.
Speaker 1: Right.  It was illegal, right?
Speaker 2: No, not illegal, but practice.
Speaker 1: Right.  And did Mr.--was he African American, or was he--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Mr. White?
Speaker 2: Mr. White.
Speaker 1: And did he also live there?
Speaker 2: No, he didn't live there, but he lived in another one that he owned.
Speaker 1: How common were these rooming houses at that time?
Speaker 2: Quite common.  They were very common, in fact.  The entrepreneurial spirit of people who would buy up those little houses and make rooms of out them, there were a lot of those around.
Speaker 1: So, this was--
Speaker 2: Nobody had--
Speaker 1: --like big houses that had been a single family house that was divided--
Speaker 2: Right, divided up.  Nobody had an apartment.
Speaker 1: It was a room, just like in New York [New York] where the, the old houses were broken up and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --each floor used the bathroom that was on that floor.  Or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --sometimes there wasn't a bathroom on the floor, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 650548
Speaker 1: What, as a child--how would you describe [HistoryMaker] Kenneth Gibson as a little boy?
Speaker 2: I was, I would say a relatively quiet boy.  I minded my own business; went to school every day.  School was very important to my family.  I think I went all the way through elementary school [Monmouth Street School, Newark, New Jersey] and high school [Central High School, Newark, New Jersey] without missing a day.
Speaker 1: And had any of your, had either of your parents [Daisy Shipman Gibson and Willie Gibson] or anyone in their families graduated from high school or college?
Speaker 2: Nobody graduated from high school.  So, forget about college.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: I think I was the, in, in, in my family I was the first to go to college.
Story_ID: 650549
Speaker 1: Where did you go to junior high school?
Speaker 2: Cleveland Junior High School.  It was on Bergen Street in Newark [New Jersey].
Speaker 1: And how far away was that from your home?
Speaker 2: A good walk, about a half hour.
Speaker 1: And you and your brother [Harold Gibson] would walk each--well, he wasn't even in there.
Speaker 2: He wasn't there.
Speaker 1: Right.  Did you ever go to the junior high school together?  Maybe one year?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, because--
Speaker 2: Because I was a year ahead of him.
Speaker 1: Right.  And then--
Speaker 2: He went directly from elementary school [Monmouth Street School, Newark, New Jersey] to high school.  He didn't go to a junior high school.
Speaker 1: Oh, so he skipped over junior high school?
Speaker 2: You know, there was no junior high school that would fit his age group at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to Central High School in Newark [New Jersey].
Speaker 1: As you are growing up in Newark in the '40s [1940s] into the '50s [1950s], what are race relations like?
Speaker 2: They basically were not bad; there was no overt racism.  There were certain places in downtown Newark that did not welcome black patronage.  There was one movie theater that if you went there, they would make you sit in the balcony.  There was a couple of restaurants in downtown Newark that wouldn't even serve you.  So, other than those examples, they were not bad.
Speaker 1: But Newark, one of the things that Newark struggled with, post World War II [WWII], was that the economy never really recovered, right?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Actually, you were there when World War II is occurring.  So--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What, well, what was the economy like when you were there?
Speaker 2: Well, the economy in World War II was extremely good.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Everybody worked.  In fact, most people had two jobs.
Speaker 1: And you as a child, you were working as well?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I was not doing too much work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I was in high school.
Story_ID: 650550
Speaker 1: So, you didn't work, when you were in high school [Central High School, Newark, New Jersey] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We didn't--I didn't do any work in high school.
Speaker 1: Your--but did you, you played instruments?
Speaker 2: I played the alto saxophone.
Speaker 1: Fr- from when did you start doing that?
Speaker 2: Oh, about 1945, '46 [1946].
Speaker 1: And who taught you?
Speaker 2: I took lessons, I went downtown.  And Newark [New Jersey] had one of the best performing theaters.  The Adams Theater had live shows and would change once a week, and had big bands.  Duke Ellington played there.  Billy Eckstine sang there.
Speaker 1: Did you go to see these performers?
Speaker 2: I went to see those, and--
Speaker 1: This is when you are in high school?
Speaker 2: Right.  I was impressed with the alto saxophone player in Duke Ellington's band.  His name was Johnny Hodges.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I said, "That's what I want to do."  So I got my mother [Daisy Shipman Gibson] to buy me a saxophone, and I took lessons.  I ended up winning the music award in high school.
Speaker 1: And did you play--what groups did you play with?
Speaker 2: I played in Jackie Bland's Band [Jackie Bland Band].  There's a picture on the wall in there, and Matthew [the videographer, Matthew Hickey] can take pictures of it later.  It had some of the most famous guys in it.  In fact, one of the guys that sat next to me in the reed section won a Grammy Award.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Wayne Shorter.
Speaker 1: Of course.  So, you were playing with some pretty great musicians.  Were you thinking this is what you were going to do?
Speaker 2: No, I found out you couldn't make any money.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You can be the best musician in the world and still be trying to figure out how to eat.  That's the unfortunate thing about music.
Speaker 1: Yeah, for most people it doesn't pay a lot.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, how long were you a serious performer?
Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't serious, but I was good.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But I didn't use it as, as an attempt to make a living.
Story_ID: 650551
Speaker 1: So you, you mentioned during, during World War II [WWII], it was prosperous times in, in the city [Newark, New Jersey].  What were the kinds of jobs that were available for people?
Speaker 2: Anything that would provide a service to the war effort.  They had factories that made equipment.  They had factories that made food for the [U.S.] military.  They had factories that would provide clothing.  Anybody that wanted to--they'd take you to the arsenal, which was ammunitions.  They would pick people up on the corner and drive them to work every day.  That was a job itself, just taking people--
Speaker 1: Just to take people, right?
Speaker 2: --taking people to work.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: But if you wanted to, you could work two shifts.
Speaker 1: So, your father's [Willie Gibson] still working as a butcher, correct?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did he also participate in any of these other jobs to support the war?
Speaker 2: He worked double duty at Swift and Company making food for the soldiers.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  So, they were involved as well.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And at any point did--because you said your father did not want your mother [Daisy Shipman Gibson] to work.  At any point during the war did she work?
Speaker 2: Yes, she worked at a factory that made radio tubes for military equipment.
Speaker 1: So, this is--
Speaker 2: A factory.
Speaker 1: --assembly kind of work?
Speaker 2: It was a combination of assembly and cutting of pieces that would be assembled--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --after they were cut.
Speaker 1: Because at that time, even women who were homemakers came out--
Speaker 2: Everybody came out.
Speaker 1: --to support, right?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't so much as to support, but to make money.
Speaker 1: Okay, there you go (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) They were not doing it for altruism.  Yeah, there was a paycheck.
Speaker 1: And your father was about how old at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, 1945 was when the war ended.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That means he was--
Speaker 1: In his thirties?
Speaker 2: Yeah, thirty-five.
Speaker 1: So, that's why he was not drafted; he was already an adult--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --at the time of the draft.  So, after the war you are--okay, so the war ends in '45 [1945].  You're still, you're in junior high school [Cleveland Junior High School, Newark, New Jersey], right, or about to go to high school [Central High School, Newark, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: About to go to high school.
Speaker 1: Did you know, were there people in your neighborhood who were soldiers?
Speaker 2: Yes, a couple.  The guy next door to us ended up being blinded I think in a military accident; he had been in the [U.S.] Army.  But the Army was a very strange situation, because it was still segregated.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: In fact, if you went over to the Red Cross [American Red Cross] to donate blood, they wouldn't take your blood if you were black.
Speaker 1: Well, there's that story of Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew], who figured out how to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --collect the blood (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's true, that's a true story.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and, and died not being able to get it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 650552
Speaker 1: So, when, when the soldiers began to come back, you know, one of the most famous stories that many soldiers told was coming--they felt that they were treated better overseas than when they came back home to segregation.  Did you hear any of the stories of soldiers coming back, and how they felt?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I've heard a lot of those stories.  I was exposed to one of those stories.
Speaker 1: Yeah?
Speaker 2: I was drafted, and that was long after the war [World War II, WWII], in 1956.  And strange as it sounds, I had basic military training at Fort Dix in New Jersey.  And while I was there, I was part of a group of people who had been avoiding the draft for years.  But they put us on a truck and drove us across the base, and the guy said, "Well, you guys are the cream of the crop."  The [U.S.] Army gives you a GT [general technical] test and determines what your qualifications really are, at least based on what they think they are.  And they told us that we were going to get special training and we could go back to our civilian jobs.  They wanted to make a spy out of me, put me back in my neighborhood [in Newark, New Jersey].  And I had to report, make a report every night.  But in order for me to get the special training and special duty, I had to sign up for another year, and I refused it.  And I was the only person in this company, this training company, that was sent from training to Fort Riley, Kansas.  And on my trip to Fort Riley, Kansas my plane stopped in St. Louis, Missouri.  And I was sitting at the counter of a coffee shop, and the waitress kept walking past me.  So, I said, "Do you have any ice cream?"  She said, "Oh, yeah."  I said, "Can I take a dish of vanilla ice cream?"  I'm sitting there in a uniform, a [U.S.] military uniform.  And a black guy comes out of the kitchen, and he walks around to me from behind the counter and said, "If you want to eat ice cream, you have to eat it in the kitchen."  I'm sitting there in a U.S. Army Class A uniform, and I'm being told in St. Louis, Missouri that I had to eat in the kitchen if I wanted ice cream.
Speaker 1: This is 1956?
Speaker 2: Fifty-six [1956].
Speaker 1: What did you do?
Speaker 2: I said, "No, that's all right.  Don't worry about it."  But later on, they sent me to Hawaii, which is not bad duty; I mean, I was enjoying that.  And they put the whole 25th Infantry Division on alert, because the Suez Canal [Egypt] had been taken over.  And they put the infantry division on alert and said we were going to go--they had to go fight.  And I refused to go on alert; I wouldn't pack anything.  The sergeant came through and said, "Gibson [HistoryMaker Kenneth Gibson], everybody's getting packed up.  We might have to get shipped out."  I said, "I'm not going anywhere.  If I can't eat ice cream in St. Louis, Missouri, I'm damn sure not going to fight in the desert in the Far East."  So, I ended up in trouble for that (laughter).
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: They shipped me over to the post engineer's office and told me to go there every day and stay there.  They didn't want me to poison the rest of the soldiers, I guess.
Story_ID: 650553
Speaker 1: Now, I, I want to go back to your--how you got to that point.  Because you graduate from high school [Central High School, Newark, New Jersey], and then go, and then go to college, to Newark College of Engineering [Newark, New Jersey], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: So, it was when you were in college that you were drafted?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was going to night school.
Speaker 1: Okay, you're going to night school.  How did you know that you wanted to be an engineer?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, when you have those class days in school, in high school--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --and you see somebody that impresses you.  A guy walks in who had these engineer boots on, and he was talking building bridges.  I said, "Man, that's what I want to do."  So--
Speaker 1: And were you always good in math and science?
Speaker 2: I was always really good.  Math was my thing.
Speaker 1: So, you go to college.  Are you, are your parents [Daisy Shipman Gibson and Willie Gibson] paying for you to go to college?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you're the first one in the family to go to college?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then you're drafted?
Speaker 2: I was drafted because I was getting a divorce.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: But I didn't tell the truth about the divorce until the heat and emotion from Vietnam [Vietnam War] was reduced.  So, they drafted me.
Speaker 1: So, when did you get married?
Speaker 2: I got married early.  I got married when I was eighteen.
Speaker 1: Like your parents.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And who did you marry?
Speaker 2: My first wife, we had--
Speaker 1: She was from Newark [New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: And so, you got married at eighteen.  This is right after high school?
Speaker 2: Right after high school.
Speaker 1: And did you have children?
Speaker 2: Yes, two daughters.
Speaker 1: Two daughters.  What are their names?
Speaker 2: Cheryl [Cheryl Gibson Fuller] is the oldest one, she was born in 1951.  And Jo Anne [Jo Anne Gibson Banks], the youngest one, she was born in '55 [1955] I believe, yes.
Speaker 1: And so, you're married and you say--who didn't you tell about the divorce?
Speaker 2: The draft board.
Speaker 1: Oh.  So, they're recruiting you; well, they're drafting you.
Speaker 2: They're drafting me.
Speaker 1: And what happened?
Speaker 2: I got drafted in '56 [1956].
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, and you were already in the midst of a divorce at that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was finished with the divorce, but I didn't tell them the truth until about that time.  I figured it was easier to tell the truth than--rather than for them to come pick me up and put me in jail.  So--
Speaker 1: And so, because you didn't tell them the truth, that's why they went through with the draft?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, the draft was--I was eligible for the draft at that point; they weren't treating me badly.  I became more eligible because I was no longer married.
Speaker 1: I see.  And then did you complete your education while you were in the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't complete it until I got out.  I had gone to night school for a couple of years before I was drafted, and I came back from the Army in '58 [1958]; and I finished my education.
Speaker 1: Where did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I got my degree in '62 [1962].
Story_ID: 650554
Speaker 1: And so, your service in the [U.S.] Army was always stateside.  You didn't leave the country because, because of getting in trouble?
Speaker 2: Right.  No, no, I didn't get in trouble and, and end up in jail or anything.
Speaker 1: Right.  You said they just separated you--
Speaker 2: They separated--
Speaker 1: --so you wouldn't influence the other--
Speaker 2: That's right.  They sent me to a place that had never seen a recruit before.
Speaker 1: And what was that experience like?
Speaker 2: It was fun.
Speaker 1: Where did you go?
Speaker 2: I went to Fort Riley, Kansas.
Speaker 1: And what was there?
Speaker 2: It was a Signal Corps [U.S. Army Signal Corps] company that was attached to the 1st Army Division, a specialized Signal Corps company.
Speaker 1: Signal Corps?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So what were you doing there?
Speaker 2: Painting signs on the trucks.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Those little signs that go in the front of the truck--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --that's like a license plate.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: They had me--
Speaker 1: So, that's how you served your time?
Speaker 2: That's how I served my next eight weeks.
Speaker 1: Oh, it's eight weeks.
Speaker 2: Well, eight weeks.  And after that--
Speaker 1: After eight weeks?
Speaker 2: They sent me to Hawaii.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Hawaii, it was in Hawaii when they said they wanted to send you to the Suez [Suez Canal, Egypt]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you said no?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't going, period.
Speaker 1: Now, how does the Army respond to that?  Because you're not supposed to be able to say no.
Speaker 2: That's because most people don't have enough courage.  You don't have to do something that's against your principles.  You're supposed to follow orders.  You can go to the stockade for that.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  So--
Speaker 2: But they--
Speaker 1: What did they do to you?
Speaker 2: I told them I'd call a press conference and tell them the truth; that if I couldn't eat ice cream in St. Louis, Missouri, I wasn't going to fight in the Suez, period.
Speaker 1: What did they do with you after that?
Speaker 2: They sent me to the post engineer's office.  They told me to go there every morning.
Speaker 1: And how long--
Speaker 2: I had to walk across, Schofield Barracks [Hawaii], which is about a mile long, at least a mile long.  I had to walk all the way across the base to go to work every day.
Speaker 1: And you did that for how long?
Speaker 2: Until they got tired of me walking.
Speaker 1: Which is over what period?
Speaker 2: Oh, about eighteen months.
Speaker 1: Oh.  And then were you discharged?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I got an honorable discharge.
Speaker 1: So, your strategy worked?
Speaker 2: It wasn't so much strategy.  I just wasn't going to do it.  I had to take whatever they wanted to dish out, or go to the stockade.  They'd have to court martial me.  And a court martial, for what I was objecting to, would be the possibility of me winning.
Speaker 1: Right.  What was it inside of you that said you were willing to stand up, even though you could have been court martialed?  I mean court martial is not a small thing.
Speaker 2: Well, it depends upon what the charges are.  It's like anything else (cough).  If you're charged with a criminal violation, it's different.  I wasn't being charged with a criminal.  I wasn't going to go fight in a situation where I could not eat ice cream in St. Louis, period.
Speaker 1: Got it.
Speaker 2: And I told them that.
Speaker 1: So you, when, when were you discharged?  What year?
Speaker 2: Fifty-eight [1958].
Speaker 1: Fifty-eight [1958].
Speaker 2: Draft is two years.
Story_ID: 650555
Speaker 1: Okay, and in--so in '58 [1958] you come back to Newark [New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: I come back to Newark.
Speaker 1: And what do you do next (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I went back, I went back to school [Newark College of Engineering, Newark, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: And are you still in night school?
Speaker 2: I'm still in night school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what kind of work are you doing?
Speaker 2: I'm working for the state.
Speaker 1: Doing what?
Speaker 2: I was an engineering aide--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --on highways.
Speaker 1: So this--that vision that you had of building bridges, you were heading in that direction?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how long did it take you to get your degree, doing it at night?
Speaker 2: Another four years.  It took eight years.
Speaker 1: By 1960, is that when you graduate?
Speaker 2: In '62 [1962] I graduate.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in '60 [1960] you become an engineer for the Newark Housing Authority, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I had been working for the housing authority--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --as an aide.
Speaker 1: What's happening in housing in Newark at this time?
Speaker 2: Housing in, in what way?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, you describe--when you first came you're living in rooming houses.  There are, there is public housing.  You're working for the Newark Housing Authority, so I'm assuming this is the public housing, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In many cities, when public housing began there were nice buildings that were built, you know, communities that were built that were affordable housing.  What was the housing that the Newark Housing Authority was building at this time?
Speaker 2: Well, it was pretty good, but not everybody could go into public housing.  So, those people who (cough) those people who were able to get apartments did well.  The rest of the people rented other units around the city.  So you--most people were renting.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were not homeowners.
Story_ID: 650556
Speaker 1: And by 1960, what is the racial and economic reality of, of Newark [New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Between '60 [1960] and--it was kind of really active communities in those days.  There were those jobs we had in factories, and there were all those assembly plants close by.  People were able to get a job.  Housing was available, anyway.  So--
Speaker 1: Was it affordable?
Speaker 2: Yes, by and large, yes.
Speaker 1: And what is the racial mix of the city at this point?
Speaker 2: In about '60 [1960], it would probably be about half and half.
Speaker 1: And is this still black and Jewish, or has it changed?
Speaker 2: Black, Jewish, Italian, Polish, and the influx of Portuguese.
Speaker 1: And does Newark at this point have issues with the mob?  You know, is that becoming part of the culture?
Speaker 2: Well, the mob was always a part of Newark's culture.  It was not anything that was talked about in publications, anyway, but everybody knew what was going on.  There was what they called the policy rackets-- numbers.  There was gambling, loan sharking, some of which still exists.
Speaker 1: And were there any black people who were part of that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  In fact, you could not run that kind of game in a city like Newark without blacks being part of it.
Speaker 1: Right.  So, there, so there were relationships among the, the different groups?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's a business relationship (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Uh-hm.
Story_ID: 650557
Speaker 1: You get your engineering degree [from Newark College of Engineering, Newark, New Jersey] in '63 [1963], correct?
Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962].
Speaker 1: Sixty-two [1962], okay, in '62 [1962].  And once you have your, your degree, how does that change your work?
Speaker 2: It didn't change my work very much, because my improvement on my job was based on civil service examinations.  So--
Speaker 1: And did you, you took that before?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: I was already a senior engineer when I graduated from college, when I got my degree.  What the degree did, it allowed me to take the professional engineer's exam.
Speaker 1: Which--
Speaker 2: Which I took--
Speaker 1: Did that open doors for different kinds of work?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, because now I'm a certified professional; in fact a doctor's examination, like an accountant's examination.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Anything that certifies you to do your profession makes you eligible for higher pay.
Speaker 1: You had been working in the Newark Housing Authority, working for them for many years and building a name for yourself during that time.  In '64 [1964], you are named Man of the Year.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the Jaycees--
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: --the Junior Chamber of Commerce [Newark Junior Chamber of Commerce].
Speaker 1: Well, so this is your city acknowledging your contributions.
Speaker 2: Yes, a servicing organization.  They were good people, the Jaycees.
Speaker 1: How are you building your--both your reputation and the breadth of your work now?  This is, we're moving into '66 [1966], and you're promoted again to chief structural engineer for the City of Newark [New Jersey].  What do you have to do in that role?
Speaker 2: Review the plans for all construction on a structural basis.  So, the building plans that were developed and submitted to the city for approval, well part of my job was to review them.
Story_ID: 650558
Speaker 1: I'm curious about what's happening in Newark [New Jersey] also, in terms of civil rights.  You know, we're--this is now--from the time that you've come back from your [U.S. military] service and you're finishing school [Newark College of Engineering, Newark, New Jersey], and you're growing in your career as an engineer, the United States is exploding in terms of folks standing up for civil rights, even as you did yourself.  And, you know, there's a lot of, of unrest throughout the nation.  What's happening in Newark?
Speaker 2: Well, Newark is like most cities.  It was like most cities at that time, with the attempts to improve conditions in the general community, whether they be jobs, education, housing, or just general improvement of conditions for people.  Everybody was a member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  At that time there was CORE [Congress on Racial Equality], and there were other civil rights organizations.  There was always the Urban League [National Urban League], and I became a part of I guess every civil rights organization in town.  And everybody was struggling to make improvements.  Jobs and education, I guess, were the focal points.  All of them were focal, but jobs and education got most of the headlines.
Speaker 1: At this point, in the early '60s [1960s], are you still experiencing segregation in Newark?  Or--
Speaker 2: In some places, yes.  There were jobs that people could not have access to.  For instance, the White Castle hamburger place down on Elizabeth Avenue wouldn't hire black people to serve hamburgers.  They employed people from Kentucky and Tennessee and all kinds of other places.
Speaker 1: To Newark, to, to serve hamburgers?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Which was essentially a minimum wage job?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's amazing.  But that's what was going on.
Speaker 1: You're working in the space of engineering as this is happening, but you know, you're paying attention to what's going on in the city.  How are you seeing--what do you see as your role?
Speaker 2: Well, we formed a couple of organizations to combat some of that.  One was called the Business and Industrial Coordinating Council, and we got some of the downtown business guys to join us, to work with us and improve the job market.  So, we had a jobs available committee and a job training committee, and we ended up getting opportunities that did not exist before.  For instance, the bus drivers in Newark were working for what was then called public service, local mass transit.  There were no black bus drivers.  The banks didn't have any black tellers.  So, if you think about the fact that the people using the buses were all black, and the driver had to be white, it didn't make any sense.  So, these are the kind of things that we were able to begin chipping away at.
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Speaker 1: --and you're, you're getting involved in these things, so this is beyond the scope of your job, per se?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Story_ID: 650559
Speaker 1: Were you at this point thinking that you wanted to be involved in political office?
Speaker 2: No, I had no thoughts about being a politician at all.
Speaker 1: But when, when you got that role as chief structural engineer in the city [Newark, New Jersey], this is when Hugh Addonizio was there.  Is that how you say his name?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He became--well, he was mayor at that time.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And as I've read it, he was looking to have inroads into the black community, so you were important at that time.
Speaker 2: No, that's not how it happened.
Speaker 1: Please tell, how did it happen?
Speaker 2: How it happened was that most of us who were involved in the Civil Rights Movement had come to the conclusion that we had to influence the mayor one way or the other, and the best way to do that was for somebody to run for mayor.  And none of those guys who were looking for a stalking horse wanted to do it, so they tried to get me to do it.  So, I ran for mayor in 1966 against Addonizio and the rest of the people, and I came in, luckily, third out of a group of about six people running for mayor.  And I decided then that if I could come in third with no money, no organization, if I ran for four years, I had to win.  That's how it happened.  So, after that campaign, Addonizio decided that he would offer me a job in the city, hoping, of course, that I'd keep quiet and out of the way.  But that's how that happened.
Speaker 1: So, he offered you a job, and you take that job?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: This is the structural engineer job?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that occurred after your run?
Speaker 2: After my run in '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: So, he saw you as a potential threat, and brought you into the fold?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So then the next year--let's see.  The first year that you ran for mayor was when?
Speaker 2: In 1966.
Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966].  The next year is when there are a number of black mayors elected around the country.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Carl Stokes--
Speaker 2: Carl Stokes and Richard Hatcher [HistoryMaker Richard Hatcher].
Speaker 1: Right, and Carl Stokes is in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Richard Hatcher is in Gary, Indiana.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And these are significant, because they're larger cities, and this is as the Civil Rights Movement is coming to a crescendo.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Are you, even though you are not mayor yet, are you engaging them in any way?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  We went out to visit with Richard Hatcher in Gary and reviewed how he was able to be successful.  We talked about his campaign, we talked about his committees, we talked about how he went about it, and we kind of copied the way he put his organization together.
Speaker 1: And so, you went with him--you went to visit him shortly after he was elected?
Speaker 2: Yeah, sometime after that.  It was, about, oh, '68 [1968], I believe.
Speaker 1: So, he's in office long enough to be able to be settled a little bit?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And when you say you copied what he did, what does that mean?  What, what did you learn from him?
Speaker 2: Well, we looked at his organizational structure, how he did it.  He called his people coordinators, but it's the same type of thing that you do when you're going to run a campaign.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: Is figure out how you're going to get to the, the voters.  Because nowadays it's not done the same way, but in those days it was people to people movement.
Story_ID: 650560
Speaker 1: In 1967, the riots occur.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What were the conditions that brought about the riots?
Speaker 2: It was a struggle for housing, jobs, employment, and education.  But the biggest problem in all of those instances, based on what I'm sure you found out, is that there's usually a sparking incident between policemen and a civilian that gets blown out of proportion by rumor and reactions on the part of the police.  And that's what causes the disturbance.
Speaker 1: And what was that sparking action this time?
Speaker 2: It was a taxi driver who was into a conflict with a cop, based on the cop being in the patrol car and the taxi driver trying to get around him.  It was abuse of authority, and that's what happens.  In every one of the incidents that you see now, as in the past, there's usually some guy who decides that, "I'm the police and I can do whatever I want." And that causes a problem.
Speaker 1: And so, riots ensued.  Are you in Newark [New Jersey] at the time of the riots?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you describe what you witnessed?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't witness too much of it, except for the fact that my daughter, one of my daughters, was upset because they were firing bullets around the neighborhood.  And I had to take her to the hospital, because she was afraid.
Speaker 1: How old was she?
Speaker 2: She's sixty-seven now; she was about twelve.  And they had called out the National Guard at that time, and the National Guard, being afraid, had shot out all the streetlights.  So you were trying to drive in the middle of the night with no streetlights.  So I had to call my brother [Harold Gibson], who was a Newark cop, to get my daughter to the hospital.  That was my frightening episode.
Story_ID: 650561
Speaker 1: And at this point do you still have two children, or you have your third child by then?
Speaker 2: No, this is just two [Cheryl Gibson Fuller and JoAnne Gibson Banks].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The third one wasn't born until 1980.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when did you marry your wife [Camille Savoca Gibson] now?
Speaker 2: This one?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Twelve years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there was another wife in between?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But who is the mother of your third child, of your third daughter?
Speaker 2: She's in Portland, Oregon.
Speaker 1: What, and what's, what's her name, the daughter?
Speaker 2: Her name is, she's named after me.  Her name is Kennon [Kennon Scott].
Story_ID: 650562
Speaker 1: So, one of the things that we've seen to happen during riots is that the neighborhood that people live in ends up being the neighborhood that gets destroyed.
Speaker 2: Well, the businesses do.
Speaker 1: The b- yeah.
Speaker 2: Not the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What happened in Newark [New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Springfield Avenue, which is the commercial district, and Market Street, and Bergen Street, that's where the businesses are.  If you've got liquor stores, they're the first ones to get attacked.
Speaker 1: The liquor stores?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Anybody who wants to do damage breaks into a liquor store to get the liquor, or the electronics places, but usually liquor stores.
Speaker 1: Can you get into the head of that person or people who are, who are making those choices?  Because on one hand, this explosion erupts because of, as you described--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, there's this defining moment, sparking moment, as you described it.  And then there seems to be a lack of reason, as it relates to--
Speaker 2: Well, there's no reason connected.  There's no connection between the spark and the people who just want to get drunk.  If you got free whiskey by breaking somebody's window and you're using the disturbance as an excuse that has nothing to do with the legitimate grievances that are going on in town; they're not related.  People who are going to be destructive, all they need is a reason to break a window.  They're not breaking the window because they don't have a job, or because housing is bad, or because schools are bad.  They're breaking the window because that's where the liquor is.
Speaker 1: So, after the riots--which lasted a few days, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Businesses are destroyed, some people are killed.  I mean, it's a tragic scene from which some people say Newark has never fully recovered.  Would you--what would you say?
Speaker 2: Well, that's true.  The image of those disturbances is always going to be there, because they always get dredged up on the TV camera reruns.  So, that never changes.  That's one thing about history; that's why we're here, you've got to talk about what actually happened as opposed to what people say happened.  But there's nothing like a picture.
Story_ID: 650563
Speaker 1: Well, in the very next year, in 1968, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is assassinated.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Which then there is a national outcry.  There's rioting again.  Is there rioting in Newark [New Jersey] as well?
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Speaker 1: Because it's already happened there.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: But you know, many cities had riots where the businesses were destroyed again.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And people's homes, too.  I'm from Baltimore [Maryland], and they had--if you put a black piece of cloth on your bannister, they would pass over your house and go to the next one.  There were all kinds of things that they did during that time.  You--well, first, tell me how was Newark affected by Dr. King's assassination?
Speaker 2: Well, we were all kind of traumatized during that period of time.  If you recall, it wasn't the only assassination.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Martin Luther King.  And--
Speaker 1: And the president [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy].
Speaker 2: You've got to also remember that certain people had made King the national enemy number one, not the least of which they hated him.
Speaker 1: When you say they, who are you talking about?
Speaker 2: Well, J. Edgar Hoover.  J. Edgar Hoover hated him with a passion, and everybody knows that.  And anybody who thinks that King was assassinated just by this one idiot [James Earl Ray], they're wrong.  That was a conspiracy.  How was that guy able to leave this country with a fake passport and go to Europe and travel around with money before he was brought in?  Do you think he all by himself did that?  You got to be crazy if you think that.
Speaker 1: During the time that it all occurred--
Speaker 2: And who sent King's wife [Coretta Scott King] those tapes?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Everybody knows who did that.
Speaker 1: During the time, do you feel like people knew?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they still know.  They just won't ever publish the real truth about that murder.
Speaker 1: As one who already--you had run for the office of mayor [of Newark, New Jersey], and you've been involved for many years in helping to support the community.  Does Dr. King's death motivate you more to run, or do you feel deflated?  What are you feeling at this point?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'm one who believes that if you're going to do anything, you got to do it and plan it, and do it well.  You can't get emotional about what you're going to do, because that's when you lose.  The, the effort that I made, and continue to make, by being involved in politics was to help my community.  And as long as you try to help your community, you're going to actually succeed.
Story_ID: 650564
Speaker 1: Your intention of helping your community--now things have shifted because of the riots.  You know there's a lot of rebuilding to do.  You still have the sa- issues that were present before, you know--housing, the need of jobs and education.  These things haven't gone away.  Does it feel like a more dire situation?
Speaker 2: It is, because the organized opposition is still there.  They're still trying to under educate our young people.  This whole business of putting people in charge of public education who don't believe in public education, it's almost criminal to me.  How can you put somebody in charge of public education who doesn't believe in public education?
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: And our young people today don't get basic education.
Speaker 1: Well, you described your education in Enterprise [Alabama] as being excellent, and even though at the time when you were coming up in Newark [New Jersey], the education system was still very good.  How has it changed over these years?  Now, we're approaching, we're in 1968.  What has changed?
Speaker 2: What has changed is that they have a lot of people who are in education who are not committed as much as they should be to actually teaching, to educating.  We have people graduating from high school with a piece of paper that says they graduated, who can't read or write.  That to me is almost criminal.  I say almost, I think it's criminal.  How can you recommend somebody to a job who can't read or write?
Speaker 1: Who's finished the twelfth grade (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who's finished high school.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: It doesn't make sense.
Speaker 1: At this, at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's where we're losing.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: How are we going to compete worldwide if our kids can't read and write?  How would you like to go to a doctor who can't read and write?
Story_ID: 650565
Speaker 1: At the same time that, that the crisis in education is happening, the mayor, Addonizio [Hugh Addonizio], is facing a lot of pressure about the police department [Newark Police Department], which even though there are many black people in Newark [New Jersey], there were virtually no white--no black police officers.  Your, your brother [Harold Gibson] was a police officer.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, there's, there's one (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: But I mean the argument, one of them, is that the race relations are terrible.  There were 145--of the 1322 police officers in 1967, only 145 were black, even though the city was over 50 percent black.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, one of the problems that we have as people who are oppressed is sometimes we have to get past those of us who are joining the oppressors in order to succeed.  They have all kinds of names for them, but the fact of the matter is if you raise your hand to oppose mistreatment, they find a way to get rid of you.  Look at our jails.  Look at our prisons.  Look at the imbalance of the people who have been convicted and sentenced to jail, as opposed to crimes being committed.  They've done all kinds of studies to prove the misuse of the criminal justice system in order to keep basically black males under control.
Story_ID: 650566
Speaker 1: All this is stirring, and you have decided to run again for mayor [of Newark, New Jersey].  What is the platform that you're running on in 1970?
Speaker 2: Well, we, we ran on those same issues; improved jobs, education, housing, and opportunities.
Speaker 1: And how is Mayor Addonizio [Hugh Addonizio] responding?  Because you know, you've ran before he hired you, and now here you are again running against him.
Speaker 2: Well, he couldn't do anything about me running.  What he could do is he could get a lot of what I call the protectors to try to keep me under control.  They had some black police officers who were just as brutal as the white police officers.  A lot of people don't want to write those stories.  But sometimes you got to get pass those guys in order to get to the real enemy.
Speaker 1: And so, as you were running, you faced all of that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, but I was aware of it.  You can't pretend that everybody that looks like you are going to be like you.  Some of them are the best protectors that the opposing people have.
Speaker 1: And your brother [Harold Gibson] was a cop--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the Newark Police Department.  How is he--what is your relationship with him as you are running for mayor?
Speaker 2: Well, not all the black guys are bad now.  I'm not saying that.
Speaker 1: Of course.
Speaker 2: I'm just--my brother was a good one.
Speaker 1: But did he get pressure as a result of you running for office?
Speaker 2: No, no.  They wouldn't dare.
Speaker 1: Was he able to be supportive of you?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he traveled with me every day during the campaign, he and a few others.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: But they had to fight with the other guys in the department.
Speaker 1: Right.  When so you were elected in 1970, correct?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In this same year, Mayor Addonizio kind of falls from grace.
Speaker 2: Well, he got charged with a federal crime.
Speaker 1: And charged and found guilty, right?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Conspiracy and extortion.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did he, did he have to go to jail?  He was convicted.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he went to jail.
Speaker 1: He went to jail?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  After the campaign was over, he did go to jail.
Speaker 1: Why, why, do you think--because this is not an uncommon experience, for elected officials to fall into this, you know, into this behavior.
Speaker 2: Well, they have all kinds of reasons for that.  Addonizio had a personal problem, he was a gambler.  And people who have that addiction, if you know anybody like that, you understand what I'm saying.  It's just like any other affliction; it's like a drug abuse.  But he was a serious gambler.
Speaker 1: While in office?
Speaker 2: While in office.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: And when you have that kind of problem--if you're subject to bad habits, let me put it that way, then you can get in trouble; and that's what he did.
Story_ID: 650567
Speaker 1: When you come into office, this is historic.  You become the first African American mayor of Newark [New Jersey], one of the largest cities in the United States, after a mayor [Hugh Addonizio] who's been in there for a long time who has fallen from grace.  But you're dealing with some, some big issues for your city that you've run on.  What are, what are some of the things that you were able to implement in this first term?
Speaker 2: You know, it's very hard for me to separate the terms now because--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, you just tell me what you remember.
Speaker 2: The things that I can--
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this differently.  You are, you are mayor from when to when?
Speaker 2: From 1970 to 1986.
Speaker 1: And so, there're several elections in between there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, four elections.
Speaker 1: Four elections.  So, you don't have to limit it to the time period, let me know some of the accomplishments you feel that you were able to make.
Speaker 2: Well, when I took office, Newark had some of the worse health statistics in the country.  We had the highest tuberculosis rate, the highest venereal disease rate, the highest infant mortality rate.
Speaker 1: In the whole country?
Speaker 2: In the whole country.  The highest maternal mortality rate, and I can go on and on.
Speaker 1: Why do you think the highest?
Speaker 2: Only because healthcare and health conditions are symptomatic of life experiences and the quality of life.  If the housing is poor and lead paint is all over the place; if your healthcare system is poor and people are not able to go to the doctor as much as they should; if pregnant women are not able to get care during pregnancy, then you end up with these kind of problems.  I was able to put together a healthcare network, and we had the major healthcare providers join in with preventive medical care, and we were in, within one to two years, able to improve all of those statistics.  So, there were children being born then that are now still alive because of that system.  So, how much is a human life worth?  I think that we saved lives; and that, to me, is a better statistic than anything that we were able to do otherwise.
Story_ID: 650568
Speaker 1: Now this issue of healthcare and how you pay for it, taking care of people, especially if they may not be able to afford it, has been a hot button topic for a long time.  How were you able to mobilize in order to make such a dramatic shift in a short period of time?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't that short, but I'm saying that--
Speaker 1: Well, you say a couple of years.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  If you consider the fact that we had a major teaching hospital in Newark [New Jersey], the University of Medicine and Dentistry [University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey], where doctors are being taught and trained--where else would doctors and students in medicine be able to practice better than at a medical clinic facility?  So, I was able to convince them that it's what I call, enlightened self interest.  If you're going to teach people how to be health providers, then why not start where people need it?  With the best training in the world.
Speaker 1: So, it wasn't a teaching hospital at first?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It was?
Speaker 2: When it first came to Newark, it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they weren't doing as much as they should do.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And the other hospitals joined in, so everybody became involved in the program.
Speaker 1: And then were they offering free treatment to the people?
Speaker 2: In most cases, yes.
Speaker 1: And this was for the residents?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, it helped them to have patients.
Speaker 2: They had patients; the hospitals had patients.  And the insurance companies were able to do all right because most of these people had insurance.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, the advantage is, I think, clear.
Speaker 1: And then you began to make relationships with these insurance companies and the various businesses.  How did you get Prudential [Prudential Life Insurance Company of America; Prudential Financial, Inc.] to be headquartered in Newark?
Speaker 2: Well, they were always headquartered in Newark.
Speaker 1: Were they?  So, they expanded--
Speaker 2: I didn't--
Speaker 1: --then?
Speaker 2: Right, they expanded.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't attract them, but I would love to be able to take credit for it (laughter).
Speaker 1: But didn't you work with them on setting up the expansion?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: They were here.  Prudential's home base is Newark.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, most people don't realize it, but every check that a [U.S.] military person sent home for support was written out of one building in Newark.  Every military person in this country had a check written home to their wives and children, written out of a Prudential building in downtown Newark.
Speaker 1: Why was that?
Speaker 2: Of course, they called it the Office of Dependency Benefits [U.S. Department of War, Office of Dependency Benefits].  They had a federal contract to write checks for every military person in the U.S. military.  The building's still downtown in Newark, it's still there.  Prudential had that contract all during World War II [WWII].
Story_ID: 650569
Speaker 1: So, I'd like to learn more about the relationship that you built with Newark [New Jersey] that--excuse me--with Prudential [Prudential Life Insurance Company of America; Prudential Financial, Inc.] and other businesses, because that's part of what you are known for; helping to bring more businesses into Newark, to bring more money into the city.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'd like to take credit for all of that.  But the point is that it makes good sense, business sense, to be where people and businesses are, because they provide a service.  The guys that I made friends with in downtown Newark, they laughed at me at first when I said I was going to be the mayor; they didn't believe it.  I convinced them to do some special things in Newark.  Before I was elected, I went to every major business in downtown Newark.  And I told them, I said, "I'm going to be the mayor, and I just want one commitment from you.  Once I become mayor, then you help me."  I said, "Because I realize who actually has the power in town."  After they got finished laughing, then I got elected and I called them all back up.  I said, "Okay, I'm here now."  They gave me, without cost to the city, a senior vice president of every business in downtown Newark.  The guy who chaired the committee was a senior vice president for Prudential; his name was Bob Smith [ph.].  I made him the business administrator for the City of Newark, at no cost to the city, and he stayed for three months and they gave him another three months.  They were able to help me change the way the city operated, just based on their experience and knowledge about how to get things done.  It didn't cost the city any money.
Speaker 1: So this was a relationship that you had planned that you had planted the seed when you were running?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And then they all agreed to help?
Speaker 2: That's right, they all came.
Speaker 1: And over what period of time were they helping you?
Speaker 2: It was six months, officially.  It was more than that, but actually I made him business administrator for six months.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I have to break the timeline for a moment, since we're having this particular topic.  So, do you see value in the current presidential administration [President Donald John Trump] bringing these businesspeople in to do these jobs?
Speaker 2: It depends on what they're doing.  You can't--just because these guys are businessmen don't mean they're smart.  (Laughter) The people that I brought in were people who actually had the power in Newark; they were already here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't resurrect--I didn't bring in new people.  Prudential was the home base in Newark, and had been for a hundred years.  These guys that we read about nowadays, they, in most cases, have no commitment to improving the quality of life of the normal citizen; they have no real interest in doing it.  So, I don't know what's going to happen.  Getting back to my pet peeve, how can a person run in charge of public education who doesn't believe in public education?  The guy [Rick Perry] who's in charge of environmental protection [United States Department of Energy] said that that was one of the departments he was going to eliminate when he was running for office.  Are these the kind of people you should put in charge?  It's a like a person who tells you that, "I don't like children," and you put them in charge of child welfare.  There's something wrong with that.
Story_ID: 650570
Speaker 1: I wanted to know (laughter), since you--now, and in your case, the businesspeople you selected were people you described who were already leaders in the community and very knowledgeable about the areas that you put them in oversight of, correct?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And after, after the six month period, who are you replacing them with?
Speaker 2: I put in charge--I replaced them with people who have brains.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm a firm believer that the quality of the person in charge should outweigh a resume.  I went to major educational institutions in this country, and I told them to give me the smartest guy you got, or girl, the smartest people you have.  They said, "What about discipline?"  I said, "I don't care.  Just who has the best ability, the most ability."  I learned that from the Rockefeller family.  That's what they did.
Speaker 1: How so?  When did you talk to them?
Speaker 2: I didn't talk to them.
Speaker 1: Oh, just from--
Speaker 2: I studied them.  The Rockefeller Foundation was started that way; they hired brains.  Nothing beats God given ability, I don't care how many schools you go to.  I don't care what your degree is in, that person who has a natural God given ability will always come out first.
Story_ID: 650571
Speaker 1: I want to address another topic that you took on, took, took on very seriously during your time as mayor, which is crime rate, you know really reducing violent crimes in the City of Newark [New Jersey].  What, what was your approach, and how effective were you?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, all mayors want to take credit for crime rate reductions, but they don't want to take blame for crime increases.  You really don't control that.  The best you can do is to make the climate better for everybody, whether it be the law enforcement officers or the citizens, so that people get along.  If you have everybody at each other's throats, that's when you will have problems.  The biggest thing about crime is that it's usually not perpetrated by strangers.  It's usually--when you have violence in a home, those are not strangers.  Childhood abuse doesn't come from strangers, it comes from people who have not prepared themselves to be raising children.  And if they don't get a good training or a good education or a good feeling about--a self-worth feeling--then it's going to be abusive.  Most abusive families come from abusive families.  Spousal abuse usually comes from a family that had spousal abuse when they were younger, or earlier in life.  I would like to take credit for crime reductions, but that's not true.  The climate is what you try to produce--the ability of people to get along with each other.
Speaker 1: And what kinds of programs did you put in place to change the climate?
Speaker 2: The best programs are good communications and education.  You'd be surprised at what happens when you talk to young people.  They're always surprised at how available you are if you're a public official (cough).  They say, "Well, I didn't know you were able to talk to young people."  I talk to more young people than I did when I was in office, and they enjoy it.  You'd be surprised at the number of questions you get, or the type of questions that you get.
Story_ID: 650572
Speaker 1: In 1976, you are elected president of the U.S. Conference of Mayors, another first.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: First black mayor to hold that position.  Can you tell me what the conference does, and what your role was, what your responsibilities were?
Speaker 2: Well, the Conference of Mayors is an organization of big city mayors in this country.  Their basic job and direction is to almost become a lobbyist for the cities through work on behalf of the cities, because what's good for the city is usually good for the mayor.  If you can talk to [U.S.] Congress about legislation that's going before Congress that's going to provide improvement of programs for cities, it usually helps the mayor.  Mayors are usually part of that organization, and we get to be president by going through a series of steps: chairman of this committee, chairman of that next committee, and then becoming vice president.  It's almost a stepping stone.  Once you reach a certain level, you're going to become president.  I just lobbied and got myself involved in the first two steps, which made my election as president almost automatic.
Speaker 1: Well, you say almost automatic, and we're still talking about a racially charged environment.  How is that these mayors, most of whom are not black, are welcoming you?  What are you doing to create this welcoming environment for them?
Speaker 2: Well, we're helping to legislate or lobby Congress to legislate on behalf of the cities.  The Legislative Action Committee [New Jersey Legislative Action Committee], which I was part of, would go to Congress almost on a monthly basis (cough) to try to lobby for legislation that would help the cities.  And that committee was composed of about ten of us.  We went to Congress, went to Washington [D.C.] almost on a monthly basis to talk about what was good and what was needed.
Speaker 1: And the lobbying worked?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 650573
Speaker 1: Who were your peers at this time, particularly among black mayors?  Who, who were you, who are your peers?  Who are your advisors?  Who are you talking to?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  Peers is a lot different than advisors, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 2: But I think about Coleman Young, who was the mayor of Detroit [Michigan].  Richard Hatcher [HistoryMaker Richard Hatcher] was still mayor of Gary [Indiana].  Carl Stokes had become a TV person.  But by and large, the mayors that remained were not African American, not black.  But we all had the same problems, because the city problems didn't differentiate between black mayors and white mayors.
Speaker 1: So, who were some of your white peers with whom you had a good relationship?
Speaker 2: I had good relationships with all of them.  Tommy D'Alesandro [Thomas D'Alesandro, Jr.], I mentioned to you--
Speaker 1: In Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 2: --and John Lindsay from New York [New York].  Later on there was Abe Beame [Abraham Beame] from New York.  And there was the real mayor of Chicago [Illinois], Daley, Richard Daley [Richard M. Daley], who had a very interesting personality.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: Daley was very determined, and somewhat strict.  He was always on time for meetings.  He went to Mass every morning.  He lived in the same house in Chicago that he grew up in.  And Joe Alioto, who was the mayor of San Francisco [California].
Speaker 1: Did you find in working with these mayors--they're heading up big cities--that you got a lot of challenges?  And also did you have any ego problems dealing with these mayors?
Speaker 2: No, there was only one or two of them that were full of themselves, as we would say in the community.  But basically, the good people who meant well--because you find out how people are when they're not in front of the camera.  Basically, they were all hardworking, and meant to do the right things for their cities and the people in their cities.
Speaker 1: And as you are working with mayors across party lines, what is that dynamic like when you have philosophical and political differences?
Speaker 2: Well, it's really not too many political differences, because being mayor is, it's a special relationship.  There's not too much time to be ego tripping.  Every now and then you would get--the Republican mayors wanted them to do something to help their party, and the Democrats wanted to do something else, but they were never into combat about that.
Speaker 1: People didn't fall on party lines so hard (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, they were good--they were basically good people, I thought.
Story_ID: 650574
Speaker 1: In '76 [1976], you put forward an affirmative action plan targeted at ending discrimination in munic- municipal hiring and upgrading minority employees working in some of these city jobs [in Newark, New Jersey].  How effective was that?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I don't really know, because we never did a numbers game.  We never checked to see what the results were, not that I know of.  What we wanted to do was to improve the opportunities for people.  Equal opportunity is what we were trying to fashion.
Speaker 1: Well, in the '70s [1970s], that was very popular, to make that effort for affirmative action--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --across the country.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And obviously it met with opposition, but it, it, it pushed through in some places.  But, but you didn't, you didn't do an evaluation to see to what extent?
Speaker 2: I didn't directly, no.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh--
Speaker 2: I think we made some improvements, but the question is how much of an improvement?
Story_ID: 650575
Speaker 1: As the years moved by, one of the challenges that Newark [New Jersey] faces is a shrinking tax base.  A lot of people are still leaving, right?  What happens when that tax base diminishes?
Speaker 2: Well, the real problem is what do you consider the base?  Where does your money come from?  The unfortunate thing, and I've said this for many years now, is that as long as you're dependent upon property tax as a basic source of revenue, then you're living with an archaic plan.  Property tax should not be the basic revenue source.  What happens when a husband dies and a widow is left as a property owner who has no children in school, and who has no ability to take the money to pay the taxes?  In many cases, they lose the property.  That's backwards.  It should not be a situation where property tax is the basic source of revenue (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you able to change that?
Speaker 2: --especially in Newark.  Newark is 30 to 40 percent tax exempt.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: The Port Authority [Port Authority of New York and New Jersey] and the airport [Newark International Airport; Newark Liberty International Airport] take up about one third of the land, and the rest of it is taken up by nontaxable institutions, educational institutions. Colleges and universities, they don't pay taxes.
Speaker 1: Well, that's that invisible deficit of many communications that have a lot of these structures there.
Speaker 2: That's because they depend upon property tax as a source of revenue.  How about other ways of raising revenue?  How about usage taxes?
Story_ID: 650576
Speaker 1: You were talking about alternative types of taxing, like what about user taxes, you mentioned.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not a tax expert.  I'm just saying that as long as we use an archaic form of taxation--and if you remember the history of this country, at one time only property owners could vote.  So, that's why these things came down to us, because women couldn't vote in those days either.  But we should not be using that form of taxation to pay the police today; and the firemen, and the sanitation workers.
Speaker 1: What did you attempt to put forward as a different way to support the city [Newark, New Jersey], as the tax base shrank?
Speaker 2: We put in some payroll taxes, and then they fought like hell about it.  We put in some parking lot receipt taxes, where you'd park your car and you'd pay the parking lot guy; there was a tax associated with that.  We did some things like that, but that's not the way to do it.  We should get away from property taxes as a basic source of revenue; and I still believe that user taxes--anybody who uses a service, there should be a fee attached to it.
Story_ID: 650577
Speaker 1: During this time, you, you--when did, when did you--you were mayor until what year?
Speaker 2: Eighty-six [1986].
Speaker 1: So, you, you are mayor of Newark [New Jersey] when the drug--well, at least one of the drug epidemics is occurring, when crack--when cocaine in general and crack cocaine become so popular all over the United States, ravaging cities.  You were mayor during that period.  What happened to Newark with this influx of drugs, and what were you able to do about it?
Speaker 2: We weren't really able to do much to improve the situation at all.  Drug abuse is beyond the powers of the mayor.  You can have all the treatment centers you want, but that doesn't deal with the problem.  As long as people are using drugs, then you're going to have problems.  It's worse today with these synthetic drugs.  They have more problems with that now than we had with crack.
Speaker 1: Which is also synthetic.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Ultimately, the way it's produced.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But, you know, one of the challenges that occurred in New York City [New York, New York], for example, in the crackdown, just so many young men of color, particularly African Americans, who were arrested for selling these dollar and five dollar--whatever--you know, the small product that was on the street, but rarely if ever were the people who were supplying it arrested.  What, what happened in Newark?
Speaker 2: The same thing.  But, you know, don't forget that whatever's happening in Newark is also happening in the suburban cities.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: The difference is those people are brought into court and not treated the same way as the guys in Newark.  All you got to do is visit the prisons and jails and see the difference.  Same crime, different sentence.
Speaker 1: And is there anything that you, in the role of mayor, can do to affect change, for, for that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Those are state laws, and at the discretion of judges.
Speaker 1: And so, are you lobbying.  You mentioned the lobbying that is done with the Conference of Mayors [U.S. Conference of Mayors].  Are you lobbying to support and protect these young people?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we did that.  And I've been out of office now a long time.  So--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --I'm not called upon to be a part of that.  But now, they're even down to the reform the bail.  Even the bail that's set, for the same crime, is totally different for violators in Newark than they are in suburban towns that are right next door to Newark.
Speaker 1: So, this is racism in another form?
Speaker 2: Institutional.
Speaker 1: Institutional racism.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: If the elected officials are not able to open the eyes of those who can do something about it, you know, how do you have hope in a situation like that?
Speaker 2: You don't get a whole lot of hope unless the people who are making the decisions are affected, or their families are affected by the decision.  And those decisions continue to be made without regard to what happens to the people that they're sentencing.  That's one of the reasons I always was upset about residency violations.  Because if the policemen and firemen and public workers are affected by the quality of the service they provide, they'll provide a better service.  At one time, cops were required to live in Newark, and so were firemen.  Those were the days when we would have police athletic leagues, and the kids got programs and everything else.  Not today, because they go home at night and their kids are not affected by the service they provide.  There's one thing about enlightened self-interest: if you are affected by the quality of the service you provide, you'll do a better job.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: That's human nature.
Story_ID: 650578
Speaker 1: When you left the role of mayor [of Newark, New Jersey], you made two runs for governor.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about--?
Speaker 2: We did that really as a demonstration of what should be possible.  People don't believe you can achieve anything unless somebody tries it and proves that you can do it.  They didn't believe I was going to become mayor until I got elected.  If you run for governor, you give some young person an opportunity to even dream of being and getting there one day.  When I saw Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] become president, it was a shock, even to me, because I never thought it would happen.  So, you have to set the example sometimes in order to give our people an opportunity to dream of success.
Speaker 1: As you say that, even though other people were doubting you, did you think that you might win?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I was firmly convinced that I was going to win.
Speaker 1: Who were you running against in these elections?
Speaker 2: When I first got elected, I was running against the guy who was in office, Addonizio [Hugh Addonizio].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: After that, it was other people who decided to run.  But after I had won the first time, it was difficult for anybody to beat me.  Incumbency has its privileges.
Story_ID: 650579
Speaker 1: And as the first black mayor of Newark [New Jersey], did you feel any additional pressure as--being black?
Speaker 2: Tremendous, tremendous pressure.  You'd be surprised at what happened to the civil rights organizations once I got elected.
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: They got no support after that.
Speaker 1: Because you had the job now?
Speaker 2: The mayor was in charge, so everybody thought if you needed a job, go see the mayor.  If you wanted to make an improvement, go see the mayor.  So, the civil rights organizations didn't get any support.
Speaker 1: Didn't you need them?
Speaker 2: I needed them, sure I did.  (Laughter) But the guys who would buy those tickets didn't think that they should support them.
Speaker 1: Well, just like when Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] became president, they said it was post black.
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's the way life is.  They said, "You got one of your own now.  You don't need us.  You don't need our money."
Speaker 1: Well, what happened for you?  What was that side effect for you, of them not giving support?
Speaker 2: We had lines of people standing in front of City Hall [Newark City Hall, Newark, New Jersey] looking for a job (laughter).
Speaker 1: And of course, you weren't able to employ all of them.  Did you have a backlash because of that?
Speaker 2: No, not so much backlash, but even the citizens didn't understand that we couldn't hire everybody.   I made the mistake of saying things like that, and the citizens didn't ever forgive me.  I said, "If I can run this city without hiring anybody, I'd do it.  Then I'd save the tax money."  Nobody thought that was a good thing to say (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Understandable.
Story_ID: 650580
Speaker 1: And so, the run for governor?
Speaker 2: It was more of a civil rights demonstration than anything, and we proved that it could be done.  I came in pretty high on the Democratic voting rules.  It was good.
Speaker 1: Why do you think you didn't win those elections?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't have enough money, didn't have enough organization; didn't have anything--enough to win.  But we proved it could be done.
Speaker 1: In the early days of your time as mayor, you got a lot of support from Amiri Baraka, who was like the, you know, the Black Arts Movement symbol in a sense, certainly in Newark [New Jersey], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you were part of an organization with him before you even became mayor, right?
Speaker 2: Well, he and I worked together for political purposes.  He headed up a group called the Committee for a Unified Newark.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he was basically the inspiration behind the Black and Puerto Rican Convention, which selected me as the mayoral candidate, and some other people.  But there's always a pioneer in every movement, and he was the pioneer for that group.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And the inspiration.
Speaker 1: And he was very supportive, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: I've read also that there was a time when he didn't like that you were supportive of the businesses so much.
Speaker 2: Well, Baraka is a very interesting person.  He was artistic in nature, and he could not support everything I was doing, because that was not his nature.   He and I used to talk about it.  He said, "Why do you--?"  He said, "I can't support that.  You out there with those white people."  (Laughter) I said, "But those are the guys who have the money."  (Laughter) So, we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ideological differences?
Speaker 2: It wasn't so much as ideological, it was just--he just had to be an (unclear).  He had to be non supportive.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But we never disagreed personally.
Story_ID: 650581
Speaker 1: You did run for mayor [of Newark, New Jersey] and not win, correct (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Sixty-six '66 [1966], 1966.  And the last time was 19--
Speaker 1: Eighty-six [1986], right?
Speaker 2: Eighty-six [1986].
Speaker 1: After you had had a lot of success as mayor?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I read that you were surprised.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was surprised, after having been in office for sixteen years that people would think that I should not be reelected.  Most politicians who have been in office too long think that, and that's when it's time to leave.
Speaker 1: And so you were defeated by Sharpe James--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --who had been on the city council [Newark City Council] for many years.  What do you think about the job that Sharpe James did?
Speaker 2: Sharpe was an interesting character.  He was a totally different type of personality than I--outgoing.  He was like a PR [public relations] person.  He was a like a circus barker at the circus, whereas as I was the engineer type--reserved and quiet.  So, he sold the slogan.  He did the slogan, like this guy [President Donald John Trump] in office now.  He said, "It's time for a Sharpe change," was his slogan.  It didn't mean anything, but it caught on.  He told people I had been there too long, and in many respects he was right.  Sometimes you got to leave.  Get out while the getting is good.
Speaker 1: Do you think that he took the baton and did a good job?
Speaker 2: I think he did.  In fairness to Sharpe, he did a fairly good job, yeah.  He made some mistakes, but everybody does.  Nobody who gets into public life can actually, honestly say they never made a mistake.
Story_ID: 650582
Speaker 1: So when you, when you left, you opened a business [Gibson Associates, Inc., Newark, New Jersey].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Or, you started consulting?  What did you do?
Speaker 2: Engineering.
Speaker 1: So, you go back to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And advice.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Advice and engineering.
Speaker 1: And what kinds of things were you doing?
Speaker 2: People would ask for--how they should approach public officials.  And since I had been involved with public officials and I knew a lot of them, I could get them meetings that they couldn't get themselves.  So, I was lobbying.
Speaker 1: Back to that lobbying that you had done with the Conference of Mayors [U.S. Conference of Mayors]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, influence peddling is what the bad people say about it.
Speaker 1: And how long did you do that?
Speaker 2: Four or five years I guess.
Speaker 1: And then you also were doing engineer projects, correct?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So did you--you built a small firm?  Did you have other engineers working with you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a couple.
Speaker 1: How--uh-huh.
Speaker 2: But we would hire contractors.
Story_ID: 650583
Speaker 1: And then what, what was the issue with the school construction project that created somewhat of a scandal for you?
Speaker 2: It was a--I don't know what the real issue was.  Some people said we had too many staff people, and that we didn't build properly.  But the real issue was that anytime you are a public official, or have been a public official--once you become a target--let me put it this way--that target is always on your back.  A lot of people were not happy with my success, because we were making a lot of money, and a lot of people wanted that job running those schools.  We built millions of dollars' worth of school work; construction management, a lucrative contract.
Speaker 1: And did you, did you close your business [Gibson Associates, Inc., Newark, New Jersey] after the--
Speaker 2: I got indicted (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: You got indicted for charges of bribery and stealing money from the contract, and tax fraud.
Speaker 2: All that stuff, yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: None of which was proven.  It ended up with a--
Speaker 1: Did that destroy your business?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we ended up with a hung jury.  And when you don't win--whatever you've been indicted for, stuff follows you.  So, you can't really be too successful after that.
Speaker 1: Did you continue to work after that?
Speaker 2: A little bit, not much.
Speaker 1: But you retired--
Speaker 2: I still do--
Speaker 1: You still do--
Speaker 2: --advisory and consulting work, but I don't hold myself up to charges.  I don't compete with anybody who's going to be upset.
Speaker 1: As you describe it--because other people have talked about this when, when--even if you're acquitted--in your case you have a hung jury--it's, you know, it's gone but it's not gone.  And what can you do, if anything, to repair your reputation?
Speaker 2: My reputation is not really bad.  I'm still called upon to make speeches.  I'm still called upon to receive honors, being honored by churches during Black History Month.  I still get asked to talk to student groups.  So, my reputation is still pretty good.
Speaker 1: At that time, emotionally, how did you handle it?
Speaker 2: It didn't bother me as much as--see, I always knew I was a target, you know.  You remember the (unclear) group?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Well, they came after me eight times, that I know of, and they were trying to set me up in all kinds of ways, and prosecutors will do that.  They give somebody a briefcase full of money and tell them to offer it to you, and if you fall for it and they put you on tape, you get indicted and you get convicted.  Well, they came at me every way you could think of, and I still think that's criminal for them to do that.  But as long as you're a successful black man in America, you're going to be a target.
Story_ID: 650584
Speaker 1: Now we--now we come to a number of years later, in 2014, your friend Amiri Baraka's son, [HistoryMaker] Ras Baraka runs for office.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: When you--did, had you known him growing up, all of his life?
Speaker 2: Just about. I remember the day he was born.
Speaker 1: And were you aware of his interest in public office?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  He ran for city council in Newark [Newark City Council] a long time ago.  He ran for mayor a long time ago.  This is not his first trip to the rodeo.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: He's been around.
Speaker 1: Have you been supporting him throughout his career?
Speaker 2: I didn't have to.  He was a community organizer type, and he did very well.  In his last--one of his first campaigns for mayor, he and I were not together on that campaign.  I forgot what was happening in those times, but--
Speaker 1: Was that when Cory Booker--
Speaker 2: No, it was before Booker.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Befo- when he first got elected, I supported him.
Speaker 1: In this day and age--so we're many years from when you became the mayor of Newark [New Jersey].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: There have been several African American men in this role since, since you initiated that role, since you integrated the role.  How different is it for Ras Baraka today than it was for you?
Speaker 2: I don't think--to be fair to him, I don't think he gets the same kind of support that I got, by and large.
Speaker 1: What kind of support did you have that you think he doesn't?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a historical event, and everybody took credit for me being elected, even those who opposed me.  In his case, he's just going along, doing something else that has been done before.  So, he's not a, he's not a history maker right now, so he doesn't get the same kind of general emotional support that I got.  It's very hard for him.
Speaker 1: Well, and the City of Newark, would you say that if you took the pulse of the City of Newark today in 2017 compared to 1970 when you first became mayor, how would you compare the conditions for the people--for housing, education, and jobs?
Speaker 2: To be fair, I think it's about the same.  I think he has as many problems now as I had when I took office.  It's no easier for him now than it was for me.
Speaker 1: And, and this is not unlike other cities that are majority black, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --industry has left.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What can be done to turn it around?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't have a success formula or a magic wand, but it's not going to be easy.  It's not easy for anybody.  Public office today, especially at the mayor's level, is very, very difficult.  You have all the problems, and not as much in the resources.  I had so much government help, federal government help, that I had programs coming out of my ears.  He doesn't have that.
Speaker 1: And now we have a new administration [President Donald John Trump] that--
Speaker 2: It's worse.
Story_ID: 650585
Speaker 1: Well, you know, the, the--before taking office, Trump [President Donald John Trump] accused [HistoryMaker] John Lewis of having a district that was impoverished and drug infested, which is untrue.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He also said that Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] wasn't born in the country.  So, all of his untruths didn't stop him from getting elected president.
Speaker 1: But I guess what I'm getting at is if the president of the country does not see black people for who they are, and what their accomplishments are, and the potential--how does that affect a mayor in doing his or her job?
Speaker 2: It makes it harder; more difficult, to be grammatically correct.  It's just not, it's not comfortable being in that seat.  The mayor [HistoryMaker Ras Baraka] has a monthly meeting with myself and with Sharpe James; our job is to give him advice.  And my feeling about advice is you don't give anybody advice if they don't ask for it, and sometimes they don't follow it even when they ask for it.  So you try to do the best you can to make sure he doesn't make the same mistakes you made.  And anybody who tells you that they went through that job without making mistakes, is crazy.  I just hope he doesn't make any blunders.
Story_ID: 650586
Speaker 1: So, Mayor Gibson [HistoryMaker Kenneth Gibson], I want, I want you to think about your career; and as you pointed out, you said, "I was a historical event."  That is a really clear understanding of your place in time in becoming mayor [of Newark, New Jersey].  As you look over your career, what do you hope your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: It's hard to answer really, because I don't know.  I would hope that as some of our young people reach adulthood that they realize that there is potential for them that they may not have thought of before.  What I see too much of today is a group of people who don't seem to have the ambition and enthusiasm about working hard to achieve something.  I don't think they have the right goals.  Maybe they don't even know how to accept their goals in order to achieve anything worthwhile.  So, maybe my history might stimulate somebody, some few, to achieve more than they're thinking about today as teenagers, maybe.
Speaker 1: Do you have any regrets?
Speaker 2: No, no, I don't.  I really don't have any regrets.  I've made mistakes, and like I said before, anybody who says they never made a mistake hasn't done anything.  But, no real regrets.  In fact, I feel really good about my life, what I was able to achieve in the years that I've been here.
Story_ID: 650587
Speaker 1: If there are any young African American males or females out there who would like to follow in your footsteps, to get into elective office and represent the people, what advice would you have to offer them?
Speaker 2: Now, that's really a good question.  My advice always is to follow the things that you have an interest in.  I try to tell the young people all the time, "Don't try to become what you don't have any God given ability to do."  I tell my wife [Camille Savoca Gibson] all the time, "God was not fair when he let Ray Charles be able to sing like that, and I can't sing anything."  But you have to recognize your own talent.  But everybody, every person, has some God given talent, and usually when you find that, it's something that you would do for nothing.  I ask people sometimes, when I interview young people I say, "What would you do if you hit the lottery and you got a hundred million dollars?  What would you do?"  And most of them say, "Well, I'd just go travel."  And I say, "Well, you're not going to do that.  You can't travel every day.  What would you do every day?"  You'd be surprised at the answers you get.  It's usually something that you would sit down and do to entertain yourself and make yourself happy sometimes.  One person told me that he would become a sculptor.  He said, "But I can't make any money doing that.  But if I had unlimited funds, that's what I would do."  You'd be surprised at what answers you get when you ask people that question.  So, the advice I give to people is do something that relates to your God given ability, and everybody has some God given ability.
Speaker 1: That's right.  Is there anything that you would like to share that I have not asked?
Speaker 2: No, I think you've done a great job.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you very much.  Thank you for sharing your history with us.
Speaker 2: I enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 650588
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead, sir, and tell us about this picture.
Speaker 2: Matthew [the videographer, Matthew Hickey], the--the City of Newark [New Jersey] was in turmoil that day, and they closed off Broad Street, which is right in front of City Hall [Newark City Hall], and they put the speaking stand right there on the City Hall steps.  They had thousands of people.
Speaker 1: What day is this?
Speaker 2: July 1, 1970.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Who swore you in?
Speaker 2: Harry Reichenstein [Harry S. Reichenstein], he was the city clerk.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (CAMILLE SAVOCA GIBSON):  Ken [HistoryMaker Kenneth Gibson], this is your graduation, and it's dated June, 1946 from--
Speaker 1: Monmouth Street School [Newark, New Jersey].
Speaker 2: (CAMILLE SAVOCA GIBSON):  Monmouth Street School, that's his elementary graduation.
Speaker 1: And where are you in the picture?
Speaker 2: (CAMILLE SAVOCA GIBSON):  This is Ken.  And this person here became--it's his lifelong friend, and still is today.  His name is Elton Hill.  He became Ken's business administrator when he was mayor.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, this is your great-grandbaby, right?
Speaker 1: (CAMILLE SAVOCA GIBSON):  Yes, that's Elijah [ph.], our great-grandbaby, and this picture was taken on Christmas Eve.  He's a year old now.
Speaker 2: Oh, wait, and actually in that picture is your wife, Camille Gibson [Camille Savoca Gibson], just so we say that name.  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  We have a picture of you and your jazz band.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What year is this probably?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-two [1952] about.
Speaker 1: And where is he in the picture?
Speaker 2: (CAMILLE SAVOCA GIBSON):  Right here playing the saxophone.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, we have the Newsweek cover, which is pretty much self explanatory.
