Story_ID: 73893
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for the History Makers.  Our videography is Scott Sterns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm Chester Grundy.  C-H-E-S-T-E-R  G-R-U-N-D-Y.
Speaker 1: Ok, and can you give us your date of birth and place of birth.
Speaker 2: I was born on August 22, 1947 in Louisville, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: And, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm Directory of the Office of African American Student Affairs here at the University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky] and I also direct The Martin Luther King, Jr. Cultural Center.
Story_ID: 73894
Speaker 1: Sir, before we go into depth, there are five "People Magazine"-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: First one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Lobster.  (unclear)--I love seafood, so you know, put lobster, shrimp, crawfish, I mean, any, any seafood I'm probably fond of.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Orange.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: At the moment, it's Cuba.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I have several.  I mean, "It's not over, till it's over", (laughter) I mean, nothing comes to mine, I have several.  I mean, you know, a lot of time I use these things as closings on letters.
Speaker 1: As you think of them.
Speaker 2: Okay. Let me think about them, okay.
Story_ID: 73895
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your, the origin of your family, as much as you know about it.  Do you know much about, you know, where your family comes from or how back, far back can you trace our family roots.
Speaker 2: Well, I probably know more about my father's [Chester Grundy, Sr.] background than my mother's [Sojourner Grundy].  But, my mother was from Tennessee.  From a little place called Lynnville, Tennessee and I know that she lived a kind of rural life. Her father was kinda struggling farmer.  Fairly big family.  I think she had nine siblings.
Speaker 1: Did she have any stories about her grandparents or where the family came from, if they were enslaved in that part of Kentucky or if they, if they were free?
Speaker 2: They were from Tennessee but no--
Speaker 1: Tennessee, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Right.  No, I don't know a lot about that.  I do know that their grandfather was a white man.  So, they were probably enslaved on a plantation.  But, her mother was an offspring of a union with this white man and this enslaved woman, I assume.  But I, it's very kinda mysterious.  She didn't talk much about it so, I don't know too much about that.  I know a little more about my father's background.  His people came from an area called Sonora, Kentucky, kind of central, eastern Kentucky.  They to, were from a big family.  Raised Catholic.  He was a--my father's father was kind of a laborer.  Did odd jobs.  I got the sense that it was really, really a struggling background.  He had, my father had four brothers and they were often relied upon to go out and get odd jobs to contribute to the family income.  They moved to Louisville [Kentucky], when my father was young boy.
Speaker 1: Now, now, (unclear) can you, can you go back any further with your father's side of the family to--are they, any like, stories from 19th Century or any, or anything that takes us back a little further?  That's what I, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, the stories that I only found out when I was an adult was, had to do with the background of his mother, aunts, and uncles who were all involved in kind of underground economy in some way (laughter), in Louisville.  So, I gathered that the brothers were involved in various kinds of street hustles, nothing, no violent crimes, but they were making their livelihood from, in buying and selling things.  I'm not sure if it was, you know, it was all legal trading or not, but--
Speaker 1: Now, this is 20th Century stuff, right?  Not--
Speaker 2: Yes, right.  And they were involved in, they tell me, they call it rum running.  So they were doing some--
Speaker 1: But, it wasn't actually rum was it? (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Naw, probably not rum, you know, all sorts of-- it was during prohibition, you know, so you talking about just illegal alcohol.  But, I just get the sense that these were people who kind of made it by their wits and, you know, did various kinds of legal, quasi-legal stuff to make it.
Speaker 1: So, there's no--I can just take it that you have very little information about what your family, or ancestors were doing in the 19th Century, where they were--
Speaker 2: Yes. (Simultaneously)
Speaker 1: or, you know, or maybe where they came from, you know, if they, you know, what part of Africa some of your ancestors came from?
Speaker 2: Well, there's a story, kind of family lore of a woman who was held on a plantation in Bardstown [Kentucky], who was from Madagascar.  And, this was told to me by a great aunt who, in fact, no other person has told this story to me, but she told this to me when I was a small boy, even before I knew of existence of a place called Africa.  And, certainly nothing, I knew nothing of Madagascar.  But, she apparently as a child knew this woman or had some contact with this woman.  And, you know, she was impressed at an early age with this story of this woman.  And, that was passed on, you know, to some family members who were interested and I was kind of intrigued by it so, what little I know about African connection has to do with the story of this woman.
Story_ID: 73896
Speaker 1: This is interesting because, up until a couple of years ago, I really didn't know much about Madagascar.  This interview is not, not about me but I'm interjecting this because, you're about the third person that's mentioned an ancestor from Madagascar.  So, there's something to this and I've actually read something about, you know, a Madagascar connection during the slave trade that hasn't, is little known, most people just don't talk about it.
Speaker 2: And this was for a fairly short period to, I wasn't--the slave trade was operating in these (simultaneously).  Yeah, but you know, this is something that I have on my list of things to do, to investigate this a little more and eventually to go to Madagascar, you know.  What I've seen of it has been kind of National Geographic coverage of it.  But, the physical resemblance of these people, you know, is striking, in terms of, I can see some physical features of my family members in what I've seen of that physical type.
Speaker 1: There's a reference to it in a book called "The Slave Trade" by Hugh Thomas.  That's when I saw a reference to Madagascar trade.  You know, but that's, you know, that's just to inform, whoever is watching this (laughter) (simultaneously).  It sounds odd, these people saying, they have ancestors that came from Madagascar, people, you know, so you know, we didn't all come from West Africa, you know, but, you know, there is a reference for that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and often times, you know, I meet students or other people from the east.  They'll immediately connect me with Ethiopia, or Somalia, or someplace like that, you know, so, that always kind of struck me, I'd say "hum, must be something to this in terms of just a physical type".
Story_ID: 73897
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father' name and spell it for us?  His date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I'm a Jr., so my father is Chester Grundy, Sr.  C-H-E-S-T-E-R G-R-U-N-D-Y, J-R, I mean C, S-R (laughter) okay.  His date of birth was June 19, 1910 and he's from Louisville, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what kind of person was your father and what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: My father was, I think, much like his ancestors; he was a real resourceful guy.  Was a laborer most of his life.  Truck driver.  And, drove--didn't do long haul but did a lot of local area truck driving.  He always kept a day job but he was of that generation of black men who kept, what he called a trade.  So, he, at one point, he was--I mean, when I was a boy, my father raised rabbits.  Then the early days of TV, he was a TV repairman.  He was a bartender.  He did various kinds of handiwork.  He worked for his bosses.  He worked at a car dealership, Chevrolet car dealership for a good part of his life.  So, he was always available to do, kind of, handiwork for his employers.  So he would do yard work, he would do repairs, I mean, various kinds of things, kind of, hustles he called it.  So, that was kind of my memories of him.  He would, you know, pull his eight-hour job, then he was always doing something either in the evenings or weekends.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about your--oh, do you have--what kind of education did he have?
Speaker 2: I think my father maybe did 10th grade.  He had to quit school though.
Speaker 1: And he went to school in Louisville?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 73898
Speaker 1: What about your mother, give us her full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother's name was Sojourner Marchbanks Grundy. S-O-J-O-U-R-N-E-R  M-A-R-C-H-B-A-N-K-S Grundy.
Speaker 1: Is there a significance to being named Sojourner?  Was there any connection to, I mean, is there an attempt to name her after (simultaneously)
Speaker 2: I think so.  I think that was deliberate on the part of--conscious naming on the part of her, her mother.  And, my mother never taught me much about Sojourner Truth, but I found out from her family members that was conscious naming.  She was from Tennessee.  Her mother and father died at a fairly early age.  I think she was an orphan at fourteen.  So, she went to live with an older sister, in a little place called Milan, Tennessee.  And, lived most of her adolescent, early adulthood there in Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that name of us?
Speaker 2: It's M-I-L-A-N, Milan, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: And can you give us her date of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother was born, 1912, August 9th.  But, she, during her, (cough) excuse me, her adulthood, she went to Kansas and took up, what was then called "Beauty Culture" in Madam C.J. Walker's School of Beauty Culture.  So, she became a beautician.  And, came to Louisville [Kentucky] during the pre-World War II era and opened a shop with a partner of hers and they were beauticians.  They were partnership in this, this business.  And, during the pre-, I guess, like 1940s so, she met my father [Chester Grundy, Sr.].  And, they were married prior to his getting drafted and going into World War II.  And, you know, he comes back from service, they start a family.  I was the second thing my father did after he got back.  And, moved to what was called the California area and that's where I spent most of my childhood.
Story_ID: 73899
Speaker 1: Tell us about your childhood.  What was some of the sights and sounds and smells in growing-up in the California area (simultaneously) of Louisville [Kentucky], and what was the significance of the California--I mean, what was it famous for and what, what kind of neighborhood was it?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I grew up during Jim Crow segregation, so I grew up in an all-black community.  For the early part of my life, I mean, up until the time I think I was maybe 10, 11; my life was totally immersed in this black community.  The only white people I ever saw were people who I would interact with when we would leave the community and go downtown or perhaps catch a bus or, you know, just in interactions with merchants or business people, or the insurance man, you know, who would come periodically.  But--
Speaker 1: In those days, they'd come to your house.
Speaker 2: Right. They were, and those little quarters and few coins for those term policies that everybody had.  But, I grew up in that community.  My school was just two block away from my house.  So, it was kind of--I mean, when people talk about, you know, close-knit, I mean, my community was very much close-knit in a, in a very authentic way.  Most of my teachers at my elementary school--which was Phillis Wheatley Elementary--several of them were either colleagues or teachers of my father [Chester Grundy, Sr.] and his generation.  So, I mean, this was the kind of community that our teacher knew us before we even arrived in the school and had certain expectations of us.  I just remember the school as being a small school, you know, grades one through six, old building, but we had excellent teachers.  I mean, these were, and again, this was during the era of the Jim Crow segregation, so we were taught by people who were the intelligentsia of our community and who probably, you know, given greater opportunity, would've been able to do something else.  But, given limited opportunity, they taught us.  They, everybody chose to teach.  So, we taught, we were taught by people who had advanced degrees.  I mean, I had a fifth grade teacher who was, I mean, her specialty was math but she taught us arithmetic and this was a woman who had, close to a Ph.D. from Columbia [University, New York, New York].  Many of them were from historically black universities.  So, they came with this strong, kind of racial pride, and I can remember that being part of what they imbued in us.  That we were expected to do very well.
Story_ID: 73900
Speaker 1: I went to that school, this was Phillis Wheatley Elementary again, up until the fifth grade when my family moved to what was then called the West End of Louisville [Kentucky].  And, there was a, part of the westward movement of black people into, what was prior to that a segregated area of the community.
Speaker 2: So, how was that area differ from, I mean--what was some of the differences that you noticed (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Well, these were kinda upwardly mobile people.  And, I just noticed that, well first of all, these people were moving into a community that was made up of new homes.  I mean, these were--for our experience, I mean, we, these were like, middle class, but this was like, fairly working class black folk; but, people with master's, scraped and saved enough to, make a down-payment on a new house.  These were what we called 235 houses.  But, the community was a little different in that people were just not as neighborly, in my estimation.  And the, the kids were involved in different kinds of activity.  It wasn't as easy to kinda connect with these kids as the kids that I were used to at the California area.
Speaker 2: Were there mostly white kids?
Speaker 1: No.  These were all, these were all black communities.  But, these were kinda upwardly, these were inspiring people.  So, where we were very much into street games, these boys played cards a lot.  Which were something I couldn't quite get used to.  I mean, they were into, Bid Whist, and games that their parent played.  But, you know, after a while, I think I adjusted pretty well to that community.  But, I really grew to appreciate where I come from in the California area.  Because it was, you know, a matter of, just a much more kind authentic experience in terms of community, that everybody knew everybody, you know, like I said, the teachers knew us very well.  What there was of a professional class were right there in the neighborhood and, you know, it was, I mean, people romanticize about what the black community was like in those days.  But, it really was a coherent kinda neighborhood where people really looked after each other's welfare.  And, there was a lot of cooperation, a lot of looking out, you know, looking out for each other.
Story_ID: 73901
Speaker 1: Now, just to backtrack, what were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells in growing-up--(laughter) (unclear)
Speaker 2: Well, our games were, were street games.  You know, so I can recall--which is another difference in this experience, when we moved to the West End--our games were always street games.  And, we were real big on street ball, baseball, in the summer, it was hide-and-go-seek.  We played, what's, I mean, I, summers were entirely involved in play. So, that during the summertime, we would gather either on the street corner kinda sitting on the (unclear) and decide what we were gonna do that day.  And, you know, the kinda neighborhood that was always very interesting.  So, with, you know, kids with a little imagination and all the opportunities to kinda explore their neighborhood, there were a lot, there were a lot to do.  There were rivalry between kids on my street and kids just a couple of blocks over.  So, some of the competition in the street games were based on these teams that we put together and, you know, we'll play football, we'll play baseball.  But, we would compete in various ways over this kinda, you know, neighborhood rivalry.  The school, as I remember, was more than just a school, it was a community center.  So, the school was always open and available to the entire neighborhood.  So, if you wanted to do a family reunion, or you want to have a meeting, or various kinds of family functions, or club functions, the school was always available for that.  This was a community where, you know, we would regularly see people like the rag man, or the vegetable man, and you know, in those days you had horse-drawn, or mule-drawn wagons.  So, these guys were regularly coming through the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Did they--what did they sound like?
Speaker 2: There was, everybody had a call, you know, so, either you'd hear the sound of the wagon or you'd hear the guy calling, you know.  So, it's, you know, I mean, if he was carrying watermelons, I mean the guy had, Melons! You know, and he would yell out a price and before you know it, I mean, people were like gathered in the streets.  And, that was just part of the kinda, the local flavor of what was happening. 'Cause these were regular kinda things that were happening in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: In 2002, (unclear) happen in the community, not most communities anyway, you know.  I don't know where it might happen.
Speaker 2: No.  Parts of the South, rural South.
Speaker 1: Yeah, maybe so.
Speaker 2: You know, I've been to Mississippi with my wife.  There's still that kinda thing that some people who, still making their livelihood selling vegetables.  So, you know, you can still find them in various parts of the deep rural South.
Story_ID: 73902
Speaker 1: These were the days, in the early days of television, okay, so I could remember, in my community, my uncle lived two doors from me and my uncle was a real gadget person.  My uncle was the kind of guy who, whatever was the new gadget, he would find a way to get it.  So, he was the first person in our community to get a television.  And, the thing that I remember there was, we're talking about, the early days of TV, when the only black programming were Nat King Cole, there was a show called, "Beulah", of course,--
Speaker 2: She was a maid, right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: White household?
Speaker 1: Exactly.  And, then there was Willie Best, Stepin Fetchit, and you know, those kinds of things were on TV.  But, I can remember when there was something that was really worth watching, like, Nat King Cole.  Or, I wanna say, Gloria Lockerman, the little black girl that won "The $64,000 Question".  When something like that would happen, I mean, he would go to the door and yell, "somebody colored's on TV".  And literally, people from the community would come and gather in his living room and watch this moment (laughter), you know, or when, you know, the Friday night--
Speaker 2: It was an occasion?
Speaker 1: It was an occasion, you know, and you know, it was, it was the kinda things that people would sit there and they would be just kinda mesmerized by that.  And, then they would talk about that for hours, you know.  Or, when Friday night fights were on and, you know, you had somebody like, Sugar Ray, Sugar Ray Robinson on, you know, there would be this gathering of people in my uncle's living room and my aunt would, you know, serve refreshments.  But, you know, this was a small living room, as I see now, a little living room but there'd be like twenty people there, you know, just to enjoy this moment of a colored person on TV.
Speaker 2: What size was the television set?
Speaker 1: Oh, my. I think maybe eight, ten inches.  And you know, at that time, I mean, TV was only broadcasted maybe six, eight hours a day.  So, you would have to darken the living room and these were old picture tubes.  You'd have to darken the living room to get a discernable picture.  And it was, you know, have a picture of a roll every now and then.  But, this was John's TV and this was kinda the pride of the neighborhood.
Story_ID: 73903
Speaker 1: Just for the record, can you--I neglected to ask you, what today's date was.
Speaker 2: Today is December the 9th, 2002.
Speaker 1: And, where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Lexington, Kentucky at the University of Kentucky.  This is the Office of African American Student Affairs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, we were just talking about some of the cultural things going on the neighborhood and where you grew-up in Louisville [Kentucky].  Did--tell me about--you told me something about school, about Phillis Wheatley [Elementary] School, but can you remember the names of any of the teachers that really were important to you in terms of your development?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I had all female teachers.  We had an African American male principal who was a graduate of Tuskegee [Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama].  But--
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Mr. Morton.  And, I forget the first initials.  But, Mr. Morton, very stern, rather small man, but probably the first black professional man in my life.  You know, someone who really ran the school and who all of us knew, but very few of us knew very well.  I mean, he was the kinda person who was a real disciplinarian and would periodically drop by your classroom just to make sure things were going well.  And, he was always great at saying something inspirational like, "hitch your wagon to a star" or something like that.  But, I just remember that he was very proud of that Tuskegee connection.  But, my other teachers were as I said, they were all female.  There were Miss Porter (ph.), my kindergarten teacher, Miss Forbes (ph.), Miss Bright (ph.), Miss Marm (ph.), Miss Morton (ph.).  So, I had--you know, from first through fifth, I had these female teachers.  All were excellent teachers.  I think that these people had a sense that they were preparing us for integration.  So, we were well grounded in fundamentals, fundamental skills; math, and English, grammar.
Story_ID: 73904
Speaker 1: Now, what about high school?
Speaker 2: I went to high school at Louisville Male High [School, Louisville, Kentucky].  I was part of what was, I guess, the fourth wave of integration.  Male was a--
Speaker 1: Excuse me, now, when did integration actually take place in Louisville [Louisville]?  And, how old were you?
Speaker 2: My cousins were part of the, I guess, first wave of integration so, we're talking about early 1960s, 1960, maybe that was it. Nineteen sixty, I think.  So, I was in junior high.  My, I had two cousins who were at the desegregating high schools which were, Male and [DuPont] Manual [High School, Louisville, Kentucky].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you know of anybody or did you hear of any agitation surrounding, I mean, leading up to integration, I mean, I know it just didn't just happen (simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Louisville, there was agitation and public accommodation demonstration downtown for maybe a couple of years leading up to the desegregation of public facilities.  Public high schools desegregated in the '60s [1960s] and that was done without a lot of incident in terms of, pressure, to desegregate that kinda followed suit of public accommodations.  But, you know, there was a, there were, there was friction in the high schools themselves in terms of fights and various kinda of incidents with students.  But, for the most part, the experience in Louisville was probably a little smoother than what happened deeper south.  And, I think, part of it had to do with the fact that racial parity was pretty close in Louisville.  So, you had large numbers of black students desegregating these high schools.  It wasn't, there wasn't kinda token desegregation that happened in other parts of the South.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is, like, did you have sense of what percentage of the black population of Louisville was, you know, from the rest of the population?
Speaker 2: I think it was about 20 to 25 percent.
Story_ID: 73905
Speaker 1: What was the first integrated school that you went to?  I mean, what year was it that you first integrated?
Speaker 2: I went to [Louisville] Male High School [Louisville, Kentucky] which was 1965.  And, I graduated from Male--I'm sorry, I went to Male in 1962, graduated in '65 [1965].  Okay.  And, at that time, I think we were, by the time I graduated, we were maybe 15 percent black at Male.  The thing that made the desegregation experience easier at Male was, Male was very dependent on athletics and this was a football school and had a pretty successful basketball program as well.  So, they relied very heavily on black athletes, and they were recruiting these guys from local junior highs, and playgrounds.  So, they brought in these guys, and I think that, in a lot of ways helped to kinda soften the climate for us.  Aside from that, most of the black students who I knew who came to Male were very solid students, and I don't know how that happened, I think it was--my experience probably--imagine how it was probably similar to other students.  We just had teachers who were very conscious of preparing us.  And they, you know, by the time I got in eighth grade, they began to talk about this experience that awaited us, you know, as part of the desegregation movement.  So, you know, they took a lot of personal pride in preparing us for this, and aside from what we were learning academically.  And, they would try to bolster us, in terms of our confidence, to deal in these white settings that we were every bit as confident, that we were every bit as able.
Speaker 1: Now, Male High School, it sounds--was it an all-male school as opposed to--?
Speaker 2: At one time, in its history, I mean, it's one of the older high schools in Louisville.  So, in its early days, it was all male.  And, Male is a school that, you know, was very proud of the fact that much of its business, political community, at one time, came from Male.  Male was the only public high school.  But, by the time that, certainly I came, Male was co-ed and was desegregated as I said--early '60s.
Story_ID: 73906
Speaker 1: At [Louisville] Male [High School, Louisville, Kentucky], who are some of the teachers, I guess, stood out?  I mean, I'm trying to give you some guidance.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, there were a few (laughter).  I mean, this was a very different environment from what I had been socialized in.  All white teachers.  There was one black science teacher, Mr. Wise (ph.), who I never had class from and had very little interaction with, but the Male teachers were all white.  They were kinda old school teachers, so the whole integration experience was one that they were adjusting to as well as we were as black students.  But, I can say, for the most part, that they were, you know, if they, if they slighted us or if, you know, were any discriminatory behavior, it was subtle.  I mean, we were, we were, not faced with blatant racism.  But I think, perhaps that their expectation of us were lower.  But, I think in time, we changed their minds about what we were capable of doing.  The thing that I probably, I mean the memory of Male and my interactions with those teachers that really stands out, was my meetings with the guidance counselor.  From the time that I was a senior, I began these college exploration meetings with him.  And, it was very clear early on, that he didn't think that I should be aspiring to anything but Kentucky State [College, Frankfort, Kentucky] , which was historically black university.  I'm sorry, a historically black college.  And, it was a normal school, a teacher's college.  So, every time I would talk with him about, you know, what I was--information I was gathering about college, he would steer the conversation to Kentucky State.  And, you know, I was very clear with him that I really didn't want to go to Kentucky State.  My sister was at Eastern Kentucky University [Richmond, Kentucky] at the time, which was a regional school.  And, I was thinking about going to the University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky] which, I mean, at one level I think he just kinda scoffed at that.  But, at another level, he just was trying to convince me that just was not for me.  That even though I was a good student and I was a solid B-plus, that I really should aspire to some other school.  So, I think really out of spite, I was more convinced at those meetings, I needed to go to the University of Kentucky.  And, I didn't know much about the University of Kentucky but I do know that most black people that I've mentioned that to, that I was thinking about UK, looked at me like, are you losing your mind?
Speaker 1: Now, give us some--of the public image of University of Kentucky, I mean, I think in those days had to do with, I mean, the basketball team was prominent.  Adolph Rupp, who put on the floor an all-white team as long as he could (unclear).
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Which gave the impression to a lot of people that it was a tough place to be black that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And, you know, I mean it's, that was the prevailing attitude, I mean, across the state, I mean, there was not a black person you would ask about UK when that very image of Rupp--I mean, Rupp was the icon of college basketball and he was pretty much the symbol, in the minds of black Kentuckians, of what everything that University of Kentucky stood for.  So, for me to think about University of Kentucky was just, in the minds of everybody I talked to, was, was just unthinkable.  I mean, why would you want to even experience that, you know?  And, my father [Chester Grundy, Sr.] told me that I was not only a fool, but a damn fool to think about going to UK.  But at that time, I, the thing that I was aspiring to was the military.  I wanted to go to a school that had a good ROTC program and there were only two in the state:  University of Kentucky, and University of Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky], and I wanted to leave home.  So, I chose University of Kentucky largely because of their ROTC program.  And, there was one other guy from my high school class, another black guy, who decided he would come to UK as well.
Story_ID: 73907
Speaker 1: Now, I wanna backtrack a little bit, back to high school.  In 1964, Cassius, then Cassius Clay, now Muhammad Ali, native of Louisville [Kentucky], had just won the heavy weight championship from, you know, did that, I mean, how did that affect you all in high school?  I mean, you know, people who at one time, who would run to the TV to see colored people on TV and then to have him, you know, a person from your city, you know, win the heavy weight championship and from the neighborhood, you know.  Did you know anybody that knew him?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, you know, my cousins went to school with him.  So, I mean, at that time, yeah, everybody was very excited about that, but it really was kinda of case of the local boy, you know that, you know, his reputation was not, certainly not what it was, or what it is now.  So, we were excited and you know, there were recognition from the local high school.  He was a graduate of Central High [School].  But, and you know, there was some formalities that were done by the City.  But, I don't think anybody had the sense of what was in store for Cassius Clay at that time.  So, it was just kind of a, I think a local hero, but not someone who was, I mean, you know, the fact that he was a guy that we all knew, you know, didn't--I think that maybe took some of the special, the specialness of it away.  It's like everyone knew Cassius Clay.
Speaker 1: Like that (unclear) in your own hometown?
Speaker 2: Right, you know.  So, you know it was like, yeah, you've done that, you've gone to the Olympics, but you still just from the West End brother (laughter), you know.  So, it was, you know--it's only years later, and now it's only many years later, that Louisville is really, fully embraced Ali.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was controversial, I mean, in those days with his positions, joined the Nation of Islam, changing his name, and you know.  Did that make, how did that make you, or how did it make you feel and how did it make other youth feel during that period of time.  Is it something that you wanted to reject or (simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: You know, at that time, I just remember being very curious about that.  You know, I, I don't, I didn't appreciate the full importance of that.  But, it just struck me, is that, that was an incredibly courageous thing to do and I didn't know the meaning of it.  I, it was before I had any sense of the political import.  But, I must say too that Cassius Clay had a reputation of being kinda, kinda crazy in our community.  He was the guy who would run beside the school bus.  He was the guy who always said he was gonna be world champion and people would always say, "yeah, sure", you know.  So, Ali had a reputation of being just kind of, you know, kind of a crazy guy who was obsessed with boxing and who had this wild idea he was gonna be a professional, and be the heavyweight champion.  And, I think most people who knew him at that time, could never image that, any of that, would come to be.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  So, you all saw him as kinda, off-the-wall.
Speaker 2: Yeah, off-the-wall.  I mean, you know, like I say, he would run beside the school bus.  He was constantly in training, you know.  He was seen in the parks running, training, shadow boxing.
Story_ID: 73908
Speaker 1: Now, when you were in high school, what were your, I mean, when you reached your senior year and you knew you wanted to go to school, had the grades to go, and what were your aspirations, what did you wanna be?
Speaker 2: Well, I came from a military family.  And, you know, like I said, I don't know where my head was at that time, but I really thought that I should aspire to a career in the military.  And, unlike my father [Chester Grundy, Sr.] and his uncles, I thought that I should aspire to be an officer.  They were all enlisted men, they all did World War II.  But, I wanted to be an officer, and that was a very big factor in, as I said, choosing the University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky].  You know, this, the thing that--as I look at that in retrospect, and we're talking about 1965, when the Vietnam War was just beginning to really heat up.  But, for me, that was, that was just kind of, part of what you did.  I mean, my, my only sense of war came from war movies, you know (laughter).  So, you know, I had a very unreal sense of just that, the implications of aspiring for a career in the military, much less the political implications.  So, I came to UK with that in mind, that I would chose a major, but ultimately my goal was to, you know, earn this career in military.
Story_ID: 73909
Speaker 1: Was the University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky] what you expected or, I mean, how did you manage this, I mean, this was a, what--I know it wasn't easy?
Speaker 2: Well, no.  I found out very early that everything that I had been forewarned of, was true.  And you know, within the first week, we realized and found out that this was gonna be a tough experience.  At that time, there were about fifty black students at the University of Kentucky out of a student enrollment of 16,000.  We were mainly from Louisville, Lexington, and Northern Kentucky, and Eastern Kentucky. So, it was a kind of an experience where within, you know, a few weeks, we all met each other.  I mean, the experience itself drew us together and we found out that it was gonna be real challenging.  I mean, we were pretty much, by the first week, subjected, most of us had some experience we were talking about, in terms of some, some racist encounter.  I mean, if you would go out after five or in the evenings here, if you weren't with someone, you can count on being called a nigger or having something thrown at you or something would happen, you know, some sort of incident would happen.  So, you know, it was pretty clear that was gonna be a reality here.  And, you know, it was that kinda thing that drew us together as a community of students.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you--were there any black professors on campus at all?  Or administrators?
Speaker 2: There were two.  There was a woman who was over the YMCA program.  Her name is Anna Bowling (ph.) and she's still on staff here.  She's Assistant Dean Students.  And, there was also a woman in sociology, a Dr. Doris Wilkinson.  I had a class from her.  But other than that, there were no black faculty, and no black administrators.  So, we pretty much had to fend for ourselves in terms of having any kind of institutional support.
Story_ID: 73910
Speaker 1: But how did you manage to do it?  Did you, did you all, did you all try to organize yourselves in some sort of (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly, yeah.  When I first got here, the students who were here had organized a group call Orgena.  And Orgena, I mean, the remarkable thing about the name itself, it's a Negro spelled backwards, okay.  And that, you know, that's really, powerful (laughter) symbol in terms of--that's kind of where we were at the time, you know, that Orgena existed.  But, Orgena's function was really just to provide some sort of social life.  So, we went to Orgena and we connected with Orgena just so that we could develop some kind of extracurricular life.  Orgena planned the parties. Orgena planned the socials.  Orgena planned the balls, receptions, but these were all pretty much social activities and no, no political, no cultural agenda.  And, you know, it was pretty much in keeping with the minds of the students who were here at that time.  The juniors and the seniors who we found were very much conscious of trying to assimilate.  I mean, these were students who had come from, black middle class backgrounds.  And they told us early on that the way to get by here is to get along.  So, the point that they made with us was, you have to, you know, find ways, find--you'll find your niche in time, and just don't impose yourself on people and you'll make it.  So, you know, we were a little younger and I think we were beginning to respond to something else that was going on in the country at that time.  So, we found ourselves after a couple of years, kind of part of two developing camps on this campus.  One was pushing for the development of, kind a political agenda, to deal with some of these issues that we were experiencing, with, I mean, no black faculty, no black staff, no black support programs, no black history course, I mean at that time, I mean, we're talking about prior to the black studies movement.  So, we were just trying to push for a black history course.  Fundamental things, we were trying to get the school to stop singing 'Dixie' at the athletic events.  Stop waving the rebel flag at athletic events.  I mean, there were a number of issues on campus that just had, basically had to do with trying to get a more humane treatment for black students.  Things that were just part of the environment.  So, that, with that agenda, we began trying to push this organization, Orgena, to become a little more political in our activities.  And, there were lots of debates, lots of discussion, and finally around '67 [1967], '68 [1968], we decided that we needed to develop a Black Student Union.  And, there was a faction of students who split from Orgena and set about to develop this BSU and formulize this agenda, which we later presented to the administration.  But, the BSU became, you know, a major part of all of our lives at that time.  And, the BSU set about to develop, I mean, like most of the issues at that time, kind of a ten point program that we presented to the administration.  And, as I look at it, the things--what impresses me now, as I look at that agenda, was like much of what I do here now had to do with the work of those students.  I mean, it was really visionary in its way that the support services that existed on this campus now, were part of that agenda that were developed by these students back in the late '60s [1960s].  So, things like cultural programming which is a lot of what I do, financial support, academic support, peer mentorship, recruitment of black faculty, issues that relate to the campus climate.  I mean, all of that was part of our early agenda as activists.  And, all those things have come to, to fruition over the time since that.
Story_ID: 73911
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, what did happen here [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky] in terms of black students, what were the issues, some specific issues here that you all had to deal with?  'Cause I know there were some.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, like I said, some of these things were so fundamental.  We were pushing for improvement of the campus climate and here.  I mean, that was as fundamental as stop playing "Dixie" at the athletic events.  We do have a school song.  Why don't we, (laughter), why don't we get, you know, the athletic department and these fraternities, and these fans, to sing the school song?  And, you know, put "Dixie" away.  You know, there were times, when you could go to UK event [University of Kentucky], say UK football game; if we played Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford Mississippi], you wouldn't know who the real rebels were, because there'd be as many rebel flags on the UK side as they were on the Ole' Miss side.
Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute now, this is, this kind of exemplary of a situation that we find all over the country and now these people are taking about refighting in a Civil War.  In a sense, I mean, within Kentucky, in a sense, I mean, I think because we've--Kentucky didn't secede.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In the Civil War, it was a neutral--it was like a border state.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And was not totally confederate or union.  But
Speaker 2: This part of the state has strong confederate sympathies.  And in fact, this was when we say divided, I mean, this was the slave holding part of the state.  So, and you know, this thing is still symbolically kinda fought out between the University of Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky] and University of Kentucky.  But, you know, which was another thing, had I known the history of this part of the state, I would've been a little less naive.  But, we, we encountered that, I mean, what we were dealing with were the messages of the confederacy.  When I think about issues--we had big beef with a fraternity on campus called Kappa Alpha.  I don't know if you know about Kappa Alpha, but Kappa Alpha traced its historical legacy to the sons of the confederacy.  So, whether these guys literally were descendants of the confederacy or not, I don't know, but they really acted like it.  I mean, they, they convinced us they were.  And, you know, one of the things that we were trying to get changed was, these guys would do annual Ole South weekend, and they would literally secede from the University.  So, they would, I mean, they would really (laughter) put on the Ole South.  They would--
Speaker 1: You're not kidding are you?
Speaker 2: No, I'm serious.  They would, they would dress up in these confederate officer's outfits.  The girlfriends would put on these, southern bell, antebellum dresses, and they would kinda parade around all weekend.  And, this usually happen in the spring.  And, they would do this symbolic succession from the University.  They would go downtown, take down the American Flag and run up the Stars and Bars and basically have a kinda free reign of the University, of the City that weekend.  So, we had our friction with them.  You know, there were times when, you know, you could pass their fraternity house and you'll get the racial slur or something.  So, we had fights.  There were one famous fight where we got the help of some football players and kinda turned their house out one weekend.  So, you know, I'm saying, these were like--our list of grievances started with stuff like this.  And, that was pretty much the flavor of the campus, I mean, you know, at that time.  I could literally walk around here for a day, two days at a time and not see any black people, except in the cafeteria where we would always gather.  But, no black instructors.  Very, very few experiences of black students in my classes.
Speaker 1: And, this is with state money too, that everybody, everybody's paying taxes?
Speaker 2: Oh sure, yeah.
Speaker 1: Your tax dollars are supporting this kind of activity?
Speaker 2: Right.  I think, you know, the reason it persisted past legal desegregation here, was that black people just wrote this off as having nothing to do with them.  And, not--I mean, even though it had been legally desegregated in the late '40s [1940s], you know, there was no significant number of black students here until like, late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s].  Because, I mean, the reputation, i.e. Adolph Rupp and all that symbolizes was just so anti-black that people just wouldn't come.
Story_ID: 73912
Speaker 1: So, how did, how did you all get organized?  What was the process, what happened there?  Orgena was already existed, and was there an issue that made you all split off?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think the thing that really energized the Black Student Union, was the assassination of [Rev.] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.].  That, I think, was the pivotal event.
Speaker 1: That was '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: '68 [1968]; April of '68 [1968].  And, even though these discussions had been going on prior to that, the BSU was not operating as autonomous organization until that happened.  And, when that happened, we were convinced that, you know, we had no choice, we had to like, take on a much more political stance and get involved in, you know, not only what we saw as our issues as students, but to try to get serious about recruiting, recruiting black students, and pressuring the University [of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky] to recruit black faculty and staff.  So, that's, that became really full-time work for us.  So then, you know, the administration, meetings with the administration began happening.  We had a president [John W. Oswald] at that time who had come here from the University of California, Berkley, who was much more liberal than what this institution was used to.  So, he--we were able to have some pretty fruitful discussions with him and he would, in fact, come to some of the BSU meetings.
Story_ID: 73913
Speaker 1: He [John W. Oswald] was trying to pressure Adolph Rupp to desegregate the basketball team.  Rupp resisted and managed to resist for a very long time.  Up until--I think the president [of the University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky] left before Rupp did, in fact.  So, it was--
Speaker 2: Rupp tried to recruit every top white athlete in the nation.  Kentucky was famous for getting every, every top white basketball player, whatever corner of the country they played in.
Speaker 1: Right.  They were the, they were the premier team of the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association].  But, this was during the period too where Kentucky was beginning to see the handwriting on the wall.  Because when they would, when they would play, I mean, this was rare--but, I remember going to a game at the coliseum here where they played the University of Illinois.  And, Illinois brought in three black players and they whooped Kentucky on their home court, which was devastating.  So, it's pretty clear that, you know, in time they would have to face this question of desegregation of the athletic team.  But, it didn't happen during my time.  There were two football players who were recruited here.  One who died before he actually played varsity ball, but the football team did desegregate before the basketball team.
Story_ID: 73914
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was your course of study like and what did you major in?  And, did you find any professors here that were supportive, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a sociology major and at that time I thought I wanted to pursue penal probation work.  I wanted to maybe even be a probationary officer.  We did have a few instructors who, I think were particularly sympathethic to our situation.  One was a sociology professor that I had, who was a Marxist, and I remember the day that [Rev.] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] died, he was the one professor who dismissed class.  And, I mean, his remark was that this was the most shameful day in our history, and dismissed class.  And, I mean, it was stunning for me, 'cause most people never raised the questions, race, or racism.  And, there were a couple of professors in English who worked with us, in time on the summer program, that I'll tell you about, but you know, knew that we were very serious about trying to recruit black students.  So, they volunteered their services as instructors to do preparatory work in math and in science and English.  So, there's a small handful of progressive instructors.
Story_ID: 73915
Speaker 1: So, now what were things like when you were on the verge of graduation, here [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky], you know?
Speaker 2: It was just a little better (laughter).  I think in my graduation class there were probably, almost half dozen black students.  I mean the attrition rate was atrocious.  We would lose, we would lose 60 to 65 percent of the black students. And, I tell you, it was not because they were not capable, but the environment, you know, that I'm describing was just so harsh that many people, just after a year to two, just threw in the towel.  So, you know, by the time the few of us persisted to graduation, if there were fifty to begin with, there were maybe a dozen so at the end of the, end of the line when we were senior and graduating.  You know, in terms of the campus climate, things hadn't improved in major ways but, there was some movement in terms of some support programs were beginning to be developed.  A summer program for incoming freshmen that, as I say, was staffed by the faculty people who were kinda sympathetic to us and volunteered.  But, you know, again, I mean, we were kinda a little quasi-administrators ourselves.  We were moving around to various high schools trying to identify students who had a potential of being successful here and, you know, we were volunteering our help to help them, you know, go through the admission process and we would always make sure these kids were enrolled in our freshman summer program.  And, you know, we would always make sure that they (unclear).  So, I mean, it was that kinda thing was--like I say, we were very conscious of trying to make sure that nobody had the kind of experience we had.
Story_ID: 73916
Speaker 1: When you graduated, were you--did you in fact go into the ROTC?
Speaker 2: No.  My ROTC experience stopped (laughter) in my junior year.  You know, ROTC, in your junior year, you have to sign a contract and that makes you regular reserved [U.S.] Army.  So, I was to sign that contract and I was, that summer, to go to a place called Indiantown Gap, Pennsylvania which was a major ROTC training camp.  And, there was cadets from all over the country brought in there, and we were to do ten weeks of fairly intense training.  And, I had my senior year in front of me and after that, it was probably, I went to Vietnam, I guess.  Well, I had a great fortune, and didn't realize it at the time.  But, I had a great fortune of developing a heart murmur.  And, the ironic thing was that I'd had a physical about five weeks prior to going to Pennsylvania, and I had a clean bill of health, I mean, excellent health.  Got up to Pennsylvania, went through this very intense military physical and was pulled out of the line.  And, this doctor asked me "Well, how long have you had this murmur"?  I said, "What murmur"?  And he said, "Well, you have a heart murmur".  And of course, I kinda laughed and said "I don't have a murmur.  I've just had a physical."  He said "Well, you do now".  And, you know, he got two or three opinions.  I mean, he called two other doctors over and they confirmed that I did have a murmur and I was just absolutely shocked.  Well, based on that, I was to be processed out.  But, to ensure that, you know, the record was accurate, they sent me to Valley Forge, Pennsylvania and this was a military intake hospital for Vietnam casualties.  So, whereas I didn't believe the doctors, I mean, I got interesting treatment there.  I walked into this hospital with these veterans, these casualties, I mean, so many casualties, these guys were like lying in the hallways.  So, I walk into this hospital and these guys look at me.  I'm obviously some little green student in this military outfit, and they said, "Well you better get out of that before--while you got time".  And, I don't know what they're talking about, you know, 'cause I'm still thinking I'm down for the military.  But, during the course of the day, you know, this physical, I met some people who pulled my coat to the fact that I was really getting a break.  In fact, I had a conversation with a doctor, a young major, who told me--I mean, this guy was an anti-war, very strong anti-war in his, in his attitude and told me that I was, you know, in time, gonna be very grateful that what was happening to me, was happening.  That I was being spared.  So, you know, I was still very disappointed, very bitter and that lasted for a while, until I realized that I was really called to do something else other than military and that--really was--I was being rescued.
Story_ID: 73917
Speaker 1: So what happened next?  What did you do?
Speaker 2: Well, I went home.  This was the end of my junior year.  My father [Chester Grundy, Sr.] died in the meantime.  So, things were kinda tentative in terms of me being able to go back to school.  And, my mother [Sojourner Grundy] didn't have the resources to send me back.  So, it was very unclear during that summer as to what my future was gonna look like.  You know, I mean, the military thing had been blown out of the water.  And, you know, like I said, I couldn't figure out how I was gonna finish.  Well, my uncles came together and ended up, and got my tuition together and sent me back to finish my senior year.  That senior year, was really an important year, because I was able to get fully involved, fully immersed in this activity with the Black Student Union and not have this contradiction going on.  I mean, because I was being told often times, that you can't, you can't walk both of these lines, you know, being in the military and think you gonna be a black power advocate, you know.  So, you know, that kinda resolved that for me.  You know, that I was really was very much interested in race and matters of the race.  So, I began, you know, working with the issue.  The courses I began taking at the time, the few that were in the curriculum were--had some racial content.  And, I began thinking about a different major, even though I was in my senior year, that maybe I didn't want to pursue this idea of going into the penal system.  That maybe I needed to think about something that's gonna help black people.  So, things kinda moved along in that direction.  And, that also gave me the opportunity to be, you know, interaction with the few instructors who had some interest in racial matters.  And, one guy in particular, a sociology instructor, had contacts with the local Human Rights Commission, with State Human Rights Commission, and began to talk with me about my interests in maybe pursuing, you know, a job as a, a field rep for the Human Rights Commission, which is ultimately what I did after graduation.
Story_ID: 73918
Speaker 1: So what did that entail?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a, what they called a state, a field rep and I was involved in community organization.  So, I did a lot of field work.  I was sent into local communities when there were issues around desegregation in school.  And I mean, we're talking about rural communities where, even though there were legal segregation, there was still quite a bit of friction in some of these schools.  So, I had to meet with local school leadership and with parents and with teachers sometimes to resolve complaints. I was involved in organizing local human rights commissions.
Speaker 1: Did you get, like, community organizing training and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: A lot of this was, OJT [on-the-job-training], you know.  I don't, I can remember being sent some places, with having no formal professional training.  But, I think the fact that I've come out of this college experience and had been doing some organization work as a student, they thought I was a natural.  So, what I learned, I learned by doing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was it--how would you do that, I mean, how--was there--did you have a procedure to say for organizing a local group or?--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I did, I did understudy some senior staff people who I would usually travel with and, you know, I was sitting in on meetings--there were always a matter of meeting with local leadership, local NAACP, Urban League, (unclear) they existed-what existed and where, you know, indigenous organizations.  So, I would, you know, for the first part of my experience, I was an observer, and finally I got to the point where I kinda knew, knew the ropes in terms of how you go about establishing a charter, how you got people on track in terms of identifying the issues in the community, those sorts of things.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, what were some of the biggest issues, I guess, I mean, was there a specific big issue (unclear) that you want to tell us about? (unclear)
Speaker 2: Well, in some of these communities, it had to do with representation, I mean, whether black students were fairly represented in school activities, treatment, I mean, students who--I mean, some of these things are kind of, I mean, persist to this very day.  Treatment in classrooms, discipline issues, faculty recruitment, curriculum issues, I mean, some of these things have not changed, like I said.  So, you know, we had resource people sometimes that we could call in that would assist with, say if a school system was interested in developing curriculum.  There were people that we had in our network who could call--we could call in and help develop curriculum.  Arbitrators in parent-student friction.  It was a wide range of things, but, you know, we're talking about communities that, for the most part, had small black enrollments and you know, kinda early throes of desegregation.
Story_ID: 73919
Speaker 1: Well how--can you tell us, I guess, about, I guess we need to talk about how you made a transition, I mean, back here from, I mean, how long did you do that and how'd you get back to the University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky]?
Speaker 2: I worked there [Human Rights Commission] for two years and then I went to--my second job I was at Plymouth Settlement House, which is a community base agency, black agency that was in the heart of what was the lowest SES area in Louisville [Louisville].
Speaker 1: SES?
Speaker 2: Yeah, social economic--yeah okay.
Speaker 1: But, I was hired by Morris Jeff, in fact, who was director of this community center, Plymouth Settlement House.
Speaker 2: Can you spell his name for us?
Speaker 1: Morris Jeff.  M-O-R-R-I-S J-E-F-F.  He was director there.  He had come there from Chicago [Illinois] and was hired to be the executive director of the center.  And it was a family agency and the, the programs consisted of a children's program, a senior citizens' program, young adults' program, and, you know, I mean, we were involved in a lot.  Early on, we're involved in a lot of programs that met basic needs.  Housing, nutrition, childcare, I mean, a lot of that.  But, over time, this center became more kinda afro-centric in its, in its outlook.  And, Jeff hired me to do what was called a Communiversity.  So, my responsibility was developing this adult education program where people were involved in identifying various issues in the community and developing these institutes around those to discuss the issue, come to some resolution, and then do direct action.
Speaker 2: It's an interesting name, Communiversity.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (unclear) I guess to his days in Chicago with the communiversity that was started by Dr. Bobby Wright--
Speaker 1: Right, I think, I think it was probably a spinoff of that.
Speaker 2: The center?
Speaker 1: Yeah, because Jeff was in Chicago during that period.  But, he was very much into the work of (unclear), you know, and that kinda education that was designed to liberate people.  So, I was coming out of the, my experience in the Human Rights Commission, and he literally stole the woman who's now my wife, stole both of us from that agency and convinced us to come work with him.
Speaker 2: How did you meet Ann?  You know, and--
Speaker 1: I met Ann on my first job with the State's Human Rights Commission.  And, I met her within the first week of that job.  And, the story that I tell her, and this is, this actually did happen.  I'm, I'm in my first day there, I'm to be interviewed and I'm sitting there in the lobby area, and I'm thinking about all the things that happened in my life that, in the course of that year.  My father [Chester Grundy, Sr.] died, my career had changed, you know, I had come out of UK, not really sure what I wanted to do.  So, I'm there, you know, about to be interviewed and she comes through the lobby area to speak with the receptionist and she says "Hello brother" and, I mean, just real friendly, you know Ann's personality, real friendly.  So, I speak to her and I said to myself, "now, I'm probably gonna marry that woman".  You know, I mean, just kinda, a voice from somewhere (laughter).  You know, I don't think I consciously was telling myself that.  But, somehow, I mean, so many things had happened, so many unexpected things that--I was thinking like, this is probably like that heart murmur, you know, the first person I'm meeting at the job, I'll probably marry this woman.  So, Ann and I became good friends after that, and our desks in fact, were adjacent and we became kinda partners.  And it evolved, you know, something else.
Speaker 2: Family, long-term.
Speaker 1: Right, (laughter) right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 73920
Speaker 1: Now, during this time that you and Ann are working together, you and your wife, Ann Grundy, what--you all were working on organizing people in communities around educational issues, right?
Speaker 2: At the Human Rights Commission?
Speaker 1: No, yeah, no, with Morris, yeah with Morris Jeff.
Speaker 2: With Morris Jeff?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, we had two different jobs.  Ann was hired to develop his children's program.  So, her focus were primary school kids and my job was working with adults with this Communiversity.  But, the [Plymouth] Settlement House was the kind of agency were, I mean, everybody was available to work with everybody else.  It was very much a collaborative kind of situation.  So, everybody work with everybody else assisting in supporting programs.  So, I mean, there were, lots of times, I was working in children's program and vice versa.  She worked with me with Communiversity.  But, you know, we had a lot of innovative programs.  We had a breakfast program that fed hundreds of kids before school.  A lunch program, and we spun it off into lunch programs, so kids were able to come by and eat after school.  We had a senior citizen's program.  A young adults' program that was designed to organize young adults to develop their own social calendar.  We had a camp program that was modeled on kind of an African village.  So, we would take these young kids, and these adolescents out to a state park during the summer months and in addition to like, all the traditional skills of camping and hiking and all that.  I mean, this thing had an overlay of African culture.  So, you know, it's really visionary in its way that we were doing these kinda things long before the term called "afro-centric" was even coined.  But a lot it had to do with kinda--
Speaker 1: This was like 19--
Speaker 2: This was like 1970s, 1970, let's see I came here in '70 [1970], yeah so, the early 70s [1970's].  Right.
Story_ID: 73921
Speaker 1: Things were really starting to heat up around the country, though, in terms of thinking about Africa, and thinking about black history and culture, specifically-there are--I know when these things started, you know, there were many critics, that said like, why have, why deal with African culture, you're an American?
Speaker 2: Hu-umm, yeah.
Speaker 1: You were born here in Kentucky, you know.  What is Africa, what relationship does Africa have to you?  And--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Any why bring it here?  You know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How'd you handle people who would say those kinds of things?  'Cause I know they did.
Speaker 2: Of course they did.
Speaker 1: So, what are y'all doing?  You know.
Speaker 2: Well, right.  You know, the thing that we were so fortunate to have in Morris Jeff, was someone who was always able to keep our critics at bay.  And, in his case, I mean, it was, it was something that he had to deal with on a regular basis because we were a community chest agency and we were affiliated with the congregational church which was a very bourgeois, black church.  And, this church was just next door to this community center.  So, they had serious issue with us even, even drawing the constituency we drew.  I mean, we were, we were just folk.  These were folk in the neighborhood.  And, you know, we, when we began moving toward this African focus, yeah we got a lot of criticism but the staff never had to deal with that much.  It was just, these were things that Jeff dealt with in the board meetings.  But, our children were very receptive.  I mean, the thing that, I mean to this day, one of the most satisfying aspects of working that job, was having these kids who were, in our cases, these were like little kids at the time, like eight, nine, ten years old; who are now adults, have their own family and come back from time to time and talk about the impact the program had on them.  In terms of the sense of just who they are.  So, I mean, we, we affirmed in what the value of what that was because, I mean, we got the witnesses all over the place of these kids who, you know, were transformed by that program.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are they still--they're bringing their children into it?
Speaker 2: Well, it no longer exit.  But, yeah, I mean, it was just like a very bright moment.  That program lasted from, Oh, the last '70s [1970s], I think Jeff left about '73 [1973] or '74 [1974].  So, it was just, maybe a seven, eight year period, where we were really thriving.  And, you know, I had this full service program that had this very heavy cultural overlay to it.  So, it was just a magnificent period.
Speaker 1: Would the program had been as successful without the culture overlay?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I mean, the administration prior to us were offering the same things, same kinds of programming.  But, never connected with the community the same way we did.  And, I think it's, you know, we were, we were cutting edge but we were very much in tuned with what was happening in the country at that time.  But, we were able to bring all of that to a very local, very local focus.  And, it really did help us connect very well with the kids.  These kids were just open to that kind of programming.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Would it had worked as well you think if you've used the bible and American flag or something, as a you know, as a, you know, as icons for, you know, these are the things that people are used to, you know?
Speaker 2: I don't think it would've spoken to who these people were (laughter) the same way.
Story_ID: 73922
Speaker 1: Well, what is the, the--well what is the hook then, you know, I mean, to African culture. I mean, what is, what is it--how to--I mean, why would you hook into that, you know.  Or is it--well--also was it just that time period or would it work today (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I don't know, that's a good question.  I mean, I don't know if it would work today.  In that community, I don't know if it would work today.  But I think it really did have a lot to do with the context of the times.  I would like to think it would work today but, we found, given the fact that, I mean, it was a comprehensive program and that every aspect of this program was philosophically operating out of the same kind of direction.  That, I mean, young kids who were going home to these parents who were in the senior program were, you know, getting the same kind of message.  Because like I said, I think we served, it was a multigenerational program and we all brought the same message.  So, I think it had a lot to do with the fact that it was, we were full service, I mean we were meeting basic needs as well as giving people, you know, this other kind of programming, this cultural educational programming.  We were doing things like, once a year we would produce a--well we would bring in a play, we would sponsor a play.  So, we would bring in, I mean, through the help of fundraising, we were bringing a theatre group, a black theatre group who would do a play at a local theater.  And, of course, people in our community would get access at a very, discounted rate.  So, you know, we were able to introduce black theatre, introduce black music, introduce--I mean, Haki would come to the [Plymouth] Settlement House periodically.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Haki Madhubuti.  So, I mean, it was, you know, multifaceted and rather exciting.  The kind of thing that we were doing, it was rather exciting, and I think just that reinforcement and the fact that we were bringing all this energy to that facility all the time was really important to the success of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, this centered around '73 [1973] or '74 [1974] when--
Speaker 2: When Morris Jeff left--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --an administration came in that didn't share the same philosophy and things began to kind of deteriorate.  Staff began to leave and program focus shifted.
Story_ID: 73923
Speaker 1: So what did you do at this point, I mean, did you--how long did-- (simultaneously)
Speaker 2: By this time I was starting the job here [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was hired here by a friend of mine, Jerry Stevens, S-T-E-V-E-N-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what were you hired to do?
Speaker 2: I was hired to be his program coordinator.  At that time, this was the Office of Minority Student Affairs.  So, he, he was, at that point, the only staff person.  He was hired in 1971 and had only student support.  He told me, when he was hired, that he was gonna work during that first year to develop a job that would be, with me in mind, and he as gonna bring me on as his coordinator.  So, sure enough, in '72 [1972], he did offer me a job as program coordinator, and I came here, rather reluctantly.  But, I came here, and took this job, wasn't real clear about what his expectations were.  But, he told me to think back to my student experience; and think of all the things I wanted to happen for me when I was a student, he said and do that.  Just do that job.  So, that was kinda my--yeah, I mean, there's no professional training for this.  But, given the experience of the [Plymouth] Settlement House and kind of where I was headed in terms of my own interest and my own development, and the fact that he was clear about one, one major point.  That we were not going to focus on, what he called repairing students, doing remedial work.  That we were going to work on trying to impact the environment.  And, we were convinced that if we could do something positive in the environment, with the environment, that our students could succeed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what kinda things did you all do, I mean, what?
Speaker 2: Well, he told me to develop a program, develop what he called a cultural education program.  And, again, the kind of experience I had working with Morris Jeff, gave me some grounding in that.  So, I knew that, with the little money he made available that it would be a good idea for me to start thinking about programming artists, programming activists, intellectuals, and generally bringing in people who represented African American culture at, at its best.  I, you know, I didn't know a lot about who that might be at that time but, I knew that, you know, there were a few people around I would talk to; who could advise me, Jeff, being one; my brother-in-law.  So, you know, I been having some conversations with people and over the course of some weeks, we kinda carved out a program that would consist of those things:  theatre and film and speakers and concerts, workshops.  And, the thing that pleased me was he said we're gonna do this year-round.  We're not gonna do this in February.  You might do a little extra in February but, for the most part, you're gonna do this year-round.  This will be co-curricular.  And, that's the position we took that, the things that we developed--the programs we developed for black students, were every bit as important as the experience they were having in the classroom.  And, for retention, this was gonna be extremely important because we were giving students the kind of experience and the kind of program that were given for the sense of who they were, create a sense of confidence and that was gonna be important to succeeding here.  And, being clear about what they were to do, you know, with the college education.
Story_ID: 73924
Speaker 1: How, I guess I keep getting back to how this is different from the typical thing you would get, you know, on a college campus.  A lot of college campuses have programs for minority students who then emphasize the development of the individual, and moving that individual into corporate society, you know, corporate structure, and to give them--to enhance their, you know, personal skills, so they can matriculate up the ladder, you know, and, and, you know, (unclear) move out and enjoy all the, you know, things that go along with success and so forth.  What is--How does what you all are doing here [Office of Minority Student Affairs, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky] differ from that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it's different in that, we believe that our students have a responsibility that really transcends their own individual aspirations.  That because they have been fortunate enough to get to the place where they can even aspire to a college education that comes with great responsibility.  And, it's, I mean, it's just fundamentally true, that any, any community looks to its educated people for leadership.  So, that's what we see as our mission here.  We don't just prepare people for individual careers, we prepare people to assume leadership.  And, we tell our students that the, you know, whether you understand it or not, you need to aspire for something better, you need to strive for something better than being, quote, successful in the, the conventional sense.  You know, getting a job and putting a few more clothes in your closet and buying some CDs.  That you really need to aspire to solve some of our problems.  And, that's why this cultural piece is very important.  Because unless people have the opportunity to come to a fuller sense of their purpose and their identity, and doing that through being in touch with people who we consider our great ones.  That, that, you know, when I think about my own experience as a student, the things that I, I don't always remember what happened in class; but, I do remember meeting Fannie Lou Hamer.  And, I remember meeting, I mean, at that time, we were meeting people like, the brothers from Louisiana, the Black Panther Party for Self-Defense.  People like Julian Bond [HM].  Numbers of people who were coming through the campus at that time.  You know, who we had a chance to sit with and converse with and those were, those were moments that I'll just never forget.  And, those were the things and those were the kind of experiences that not only gave me a fuller sense of what I should do with my life, but they gave me, you know, the courage to stick this out.  That I didn't have the luxury of say, I'm gonna go home, you know 'cause I'm, I'm tired of this, I've tried--I'm tired of this treatment, you know.  So, I think, that's valid, I mean, I know that's valid and know that that's--even though, you know, I'm thirty years from my own experience, that that kind of education is absolutely necessary.  We're talking about, you know, comprehensive, holistic, kind of development that is gonna help our students realize what they really should be about doing with their lives.
Story_ID: 73925
Speaker 1: It seems as though this (unclear) is different from the ideas that were, I guess, prevalent in the early '60s [1960s] that you become a successful, you know, you, your--education is to help you become a professional success and then once you're a professional success, by you being that model example, it automatically makes people wanna be like you (simultaneous) thing, rather than you actually having to do anything else, you know, still people are very resistabt to the idea that they, you know, they should do anything.  It's an educational problem there, I guess, to try and, I mean, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is.  And, I think it's the, it's a responsibility of educators to, to really communicate that message that--and it's a message that really does run against the grain because, I mean, that's still the prevailing message of the university.  I mean, it's only recent years that people are beginning to talk about, you know, ethics of education or social responsibility.  I mean, only after, you know, business schools have turned out, Michael Milkens and the Bolskeys (ph.) that, you know, there is something deficient, there's recognition of something deficient, in terms of a sense of service.  And, there's something that, I'm pleased to say, that we knew early on that service was really something to aspire to, it wasn't something that, you know, you took on to add to your agenda.  There's something that you really aspire to as a calling.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now this is--this comes on, nowadays we have the Clinton Administration, was calling for service, you know, to be performed in the high schools, you know, so kids can graduate.  I mean, they were called for that kinda thing, national service were reduced to a level of Americore and those kind of a things, you know.  And, you're saying that you all were doing something similar, back in the day, and still a sense of giving back to the community.
Speaker 2: You know, I mean, one thing about again, these moments in my life as a student; the conversation with Fannie Lou Hamer.  I mean, this woman sat down in the cafeteria with us and her first question to us--and this was just a handful of kids but she said "What are you doing"?  And, I think somebody began answering that questions about what classes they were taking.  And, she said "No baby, I'm talking about what are you doing"?  And, you know, it was like a, it was a powerful moment because we were like, oh, she's asking us what are we doing with our lives, you know.  And, you know, that's something that we'll never forget, you know, that here this woman, who didn't have an education, I mean, probably no formal education, but were very clear about what we ought to be doing, you know.  Given the fact that we had to, the luck of the, the good fortune to be here that we just couldn't be wasting time and being silly (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did y'all have a sense of who she was when she was there?
Speaker 2: You know, she, at that time, she was part of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party and was kinda touring the South on the sponsorship of the, I think, American Friends Service Committee, it's one of the liberal groups, liberal white groups.  So, we knew the name but, I don't think I knew, at all, just who she was or how important she was and this, what this Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party was gonna ultimately become.  So, I mean, she just impressed me like a grandmother, you know.  That's how she relates to us.
Speaker 1: And what about Julian Bond [HM], I guess he was kind of SNCC experience, I guess.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  And we had SNCC people who were coming through the campus at that time.  In fact, Bond came here as a speaker and I'm not sure who sponsored him but, at that time, I think he was a presidential candidate.
Speaker 1: Bond?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was the youngest--if I'm correct, I think that's--he was running, you know, progressive ticket.  No, no, no, not presidential candidate, he was a congressional candidate.  In fact, he was too young to qualify but, was running.  But, there were SNCC people as well, who came through from time to time.  And, would work with our BSU [Black Student Union].  There was a fellow, Lemond Godwin (ph.), who was a Ford fellow, on campus, graduate student, who was--went with SNCC, and who was our advisor.
Story_ID: 73926
Speaker 1: So, what have been the challenges of trying to keep this program going on the campus?  I know that you've been challenged.
Speaker 2: Sure.  Well, one is, always making the case.  And, that case had to be made not just with an administration and legislature but, it has to now be made with students.  I mean, things have changed significantly since, you know, the early days of this program when students I think were very clear about the value of going to a concert or going to a lecture by Alex Haley.  You know that now, I mean, you know we're talking about a different kind of mind set, a different kinda of value system, so you know, it becomes more challenging in trying to do this kind of program with students who really respond to a different political, a different cultural environment and who come here with different values.  So, that our ways requires that, you know, we try to be creative in the way that we do things.  I can remember, a few years ago, we had one of our most successful programs, when we co-billed, you may know the name of the rapper, KRS-One, Kris Parker--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: With Kwame Toure.
Speaker 1: Who used to be Stokely Carmichael?
Speaker 2: Who used to be Stokely Carmichael.  Now, of course, you know, most of our student had never heard of Stokely Carmichael.  But, they knew, KRS-One.  So, co-billing them got out about 2,000 students.  All 2,000 which came to see KR, KRS-One but who were treated to Stokely Carmichael.  So, it was a powerful evening.  And we found, you know, being creative and always trying to find ways to, like, engage students, just from programming where they are and then move them through, you know, a process of trying to connect with more traditional, more substantive things sometimes and, you know, what they are into in terms of what's popular, popular cultural activity.
Story_ID: 73927
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of your other activities.  You've been involved in, I know the National Black Holistic Society and some other things on the national and local level, you know.  You've stirred some things up and built some connections with people.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well you know, a lot of that I see is just an extension of the work that I do here [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky].  And, I, again, feel real fortunate to be in a job and be in a career that allows me to pursue so many of my own interests.  So, it was through my work here, and my relationship to Ann Beard (ph.), now Ann Grundy, my wife, that we first met Haki Madhubuti [HM].  Ann met Haki through, in her first year at Plymouth Settlement House when he would come to, as I said, to do programs, read poetry.  But, those kinds of connections have built relationships over the years and those kind of relationships have spun off into activities, like the National Black Holistic Society.  So, when I met him, well, didn't meet him, but when I connected with him again after I started working here, I brought him in as a lecturer.  And, it was during one of those visits that he introduced me to the National Black Holistic Society.  And, told me that he would be interested in, me considering becoming part of the group.  Went to Chicago [Illinois], interviewed with a panel of members, was initiated into the group and that evolved into, years of activities with them.  One of which was developing the National Black Holistic Retreat.
Story_ID: 73928
Speaker 1: You asked me about the [National Black] Holistic Society.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  As a follow up, give us some examples, the kind of things that the Black Holistic Society would do.
Speaker 1: You know the thing that we were attempting to do with that society was develop a black fraternity.  I mean, it was really a fraternity model and we were a fraternity based on an African model of brotherhood.  So, in, in doing that, not only did we come together around fellowship, I mean, sometimes we would meet just to kinda kick it with each other.  But, we always had an agenda that we would work through in the course of a weekend.  And, there were a number of projects that we tried initially, but we hit upon this idea of trying to do these retreats.  And, the point of the retreat was to bring together a community of black people, to devote a weekend, to look at the issues that we felt impacted the development of positive black community family life.  So, the model was to pick some remote site and, you know, handle all the logistics in terms of accommodations and food and all that; cultural programming, which was usually my responsibility.  But, also developing an agenda of presenters, who would over the course of the weekend, address a wide range of issues:  education, politics, health, spirituality, I mean, just a wide range of topics.  So, we did that, we did that initially up in Pennsylvania, Mount Tone Pennsylvania Ski Resort, which was a white-owned resort.  And, as we had those early experiences, we had to fine tune the retreats.  We realized that, you know, to be consistent with our own values, we needed to move to a black-owned resort.  And, someone identified King Lodge in upstate New York and we moved the retreat site from Mount Tone to King Lodge, which became our home for a number of years.
Speaker 2: Tell me about King Lodge, I mean, it had a previous owner that was famous--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Well, King Lodge was owned by three generations of a black family, the Owens family.  And, they bought this site and bought this resort, I guess during the heydays of resort vacationing in New York.  So, they had a-King Lodge was to black people would say, the Poconos, and some of these other famous resort sites were to, you know, the white vacationing community.  So, during this time, I mean, King Lodge had a number of people who visited, people like A. Philip Randolph stayed there.  Ralph Bunche, was known to have stayed there.  So that's part of the, you know, the legacy, the history that King Lodge likes to point to.  So, it really worked very well with us.  The Owens family, after a few experiences with us, you know, grew to appreciate the kind of programming, the kind of experience that we were trying to develop there.  And, you know, worked very closely with us to make sure that, you know, we could have the, the kind of program that we envisioned.  So, what, maybe 10, 12 years we did that there at King Lodge and there was only one, one other, one other time that we programmed upstate at Peg Leg Bates, which was a larger resort in Upstate New York, further north.  And, we had, you know, good experience, but it didn't compare with King Lodge, so we moved the retreat back to King Lodge.  And, did the retreat there as long as it lasted.
Story_ID: 73929
Speaker 1: The [National Black Holistic] Society also sponsored Kwanzaa, annual Kwanzaa festivity and/or meeting, gathering down in Georgia, Jekyll Island in Georgia, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we in fact, are very proud to have sponsored the first national Kwanzaa celebration.  Which was, I forget the year, but we did that at, as you said, Jekyll Island Georgia, and that was a retreat site.  The reason we chose Jekyll Island is because of its historical importance.  Jekyll Island was a, as you know, part of the Georgia Sea Island Chain.  One of the Southern-most islands and it was the last site that was the point of embarkation for slave ships.  In fact, there's a ship called The Wanderer.  That was the last site to, the last ship to have landed on the beaches of Jekyll Island.  So, it had that kind of symbolic importance.  And, also we wanted to change the geographic location of the retreat site so that we would draw a large number of Southerners to the retreat, which we were able to do through hosting it at Jekyll Island.  But, those were very powerful moments.  Those--we would draw 500 people, typically, to these retreats at Jekyll Island.  The first year, I recall, we had Dr. Maulana Karenga [HM], who was the founder of Kwanzaa.  And, a number of other very important speakers including Na'im Akbar [HM], Dr. Asa Hilliard, Dr. Louisa Tish; very powerful celebration.  People from all over the country and, as I said, was a historic moment, the first national Kwanzaa celebration.
Story_ID: 73930
Speaker 1: There was something done, you know, at least a couple of times that I know of; that had to do with going to the ocean.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can tell you about that, and I can tell about, you know, we talk about that a lot because there was, there was some things that happened in the course of that celebration that, in that ritual, that were really, almost surreal.  But, what we, what we intended with that ritual was to, what we call--it was a, it was a ritual of spiritual reclamation.  So, we called ourselves, in going to that beach, that beach where the slave ship "Wanderer" landed, that we would symbolically close the door of slavery.  That we would try to invoke the spirits of those Africans who were introduced to this country through their experience of landing with that slave ship on that beach.  So, it was a, a ritual where we paid homage to those Africans at the same time, we would try to close the door to all of that experience of slavery; mental and physical slavery and open a new door of possibility.  So, that was the kind of, the spirit of that, that celebration, that ritual.  But, what I was gonna share with you that I think was rather surreal, was that in, in setting in the schedule, I mean, as we planned that event, we were very conscientious and very determined to do this at low tide.  And, we'd timed the tide, of course.  So, what actually happened was quite different from what we thought was gonna happen.  So, we go to the beach and as we get into the celebration, we have the elders sitting on the, there's a large circle, and the elders was sitting on the circle that was closest to the ocean, that, that part of the circle.  And, I have this on tape, but, what happens is, we get into the celebration, you see the elders began to turn around and kind of look to the ocean, as oceans began to lap up on the backs of their heels.  And, we begin to look at each other, like, this is really odd because this is supposed to be low tide.  But, what happens is, people began to move in closer to avoid getting too wet and the circle tightens up and our very astute brother, David Hall, who was leading the ritual notices this, and says "That's no accident, this is happening at this moment because it means we have to come together, closer if we're gonna withstand, you know, the trials and challenges of the future".  Which was perfect (laughter), for our purposes.  And, you know, I'll always think that maybe there was some intervention there, I mean, seagulls were flying particularly close that day.  But the, you know, retreat site had that kind of power to it.  That there was a kind of program that we planned, but there was always something that transcended it once people came together.  And, once the program began to unfold, that there was something much, much more powerful that took place, that you know, we were always just, even as planners, we were always just really amazed.
Story_ID: 73931
Speaker 1: Now, what are your goals and aspirations for the black community?
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: That's a big question.
Speaker 2: You know, I just, I mean, like most of us, I would really like to see this community, our community, free, self-determining, self-sufficient, able to procedure at the level of potential that we all know exists, but for many reasons it's been stifled.  I wanna see us, again, to be producers instead of consumers.  I want our children to have a love for learning and be grounded in who they are, have a strong sense of confidence, you know, full of smiles and laughter, I mean, those sorts of things.  I mean, I mean, when people talk about returning to our greatness, I mean, I, I wanna see that, you know.  And I, through my knowledge of history, I think there are times that we can point to clearly that we were that kind of community; great, and self-sufficient, and producing, and creative, and that's--I want to contribute to that in some way.  My particular interest is in the culture.  And, I think if we are reconnected with our culture and with the power of that culture, then that can be your window through which we can see ourselves.
Story_ID: 73932
Speaker 1: At this juncture, what do you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I know it has to do with my work with the culture.  But, I see myself as a teacher, I mean, I know I'd be an educator all my life and I know that my sense of who I am as a teacher, doesn't depend on my profession.  I was never hired, even in this job, to do what I'm doing.  That, what has happened here really has to do with circumstances, it has to do with like, the vision of the brother [Jerry Stevens] that brought me on to let me do what I know I can do well.  So, I, I'm a culture worker by calling, and whether that ever, I mean, you know, has a title of administrator, or professor, whatever, my particular expertise and my love is in cultural activity and creating cultural activity, facilitating cultural activity.  I mean, I, I once heard that, "If the beautiful see themselves, they would love themselves" and that's what I believe, I really believe that.  And, I want to put the beautiful in front of themselves, that's what I do real well.
Story_ID: 73933
Speaker 1: Now, I know your father [Chester Grundy, Sr.] died early when you were, while when you were in high school I guess, right, I should say, in college.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you mother [Sojourner Grundy] get a chance to see you become successful at this cultural realm?
Speaker 2: Hum, she did.  My mother died about five years ago and I've been doing this job quite a while.
Speaker 1: What did she think about this?
Speaker 2: Well, she, she doesn't, didn't really understand it but she knew that it was important to me and that I've been consistent.  You know, I think that's what she wanted me to do.  She wanted me to be a good father and be consistent.  And, I think my mother, realized that I was about that.  I was about, I was very serious about this and she began seeing glimpses of that when I was a student.  That, you know, this was something that I was very much committed to.  And she trusted in that.  You know, whether she understood it or not, she trusted in my commitment to it and the fact that, you know, I had a great love for this.
Story_ID: 73934
Speaker 1: And, this question's a little bit different from legacy.  How would you like to be remembered?  And, a lot of people know you, so (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I think I want to be remembered for being consistent, you know.  That, I have, regardless of what I've done in my life, I've tried to be consistent and I've tried to be--and I give it my best.  But, if I'm, I mean, there have been some things I've done, not been committed to, you know, as--in way of just making a living.  But, what I've been fortunate to have a livelihood, I've been really committed to like this.  Then, I've tried to do this consistently and to the best of my ability.  And, I also want to be remembered as someone who really had a deep love for people in this community and tried to, tried to serve.  I mean, that sounds like [Rev. Dr.] Martin Luther King, [Jr.] okay, but, I'm serious about that.  I wanted to serve.  I wanted to--I saw this job as being a real responsibility and it's been as gratifying to do it as I hope it's been, you know, whatever values come from my work for the people.  It's been mutually gratifying for me.  I've grown by doing it.
Story_ID: 73935
Speaker 1: Yeah.  This is, this is Chester Grundy.  This was taken, three or four years ago.  I think I'm attending a lecture at the [Martin Luther King, Jr.] Cultural Center at that moment.
Speaker 2: Alright, next.
Speaker 1: That's me with Muhammad Ali and that was from a visit that he made to the campus about six years ago.  We had him here for a couple of days.
Speaker 2: Alright, next.
Speaker 1: This is Wayne Shorter, who was a guest artist who appeared in our spotlight jazz series.  This was last year.
Speaker 2: (unclear), next. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  We got a glare.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the great Dizzy Gillespie and this is back stage at a concert, I think in the early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Okay. Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is Ozzie Davis [HM] who was the speaker at our Martin Luther King Holiday celebration just this past year.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Next.
Speaker 2: These, this is Chester Grundy with the women in his life.  To the far left is my wife, Ann.  Standing to her left is my daughter Tulani, that's my oldest daughter and standing to her left is my daughter, Saida.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wow, this is the Board of Directors of the National Black Holistic Society.  This was taken about four years ago.
Speaker 1: Any, particular, about this was associated with?
Speaker 2: This was the opening.  This was the grand opening of the Betty Shabazz Retreat.  The Betty Shabazz Retreat Center was opening that weekend.  And, this was that Saturday.
Speaker 1: Okay, great.  That's good, next.
Speaker 2: This is the late, great--
Speaker 1: A slight glare.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is me with Joe Williams.  Late, great Joe Williams who was guess artist in our spotlight jazz series about, four years ago.  This was just a couple of months prior to Joe's death.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is Chester Grundy as a, I think this is about 1972, when I first started working at the University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky].
Speaker 1: Okay, right. I think that's it, I don't know of any--okay
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's Chester Grundy with Archbishop Desmond Tutu, who was another guest in our program.  His daughter was a graduate of the Patterson School of Diplomacy here.
Speaker 1: Oh really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When was this taken?
Speaker 2: Wow.  This was 1984.  The year of his--the year he won the Nobel Prize.  It's '84 [1984] or '85 [1985].  I think it's '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Okay. Very good.  Now, you can go ahead when you're ready.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is me with my daughter Saida who I think was maybe three years old at the time.  I remember this, this was at the Wynton Marsalis concert.
Speaker 1: And, how old is Saida today?
Speaker 2: She's twenty.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, seventeen years ago.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay, great.
