Story_ID: 152240
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Mathew Hickey.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: William Leverett Griffin, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Leverett, L-E-V-E-R-E-T-T, Griffin, G-R-I-F-F-I-N.
Speaker 1: All right, now, is there a story behind your name?
Speaker 2: Well, the story behind my name is, on the Griffin side, there are a lot of William Griffins.  So, no, juniors, no seconds, no thirds, just a lot of William Griffins.  So my grandfather, paternal grandfather, his name is William Lewis Griffin.  And then he had a great-great-grandfather who actually fought in the Civil War, and his name was William Griffin.  So, that's a family name.  And I have a son, but I didn't want a junior.  So I--my youngest son, his middle name is William.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Eleven, twenty-five, 1970 [November 25, 1970], Austin, Texas.
Speaker 1: All right, and, sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: My occupation is entrepreneur.  Currently, I run a company called Hip Hop on Demand, and I'm the chairman and CEO of that company.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is May 9, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at my home in Round Rock, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 152241
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask, that only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I do, spaghetti.
Speaker 1: All right--
Speaker 2: With marinara sauce and breaded parmesan.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Maroon.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: Cabo San Lucas [Mexico].
Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure if I would say one.  I have a lot of sayings with my sons, you know, right hand, black man, something I like to say.  God is good all the time is another phrase that I like to use, and then, obviously, there are verses that we like.
Story_ID: 152242
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and then we'll bring 'em together.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Patricia, P-A-T-R-I-C-I-A, Ann, A-N-N, Seaton, S-E-A-T-O-N, Griffin, G-R-I-F-F-I-N.  Seaton is her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born December 9, 1950, 12-9-1950 in Liberty, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back does your knowledge of her ancestors go and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well, my knowledge goes back really on a cursory basis, census stuff back to 1870.  But for the most part, she comes from a whole family of educators.  So her parents were--and my mom grew up in Houston [Texas], and her parents were both educators.  Her father was a principal in Houston Independent School District for thirty years and retired, and her mother taught for fifty years in the Houston Independent School District.  And then her mother's parents were principals.  So my great-grandfather, he had a Ph.D. from USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], and he was a principal at, at a pretty historic high school in Houston [Texas] called Yates.
Speaker 1: Jack Yates?
Speaker 2: Jack Yates High School [Houston, Texas].  So--
Speaker 1: Well, what was his name?  We may as well give the names here.
Speaker 2: His name was Dr. John Gooden, G-O-O-D-E-N.
Speaker 1: And he was the principal of Jack Yates?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so there were actually--I was just talking to my grandmother about this the other day.  Her name is Lillian Seaton, Lillian Gooden Seaton, and so he taught at Yates--I mean he was a principal at Yates.  She went to Yates.  My, both of my parents went to Yates.  And so anyway, we were just talking about this.  There were three other major high schools in Houston.  Booker T. Washington [High School, Houston, Texas] was a high school.  Jack Yates was a high school and [Phillis] Wheatley [High School, Houston, Texas] was a high school.  All of them had principals who had gotten their Ph.D.s from the University of Southern California.  And so one of the reasons why that happened is because during that time in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s], there were no black graduate schools in the State of Texas.  So you could not go to--you could go to Prairie View [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical University, Prairie View, Texas] which is where my great-grandfather went or you could go to Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas] which is where my great-grandfather went and my grandmother subsequently got her master's there.  But you couldn't go to University of Texas [Austin, Texas] for graduate school.  So they had to go out of state, and USC [University of Southern California] was a school that did admit blacks if you were capable and able to get in.  And so they went out there for--my great-grandfather went out there for eleven straight summers.  He packed his family up, moved out there and he was an administrator during the school year in Houston.  And then all the summers they would spend in Houston--I mean in Los Angeles [California] while he worked on his Ph.D.  And so that's my mom's side of the family.  All those are educators.
Story_ID: 152243
Speaker 1: Now, let me go back over it again 'cause your son may want to find out this, you know, look at this later, later on.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, so your great-grandfather is Dr. John Gooden?
Speaker 2: Yeah, John Gooden.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--and your grandfather is?
Speaker 2: Well, and my grandfather is Orville Seaton, O-R-V-I-L-L-E, Seaton--S--
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.  We jumped from the--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) Matri--or the patri--(unclear), yeah, from maternal, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your grandfather is Orville Seaton--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And he was a principal too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was also a principal.
Speaker 1: And was he a principal at one of the other schools in--
Speaker 2: No, he was a principal at middle schools.  So there was a middle--there was, Doss Middle School [(ph.) Houston, Texas] is one of the ones that he worked at, Burrus [Elementary School, Houston, Texas] was another school that he was the principal of.  So he was a principal in middle schools.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's your maternal grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: All right, now, was his father an educator too?
Speaker 2: No, his father, his father was a manager in the Negro Leagues baseball for a long time.  And then they had property down in Washington County [Texas], which is where my maternal grandfather's side of the family is from.  So they had cows and what not down there.  So he pretty much managed that.
Speaker 1: You know what team he managed in, or what team--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: --(unclear) teams he-- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --no, so I have to do more research on that myself.  But in Texas--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now, what was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Turner Seaton.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: S-E-A-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: So he was an entrepreneur and a farmer?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean mainly, more, more rancher because it was cows, but, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And the family still has that.  It was, basically, there was roughly 125 - [1]30 acre tracks.  There was two tracks that they've had handed down to them for a long time since the, since the late 1800s.  And so he was respons- he was an only child and he was responsible for the upkeep, the management of all that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 152244
Speaker 1: Okay, and your, your--any information about your great-grandmother?
Speaker 2: On--
Speaker 1: --on your mother's [Patricia Seaton Griffin] side?
Speaker 2: On the maternal side?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Well, so Big Mama was her nickname, but her name was Willie Gooden, W-I-L-L-I-E.  Taylor was her middle name, Willie Taylor Gooden.  And she was a, she was a homemaker, and then where they lived when they were in Houston [Texas] was in Third Ward on a--they lived on the street, Barry Street, but they also owned the property on Holman [Street].  And on that property, they had a store, a rooming house, and then a couple of apartments that she managed.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was busy too.
Speaker 2: She was very busy.  So on the 1930 census, it lists her occupation as store owner.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So this is your great-grandmother and your great-grandfather [John Gooden].  Now, I didn't think I asked you--did I ask you about your grandmother 'cause your grandfather [Orville Seaton], your maternal--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So, yeah, my grandmother--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Lil--on my mother's side, yeah, Lillian Seaton.  So she taught in Houston Independent Schools for fifty years.  And she was an elementary school teacher.  And, in fact, every--we lived with her for our first few years, my first few years in Houston.  And then--'cause my mom was still down here at Texas going to college.  And then we were there every summer for twelve summers.  And so we used to go, sit at her desk.  We'd have summer school.  So we'd do that for, basically, the first three hours in the morning, and then she'd make lunch.  And then after that we'd go out and do something.  Either we'd go to San Jacinto Monument [La Porte, Texas] or we'd go, go-cart riding or we'd go down to Galveston [Texas] or we'd go to the ferry or we'd do something in the afternoon.  But we had school every day in the summer with her.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and your grandfather is Dr. John Gooden who was the--
Speaker 2: That's my great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Great-grandfather.
Speaker 2: My grandfather is Orville Seaton.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, Orville Seaton, okay.
Speaker 2: So my mother's parents are Orville and Lillian Seaton, and then my--Lillian's parents are Dr. John Gooden and Willie Gooden.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then my mother's father's parents, her mother--her grandmother was named Mary Seaton.  But she, she passed away before my mom was born in 1950.  She had, she had breast cancer and it turns out just a couple months ago, my mom just passed away from breast cancer.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry to hear that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, thank you.
Story_ID: 152245
Speaker 1: So you're--this is a family of educators, and so what did your mother [Patricia Seaton Griffin] say about growing up in this family?  What was it like?
Speaker 2: What was it like?  Well, it was, oh, it was kind of tough, honestly, because my mom graduated from [Jack] Yates [High School, Houston, Texas] when she was sixteen.  Then she came down to the University of Texas [at Austin, Austin, Texas] and they were just beginning to integrate at the University of Texas.  And so she was young, and then she met my dad [Rodney Griffin], and then they got together and they got married.  And then they had my sister and so my mom graduated from high school in '67 [1967], came down to the University of Texas in the fall, met my dad, had my sister [Elizabeth Bent] in '68 [1968], had me in '70 [1970].  So she, by the time she's nineteen, she had two kids, and my parents didn't work out.  And so my dad really wasn't around.  So as a result, it was pretty tough on her.  I mean she was working at the phone company, which is where she ultimately retired from and going to school at the same time.  So, that's how we--we spent a lot of time in Houston [Texas] with my grandmother [Lillian Seaton] in the early years.  And then when we were at home, she was kind of working two jobs.  So we spent a lot of time on our own.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what did your mother major in at the University of Texas?
Speaker 2: Communications.
Speaker 1: Okay, and she got a job with--would it have been Southwest Bell?
Speaker 2: It was Southwestern Bell, right, yep, so, so she had two jobs.  She was working at Southwestern Bell, and she was also working at Seton Hospital [Seton Medical Center, Austin, Texas], which had--which was the hospital that I was born in.
Story_ID: 152246
Speaker 1: I'm gonna go to your father's side.  Then we'll put 'em together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Rodney, R-O-D-N-E-Y, Leverett, L-E-V-E-R-E-T-T, Griffin.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth is November 4th, 1946, and he was born in Houston, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, once again, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Well, they were educators.  So my dad's parents, his mother was Margaret Riggins [ph.] Griffin, and she taught in the Houston Public Schools for almost forty years until she retired.  She taught middle school English.  And then his dad went to--he was actually at Tuskegee Institute [later Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], and he was a mechanic for the airmen in World War II.  He came back to Houston [Texas], and he tried his hand in a few different things, an entrepreneur of sorts.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did he have a store or anything or did he have--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, he had a, he had one, one of the first African American car dealerships.  He had Griffin Motors in Houston.
Speaker 1: Okay, was he the first?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: The story--I don't have the full story on that.  It was short-lived, but he had Griffin Motors.  He had a partner.  There was a dispute (laughter), and that's as much information as I could get from my dad on that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So any history beyond your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Beyond them?
Speaker 1: Yeah, do you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't have a lot of history on my--I don't know a lot of the history on my dad's side other than that line of William Griffins.  You know, so I know--and that basically has been, you know, started from family folk tale to me actually being able to go trace this line of William Griffins back to the William Griffin who was in the, who--
Speaker 1: So this is on your father's side?
Speaker 2: This is on my father's side.
Speaker 1: So you could go--so where did that William Griffin live?
Speaker 2: Which one?  The original one?
Speaker 1: (Unclear) yeah, the one that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He lived, he lived in Washington County, Texas, but then he ultimately served along the Rio Grande Valley in Texas.  Basically, they were enforcing, it was--the Union soldiers were enforcing a blockade against the Confederacy down at the border in the Rio Grande.  And so that's where he served.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then, ultimately, after the, after the [Civil] War, then they sent and settled in an area near Houston in Waller County [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so your grandfather who went to Tuskegee, he was actually from Texas and--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they're all from Texas, I mean, yeah, a long time, I mean long--as far--all the way, the 1870 census is the earliest I could see it in, and that's where they're from.  And their birthplace is still in Texas.  So sometimes you'll see, you know, on my wife's [Christine Griffin] side where it'll say, her birthplace, Alabama or somewhere else, but in 1870, these, all these were birthplace in, in Texas.  So that's pretty much where we've been a long time.
Story_ID: 152247
Speaker 1: What was, what was it like for your father [Rodney Griffin] growing up?  What, what did he say about growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, he grew up in segregated Houston [Texas], kind of--and that's the kind of circumstances that my mom [Patricia Seaton Griffin] grew up in.  And so he has always saw himself as, you know, a lifelong struggle, essentially, against segregation and for desegregation.  So a couple of the highlights that he pointed out in his growing up, at least as he, you know, shared with us for family was, he was, he went Worthing for ninth grade, [Evan Edward] Worthing High School [Houston, Texas] for ninth grade and then ultimately finished up at [Jack] Yates [High School, Houston, Texas].  But he was on a, the first--he participated in the first integrated chess tournament in Houston.  And they beat [Mirabeau B.] Lamar High School [Houston, Texas] which was, you know, the white high school in River Oaks [Houston, Texas], and it was reported in the papers, reported about it, and it caused a big uproar because people didn't think that the races should be playing each other in chess at the end of that.  And that's one of his, his--that's one of his shared stories and one of his favorite memories.
Speaker 1: Now, this is something, the races should not be playing each other in chess.
Speaker 2: Right, well, when--once you have a black team, high school, beating, you know, your establishment white high school, then it probably wasn't a good idea, I guess, they figured.
Speaker 1: Now, these are the days--I don't know if they lasted through your father's generation, but I know that in most of the major cities in the U.S., the black high schools didn't play the white high schools until the mid-'50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: But--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Black high schools--
Speaker 2: Anyway where you, it happened somewhere, you add another ten years to Texas, and that's kind of where we are on it.  So this was in the--this was him in the ninth grade.  He graduated from high school in 1965.  So this was probably '60 [1960] or '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: Okay, so Lamar was the--was that the ultimate white high school, the one--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Lamar, yeah, definitely.  It was in what is still the most prosperous area of Houston which is the River Oaks section.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So that's--that's interesting.  So Worthing, was that a high school that was becoming integrated at the time?
Speaker 2: No, it was a black high school.  No, this is still--no, Houston high schools were still segregated.  Yeah, so this was a black high school, Worthing, and then he ultimately went to, he went to ninth grade at Worthing, and then he transferred to Yates, and that's where he graduated from.
Speaker 1: So the black high school, I mean the black population of Houston is steadily growing, I guess from the '30s [1930s] on.  At one time, you just had [Phillis] Wheatley [High School, Houston, Texas], then Jack Yates, and then Booker T. [Washington High School, Houston, Texas], I guess--
Speaker 2: Yeah--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I don't know which one came first.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Booker T., Worthing, Kashmere [High School, Houston, Texas]--
Speaker 1: Kashmere, okay, those are all--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, Houston always has had a lot of, a lot of blacks, a lot, you know, because basically, that's the major city in east Texas, and that whole part of east Texas was where you'd have cotton plantations or ranches, farms.  And when they--people left the farms, they went to Houston.  And that has been going on for a long time.  I mean there wasn't really like an auto industry or anything that's really sparked that.  I mean, I guess, oil at certain points in time, but even in East Texas, they still have the oil industry, but Houston was definitely--has always been a very big, prominent, African American city, I mean always.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So did your father go on to college?
Speaker 2: He did he--so he came down to the University of Texas [at Austin, Austin, Texas] when he graduated and that's when he met my--that's where my parents met.  And then one of the reasons, part of the reason why my dad went to University of Texas is, he had an older sister who was two years older than him.  And she actually was at the University of Texas.
Story_ID: 152248
Speaker 1: And, and one of the bigger things, so William Griffin, my dad's [Rodney Griffin] dad, when his, when my dad's sister--her name was Cheryl Griffin at the time--was at the University of Texas [at Austin, Austin, Texas], the dorms were segregated.  So my grandfather, on her behalf, with two other dads, filed a lawsuit against the University of Texas, and it ultimately led to the integration of the dorms at the University of Texas.  So there's some family history at the University of Texas.  And it also gives a little bit of perspective on the identity of that side of my family.  I mean they really do view themselves as fighters and, you know, racial justice, and, you know, in the early years, at least around that '60s [1960s] period, you know, they definitely, definitely made a mark in that respect.  And that's something that I pass on to my kids so that they understand that part of their history in that they should feel just as entitled to anything, at least as it relates in this state, as anybody else because they participated in opening those doors, and it's their responsibility to walk through those.
Story_ID: 152249
Speaker 1: Now, are there any organizations associated with your father's [Rodney Griffin] side of the family and their activism?
Speaker 2: Well, my dad, for a long time, for probably twenty years--well, for forty years, he's been active in the Democratic Party.  And for probably twenty years of those years, he was an elected representative on the [Texas] State Democratic Executive Committee.  So he's very active in Democratic politics in the state.
Speaker 1: I mean in those days though, in terms of civil right activism, were any of them a part of CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] or NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Youth or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, NAACP, definitely, and when he was here, he was really into the Urban League.  So that was just, that was just forming around that time.  And so we used to have--there used to be a show on in Austin [Texas] called 'People View,' [ph.] which is essentially, it was a civic affairs type of show like--it's kind of the 'Gil Noble Show' in New York [City].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so he was a regular on that, talking about a lot of the issues.  I think his biggest issues around that time were around economic justice.
Speaker 1: Okay, he was of the leader in the Urban League, is that--
Speaker 2: Ah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --or he would--
Speaker 2: Active, active.  He was always a good spokesperson, I mean very, very good spokesperson.  And so he was interviewed regularly on those civic--in public affairs programs as related to economic justice.  And then he was active in the Democratic Party.  So his contemporaries around that time were Ann Richards, you know, lieutenant governor.  These were people who were at University of Texas [at Austin, Austin, Texas] with him and Lloyd Doggett, you know, he's a long-time congressman from Texas.  And so those were his peers at the University of Texas.  And then his--and they were always pushing for, you know, more liberal policies.  And then he was part of that kind of core group and his, his push, you know, at that time, was economic justice.
Story_ID: 152250
Speaker 1: So, you know, he'd [Griffin's father, Rodney Griffin] go to the Rainbow/PUSH [People United to Save Humanity] convention--he go to the Rainbow/PUSH conventions, and, you know, there was a whole group of them who would go work that, that circuit of all those, all those events.
Speaker 2: That was my next question.  I was gonna ask you about Operation Breadbasket--
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: --and PUSH 'cause we interviewed [HM] Pluria Marshall [Sr.]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, anyway, so my dad and Pluria are like this.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So Pluria was down here, before, before he moved to [Washington] D.C., he was down here.  And, and so, yeah, my dad was in that core group of guys, you know, the Houston [Texas] guys, and Jew Don Boney [Jr.] is another guy, their whole group, cohorts.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I thought so, and I was thinking that he had to know Pluria Marshall.  And it's interesting that you're in cable television--
Speaker 1: Right.  And he's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and Pluria Marshall was the person--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --been pursuing it a long time.
Speaker 2: --beating down the doors for black people--
Speaker 1: Yeah, for a long time.  And so, I, the last time I talked to Pluria was probably like ten or twelve years ago.  And this is, it was when he was in D.C.  So, you know, it was a hard job.  I mean he had a hard job, you know, and only a few people were able to get through as owners.  But a lot of people were able to get in as executives.  So, his work was obviously, definitely important.  But when they were back here in Texas, they were working on economic justice issues.  And so my dad was a cohort of that, but then he ultimately went into--his activism became actually within the party.  So then he became, on the executive committee of the Democratic Party in Texas [State Democratic Executive Committee], which he, he still works with them now.
Story_ID: 152251
Speaker 1: At that time, the time your father [Rodney Griffin] was growing up and up until 1994, the Democratic Party in Texas was very strong.  It may be strong now, but they're being overshadowed by these right-wing Republicans.  But, yeah, that's, you know, [HM] Lee P. Brown is a police chief in Houston [Texas], and then its mayor, (unclear), Ann Richards and the other people (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, [HM] Ron Kirk in Dallas [Texas].
Speaker 1: Ron Kirk, right.
Speaker 2: You know, so, but you have to separate local from the state.  I mean they're still strong locally.  I mean they have a lesbian mayor in Houston, the district attorney in Dallas is African American, you know.  So when you get to the cities, Dallas, Houston, specifically, Houston especially, it's diversity because the numbers, the numbers are there, and then the history of them being active is just there.  When you get to state wide, there are all these huge pockets.  This is a very big state, and there are all these huge pockets, people who just think differently.  They're going to resist it massively.  So that's kind of the difference.  And then the Democratic Party is--Ann Richards had been around a long time, and she's very popular.  And then before her, there was a Democratic governor named Mark White.  But he was very conservative.  He wasn't what you--he's not the modern, modern Democratic governor.  He's not what--he's not [Edmund] Jerry Brown [California governor].  I mean, you know, he was a Texas--because Texas was a proud Democratic state, you know.  You had Lyndon Baines Johnson, John Connally.  I mean it was a long-time Democratic state.  So one of the things that I just learned, you know, probably a couple of years ago, was my great-grandfather, Dr. [John] Gooden, on my mother's [Patricia Seaton Griffin] side actually taught my grandmother [Margaret Griffin], my dad's mother in school at one point in time when she was in high school.  He had a class that he taught her in.  And, but he wrote his dissertation on public education in Texas.  So he traces the genealogy.  I have it there, you know, he traces the genealogy of Texas as a state, just as a political entity, and then he talks about how public education was created as a right.  And then he talked about, at the time, Negro participation within that.  And part of what he pointed out was that one of the biggest adversaries to blacks even getting public education was the Democratic Executive Committee of the Democratic Party in Texas, which ironically, you know, basically, you know, eigthy years after that, my dad was on that executive committee.  And the point being is that, that Democratic Party, even in Texas all the way up through the '80s [1980s] and early '90s [1990s] is different from the governor who would come out and endorse [HM] Barack Obama today, you know, for a Democratic, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, it'd be like remnants of the Dixiecrats of long ago.
Speaker 2: Huge swaths of it, you know, and the people who had just been Democrats for so long, they supported Democrats until George W. Bush came along and told them that you, your values are with us, you know, even though you were a Democrat.  And then George W. Bush is the one, when he beat Ann Richards in '94 [1994] was the one who was able to get the state to really think different.  And then that created a Republican takeover in Texas as a party too.  The values are the same.  But--and party labels and identity switched to Republicans.
Story_ID: 152252
Speaker 1: All right, go, go ahead and explain what you were just saying?
Speaker 2: So the, the way I found out about this, this state [Texas] Democratic Executive Committee and the public education, et cetera, was I--it had always been told to me by both of my mom's parents [Lillian Seaton and Orville Seaton] that my great-grandfather [John Gooden] had gone to USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] and he had gotten a Ph.D.  And so I wanted to find out more information about it, the years, etc.  So I actually did an online search, and in the process of doing the online search, USC [University of Southern California] has their online archive, and then I saw that John Gooden had a, had his dissertation in the archive.  So that made me curious.  And then I called up USC, and they were able to--to the registrar, so they were able to send me his transcript.  And then they said that it's not on--the actual dissertation is not online, but they have it in their offsite archive.  So I went out there, and they found it.  They printed it up for me.  I got it bound.  I sent a copy to my grandmother, Lillian [Seaton], who's his daughter, and I gave a copy to my mom [Patricia Seaton Griffin], and I kept a copy.  And in the process of reading about it, that's when I learned about public education in Texas, and what had led to the opposition of blacks actually getting public education in Texas was the State Democratic Executive Committee, which was the irony was, eighty years later, my dad [Rodney Griffin] was serving on the board of that executive committee.  And just to see those two things, you know, tied together and at least my own personal family history was something that I thought was important to know and something that I really wanted to share with my kids.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I had heard about it, you know, you hear family legend.  Well, we've done these great things, x, y and z, but it's a total other thing to be able to actually see tangible evidence of the work that they've done.  And, you know, as I'm reading this, you know, dissertation, I was just even thinking at that point, I don't think I have ever written or explained anything as well as what my great-grandfather did, you know, sixty, seventy years ago.  And it made me think, I'd better step my game up because I'm supposed to be making progress, you know, over that.  But it was, it was something important to see, and now my kids have that as a starting point.
Story_ID: 152253
Speaker 1: Yeah, but you have a unique situation, a legacy that actually can push you, you know--I mean you can see your ancestor out, out ahead of you (laughter).
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: You know, which is, a lot of people don't have that--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --that vantage point.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: They see themselves as being the epitome of the line, you know.  And you look back and see, you can look ahead and see where he's like was up here, you know.
Speaker 2: That's true, and when you, and when you--you know, so when you asked like how I grew up, well, I didn't have that legacy inculcated in me as I grew up.  You know, everything was so here and now, you know.  My dad [Rodney Griffin] wasn't there.  My mom [Patricia Seaton Griffin] had so many immediate needs, you know, food, clothing, shelter, so many immediate needs that a lot of what my sister [Elizabeth Bert] and I were really taught was, you know, go to school.  That's expected.  Don't get in trouble, you know, all these things were here, but it never was explained to us that, you know, we were an extension of something or we were building on something.  And so one of the things I really wanna do in my parenting is to let my kids know, look, you're an extension of something.  There's an expectation of you that is great and substantial and one that you're capable of and this world needs what it is that you bring because of all the things that are going into you is something that the world hasn't had, shared with it yet, and they need you to carry that on.  And so when I see my kids, they have way more confidence--you know, I feel like my kids have already passed me, you know, in the sense of way more confidence, way more sense of entitlement.  It would never cross their mind that anything that they worked for, they couldn't go do or that the entirety of the whole world is available to them.  They, it wouldn't cross their mind.  And I remember when we did that, a little bit of Ancestry.com stuff with the William Griffins, you know, my oldest son, his name is Chase Griffin.  And he started seeing it, and he said, "Why didn't you name me William Griffin?"  You know, and that's like I, that--one, I wanted him to do his own thing.  You know, that was the biggest thing.  But it would have, it never occurred to me as I was growing up to say, "Man, I'm glad I was named William Griffin" or "I wish I was named after somebody else in my family."  So I thought that was, I mean I thought that was kind of a leap for us family-wise, that he actually wanted to be part of that tradition in that way.  But I told him that you are a part of it, you know, obviously, I didn't want you to have to feel like you had to be so closely associated.  I wanted you to, you know, forge your own path and do your own thing.  But I said, had I known how much William Griffins had done, I may have felt differently and may have thought then, it is a name worthy of my son that I should be passing on and handing down.  But I didn't know at the time.
Story_ID: 152254
Speaker 1: So is there a story about how your parents [Patricia Seaton Griffin and Rodney Griffin] met at University of Texas [at Austin, Austin, Texas] or who brought 'em together?
Speaker 2: I don't have the, I don't have the--all I know is that they were at the University of Texas at the same time and after a short period of time, my mom was pregnant.  And they had to get married, and they did.  So they got married shortly thereafter, and then my sister was [Elizabeth Bent] here about six months after they got married.
Speaker 1: Now, when you say they had to get married, they--it sounds as if they really weren't that much into each other.  I mean they--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, they had just met.  This was my mom's first semester at the University of Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My dad had been there--my dad graduated two years before, so my dad had been there a couple of years.  This was my mom's first semester, you know, first semester there.  And, you know, and she was the oldest of four kids, and she was the pride of my grandfather [Orville Seaton] especially, you know, but my grandparents, you know, because she graduated high in her class.  And here she is coming from Third Ward [Houston, Texas], and she's the first person in the family to go to the flagship state university, the first one to go to a white school at the University of Texas, you know.  And then for her to come home and say that she was pregnant was devastating, you know.  And I don't think that she fully recovered from the disappointment that she feels like she caused, even though, once we came along, my grandparents, you know, both of my--my grandfather and my grandmother [Lillian Seaton] just loved us, you know.  And subsequently they, you know, they showed her a tremendous amount of love, I mean, and you would feel like they got over it.  But I don't think that my mom ever got over it that disappointment.  And then, so they weren't high school sweethearts or, you know, anything like that.  And to be honest, my mom passed, so now we're going through her estate situation.  So we had to establish, you know, when they were divorced.  And I never even remember seeing my parents together as a couple ever, like I've seen them together, you know, at graduations, etc., but not as a couple.  I, my dad never lived in our house.  So I don't even remember him being there.  I visited him, you know, down in Houston [Texas], but I never remembered him--in just the way they are, it was just a--I couldn't imagine how in the world they could have ever gotten together in the first place, honestly.  But then when I found out they didn't get divorced until 1975, so that was five, you know, roughly five years after I was born and seven years after my sister was born.  But I'm sure that was just something of an administrative issue because I just don't remember them ever being together.  So it wasn't a--and it was one of the great disappointments of my mom's life, you know, just the marriage, it not working out and unfortunately, my dad didn't do the things that he was supposed to do as a provider, and that was also a constant, you know, problem for my mom because, you know, she was raising us as a single parent, and she did have two jobs and it was very difficult for her.
Story_ID: 152255
Speaker 1: All right, what were your mother's [Patricia Seaton Griffin] aspirations?  I mean, I mean before she, you know, she had children.  Did she have--did she--did she aspire to have a Ph.D. in education or some other field?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a good question because my mom was diagnosed with Stage 4 breast cancer two years ago.  And so I used to be the one who would pick her up and take her to chemotherapy.  And so, this was the first time we ever really had discussions about, you know, what she wanted to do, you know, with her life and how she felt about how her life turned out.  And what she wanted to do, my grandfather [Orville Seaton] wanted to be a veterinarian, and so he went to college at Prairie View A&M [Prairie View Agricultural & Mechanical University, Prairie View, Texas]--well, it was just Prairie View at the time--no, it was Prairie View A&M then, and in animal husbandry 'cause he grew up in Washington County [Texas] on this ranch (unclear) I was telling you about.  But there were no graduate schools in--the only veterinarian school in Texas was Texas A&M [Texas Agricultural & Mechanical University, College Station, Texas].  And they didn't take blacks.  So that was a disappointment for him even though he wound up raising cows and, you know, for the rest of his life.  But he, then he went in--he was a county agent.  So he'd go from farm to farm and he was, you know, giving out seeds, testing the soils, helping the ranchers learn.  And then when my mom was born, then my great-grandfather [John Gooden], his father-in-law, basically, got him a job at the, in Houston Independent School District because, so they could be more stable.  He wouldn't be out, you know, from farm to farm all the time.  So he wanted to be a veterinarian.  So then my mom said, well--and she loved her dad more than anybody, and so she wanted to be a veterinarian.  So when she went down to the University of Texas [at Austin, Austin, Texas], she said her plan was to study biology and then ultimately, become a veterinarian.  But then once she got pregnant and started having kids, then she had to go to school part time.  Once she started going to school part time, she had gotten a job at Southwestern Bell.  So she said, "Well, I'm in this field now, so then I switched to communications."  And then that's how, you know, she wound up spending the next thirty years there and retired from South--from the phone company.  And then, but she did a bunch of other things too.  She had rental properties, and, you know, she had an entrepreneurial spirit.  But that is what she went there to become, and it was something of a disappointment to her and, I guess, initially, a disappointment to my grandfather that, you know, the thing that she went down there to do is not what she wound up doing.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're the first born, right?
Speaker 2: No, second.  I have a sister two years older than me, Elizabeth [Bent].
Speaker 1: Okay, so your sister was the one that your mother was initially--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --had, and so you were born two years later?
Speaker 2: And I was born two years later.  So my mom was seventeen when she had my sister, and then nineteen when she had me.
Speaker 1: Okay, and by the time you came of age, your father [Rodney Griffin] was gone?
Speaker 2: Gone, I mean, yeah, I mean gone.  He was in Houston [Texas].  We'd visit.  I mean it wasn't, it wasn't, you know, on a pure abandonment situation.  You know, I wouldn't say he did that, but he just was not a provider.  And so there was always court proceedings, lawyers involved in getting him to pay child support.  There was always, always late, never extra.  And it was, you know, and so it was very difficult for my mom, you know.
Speaker 1: What did you father do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, he, he--when he, when he first got back to Houston, he actually worked for the phone company too.  He was in business sales, I think.  And then he ultimately went into financial services.  So he was, he was a real estate broker for a long time, and then an insurance broker.
Story_ID: 152256
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' [Patricia Seaton Griffin and Rodney Griffin] personalities, their sense of humor, their dispositions, their talents, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, I look like my dad.  In personality, when I was younger I had my mom's personality because she was a big personality.  She's a very, very dominating, strong type of personality.  As I got older and just a little bit more comfortable with myself, you know, I kind of just took on my own personality, you know, a little bit more, a little bit more laid back, a little bit more thoughtful.  I'd like to think I've become more empathetic as I've gotten older, I mean especially since I had kids.  That really kind of changed my perspective on everything.  So I would say I was, my mom had a very dominating personality much like her dad.  And I looked up to my mom.  I mean I idolized my mom, you know, when I was growing up 'cause I thought she was strong.  And she did everything.  You know, it's from, from, you know, my perspective, and then once I had kids, I just thought, I don't wanna be that kind of parent.  You know, I wanna be the kind of parent who tells my kids I believe in them.  I have expectations for them, hug 'em all the time, say, "I love you" all the time.  You know, just a different type of parent, you know, because when I look over my family, it's a lot of academic, I mean, you know, for an African American family especially, a lot of academic achievement.  And that is a definite value that I can say, you know, has passed down even when I was looking at the 1870 census.  And I looked in that William Griffin household.  It was eleven people in there, literate?  Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, you know, to even back to 1870, to be able to see that on a census.  You know, "Can they read?" I think was that tab.  And it was like everybody in the house could.  And then there were kids who were like eleven, twelve, thirteen.  Are they home?  No.  Where?  School.  You know, just to even, even see that as far, as far back.  So we have a lot of achievement in that area.  Entrepreneurship or self reliance is a huge ethic.  You know, somebody owns something, everybody owned something.  It's a store, it's a rent house.  It's a cow, you know.  There's, everybody believed in ownership, definitely homes, you know, obviously, but didn't see a lot of people who said, okay, I believe in you.  I love you.  Not a lot of that warm and fuzzy and investing that kind of time with your kids to help them to develop and be what they wanna be.  So that's really, when I look at changing the trajectory of my family, it really is based on that, which is that the first thing you're gonna know is that you're loved.  The second thing you know is that you're supported.  And then (unclear) we are, the family, they introduced us to Jesus early.  We got baptized early, you know.  So eternal life, we've--I feel good about what our family has done traditionally, but as far as raising the kids, it's a lot more supportive and not as, not as--I think "harsh" would probably be the word and slightly detached.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was a more, kind of strict, lots of corporal punishment?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, heck yeah, definitely, yeah, (laughter) definitely.  And she wasn't there too, at least as it related to my mom.  So she wasn't there.  So she's getting up, and she's going to--so she's at work before--as we, getting ready to go to school.  And as we get ready to go to bed, she's coming home from work.  So she was working from eight to nine.  So she'd go work her day job, eight to five, and then she'd go to Sears [Roebuck & Co.], which is where she had her other job.  And she was the telephone operator on the switchboard at Sears.  So then she'd work at Sears until it closed at nine o'clock and then she'd get home about 9:30.  So she literally, for the bulk of when we were, when we were growing up, she wasn't at home.  But when she did get home, we had so many responsibilities.  You know, we had, you know, the cooking, the cleaning, etc., the first thing she'd do is she'd come in, she'd check the TV.  She wanted to see if the TV's hot 'cause that means we're--so we didn't watch a lot of TV.  We didn't, I, you know, like '[The] Cosby Show' was big then, and (unclear) like we just didn't watch it.  You know, I didn't see 'The Cosby Show' really till I got to college, and I was at Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire] and just bored and, you know, they ran a lot of reruns, and so that's how I kind of caught up on those shows.  So we didn't watch a lot of TV.  There was a lot of yard work, a lot of cooking, a lot of cleaning, just a lot of, lot of independence.  And if things weren't done completely or, you know, kind of way she wanted, then, you know, yeah, there was corporal punishment.  You know, she was under a lot of pressure.  I mean that's how I look at it.  I mean she just felt like she was under a lot of pressure.
Story_ID: 152257
Speaker 1: Did she [Griffin's mother, Patricia Seaton Griffin] have any outlet or anything or any--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, she was an on-air personality on the, on the community radio station here.  So she would do that on Sundays.  So she had a show from six to nine on Sunday nights.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, you know, she would that, and then, you know, you know, in her young years, you know, before, you know, her forties, I mean she played tennis, and, you know.
Speaker 1: What kind of radio--it was a radio show?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's called KAZI, 80.7 FM [sic, 88.7 FM].  It's Austin [Texas] community radio station.  And I actually--she was one of the first on-air personalities with that station.  Then I was actually on that radio station too.  I did a teen show, hip hop show.
Speaker 1: Now, was there, KAZI?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, in ki--Swahili, Kazi means "work".
Speaker 2: Oh, everybody, yeah, everybody here will know it, yeah, yeah.  And so the people who founded it were John Warfield.  Have you heard of him?  He was an African American Studies professor at the University of Texas [at Austin, Austin, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--these are people who were, maybe high school day and-(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were their contemporaries at Texas.
Speaker 1: --they were like--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: They were--okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, oh, yeah, yeah.  No, that--
Speaker 1: Because the KAZI, I know that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, well, that's why they named it that.  Yeah, yeah, I mean so they were, and, you know, he had named his kids Jabari [ph.] and Anjari [ph.], you know, so, and--so these were my parents' contemporaries at the University of Texas.  And then they wound up getting a license to start this radio station here.  And so my mom was with that founding group.  And so she became an on-air personality there, and then a couple of years later, then I got a show on there.  It was a hip hop show.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, she had a lot of--she had a lot of outlets.  She was just old school.
Speaker 1: All right, okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, my--and my, and the irony is, my grandmother [Lillian Seaton] was not like that.  You know, she just said, well, I never understood why y'all got spankings 'cause you didn't do anything to deserve spankings, you know, 'cause she had us in the summers, you know.  But that might be grandma talking.
Speaker 1: So, there was tension or maybe--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I think she, I think she was too young, too much pressure.  I mean, honestly, you know, I mean she's got two kids by nineteen, and she wound up getting her degree from the University of Texas in '74 [1974].  So, but here she is working two jobs.  At that time, there was a big--at least in Texas.  It was probably nationwide, you know, when child support enforcement moved into the attorney generals' offices.  So, and that was in the '80s [1980s], and so she was, you know, late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s].  So she was always, and so you didn't talk to the other party anymore.  It was the attorney general who would enforce it.  So she was always having to go down to hearings to get them to enforce the child support.  And then he was always late, and, you know, it was, it was pressure.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in the early days, she didn't get a lot of support from him [Griffin's father, Rodney Griffin] probably because of, you know, enforcement (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, nothing.  I mean nothing, I mean, you know, it's--we have a--me and my dad do not have a close relationship.  We never had a close relationship, but I always had a cordial relationship in terms of, okay, I'm graduating from school.  If you wanna come up, you can come up.  You know, we just had a baby.  If you wanna come out, you can come out, you know.  But it never was close, and now that I do have my own kids, I understand him a lot less.  You know, I just couldn't imagine it, you know.  And then when, you know, when my mom was battling cancer, and I see my mom dying, and I just look at, you know, really how hard her life was, at least during that period.  You know, I don't think she, you know, fully recovered, you know, from that period, from the disappointment of where her life, where she thought it was going and kind of what she did with her life.  She did a lot of reflecting, you know, towards the end.  So she was generally happy and satisfied in the sense of, you know, her kids and her grandkids.  But she had a lot of regret about that period.
Story_ID: 152258
Speaker 1: Now, what about your sister?  What's her name and what does she do?
Speaker 2: Well, my sister's name is Elizabeth Griffin Bert, and she, now she's an executive coach.  But she followed--she was more, you know, she's the older child.  She was the most likely to do what was expected of her by her parents and her mom [Patricia Seaton Griffin].  So she actually wound up going to the University of Texas [at Austin, Austin, Texas].  She was a communications major, and then she went to, while she was in school, she actually worked.  She also worked while she was in school at Motorola.  And so she was in, she worked at Motorola for a long time, and it ultimately spun off and became Freescale [Semiconductor, Inc.].  And so she worked there for probably about maybe, almost twenty years.  And then--in the communications field, and then she went back, got her master's in executive coaching.  So now she's running her own business, Total Leadership Ventures.  And so she helps--she has a bunch of different clients.  She's got corporate clients, has companies, executives.  She has National Basketball Association, the WNBA [Women's National Basketball Association].  So she's building up a pretty robust executive coaching practice.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you were growing up, it's you and your sister and your mother--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --pretty much.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And then you spent a lot of time, you said, with your grandparents [Lillian Seaton and Orville Seaton]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and all the holidays in Houston [Texas], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 152259
Speaker 1: Now, now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I, my, my earliest childhood memory is being at that kitchen table with my grandmother [Lillian Seaton], learning my numbers.  So, and (unclear) she used to have, when we were growing up, she used to have these beads.  So when you come into her front door, there's an archway, and then she had all these different color beads in the archway.  So that's how we learned our colors, and that's how we learned how to count.  So as soon as we walk into her house, and then we turn to go into where her kind of sitting room would be, is all these beads.  So we had to count all the beads, and then we had to identify all the colors.  And so that's one of my earliest memories of like coming in that door.  I used to love it, like I used to love to go--I used to love to go there, period, just because the--just my grandmother, just how loving and just awesome she was.  It was always like a retreat for us, you know, (laughter) to go down there and be there 'cause she was so happy that--she was so happy to see us, and we were so happy to see her.  And she just, she just did everything for us, you know, and just--you know, what you would expect from grandmothers.  So anyway, so I just remember like being at--my sister [Elizabeth Bert] was a little bit bigger than me.  She was two years older than me, and so there was always a rush to see who could count 'em first and who could identify the colors first.
Story_ID: 152260
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  So, now, did you grow up in the same neighborhood the--
Speaker 2: My whole time?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I, well, I lived in four places.  The first one we lived in what would be considered--it was public housing.  And I don't remember it, but that's what was on my birth certificate when I was born, and that's where we were.  First place I remember was a place 7604 Blessing Avenue, and it was a neighborhood called St. Johns here in Austin [Texas].  And it was a four-room wood, frame house on cinder blocks.  And my, my parents [Patricia Seaton Griffin and Rodney Griffin] bought that house for $8,000 and me and my sister [Elizabeth Bert] shared a room, and then my mom had a room, and then we had one bathroom, and there was kitchen and living room.  So that's where--and I lived there from probably age one until I was twelve.  And then my mom thought that we were just getting too old, and we needed our own room.  So then we moved probably three miles away--probably four miles away off of Martin Luther King [Jr. Boulevard, Austin, Texas], and on a street called Broadhill [Drive, Austin, Texas].  And Broadhill, it was a three-bedroom, one and a half square foot house--I mean I'm sorry, one and half bathroom house, probably about eight or nine hundred square feet.  But we, you know, we had, we had a yard at both the houses, and then we had a basketball court in the back, you know.  But my sister and I had our own room.  So then we lived there for three years.  Then when we got the--when my sister was almost done with high school, we moved right across the street from the high school.  This was my freshman year.  So I could--that way, I'd be able to walk to school.  I would--we were taking the bus, but I was in this magnet program that started a whole hour earlier.  So then we moved to another street, Pecan Brook [Drive] (unclear), which is right across from our high school, LBJ [Lyndon Baines Johnson Early College] High School [Austin, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I lived in three houses, basically, you know, from the time when I was one till I was eighteen.
Story_ID: 152261
Speaker 1: All right, now, what were some of the sights, sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, growing up, so we spent a, I spent a lot of time outside.  So I was riding bike.  When we got to the house on Broadhill [Drive, Austin, Texas], we had a basketball hoop in the back.  So then all the neighbors would there, and we'd play like all day, hours at a time.  When we were around in the summers, and that kind of stuff, riding bikes.  So we would ride like all over town.  Our houses were always--and it's not (unclear), they were so small, I just preferred being outside, you know, as much and as often as I could, you know, even to the extent that we had a bus that would take us to school, but I preferred to walk home, you know, just so I was in no hurry, in no hurry to get home.  And I preferred being outside.  And so I was, that meant riding bikes, playing basketball, that kind of stuff.  And then as it relates to school, schools are different now than they were then.  I mean schools--I just always hated school personally, you know, because I had my--I had with my grandma [Lillian Seaton] on one hand, which I, you know, she said I didn't like doing it there either.  I just hated school.  But--
Speaker 1: Well, why?  What was the--when you reflect on it, what was the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I think, to be honest, you know, because of the way, you know, maybe my household was, I did not like being told what to do.  And, and school then especially was a, really pretty much a one-way, be told what to do proposition.  You know, there wasn't--none of the stuff that you would--so that's why, when I got to college, I could not believe how awesome it was.  It was awesome, you know, because there really was, there was--you know, obviously, you have your big lecture courses, but there was a lot of interplay.  They are interested in what you think.
Speaker 1: This is Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], right?
Speaker 2: Well, this is when I got to Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire] especially--
Speaker 1: I mean Dartmouth, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean and when I got to [Harvard] Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], now, law school was a combination of, you know, lecturing and seminars.  But it was--and when I was growing up, school was basically teacher does a little bit of a lecture.  There's worksheets, book, assignment, due tomorrow, bam.  That's it, you know.  It wasn't a haven of Socratic dialogue or debate.  And they weren't really trying to--and you're--it wasn't--I didn't go to one of those schools that are mission driven.  I went to, you know, just the regular public schools.  And, you know, they just wanted you to get your work done and not get in trouble.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I didn't like that part about school, but so, I did like being outdoors, and that was, you know, one of my--you know, that's kind of how I remember childhood, either riding my bike, basketball.  And that was until I got to high school [at Lyndon Baines Johnson Early College High School, Austin, Texas], and in high school, I was on the radio station.  So I started deejaying.  So on Fridays and Saturdays, I did parties.  I had a regular club gig that I used to deejay at.  So then I was out on Fridays and Saturdays doing that.
Story_ID: 152262
Speaker 1: I gotta bear this in mind, but let's, let's go back to grade school, and where did you start school?
Speaker 2: I started school in a church school which was Ebenezer Baptist Church [Austin, Texas] had a church school, and my sister [Elizabeth Bert] was going there.  And I actually went to, I went there through kindergarten.  Then when we went to the public school at T.A. Brown Elementary [School, Austin, Texas], my sister was--she skipped a grade basically.  So they moved her to third grade 'cause we could already read, you know.  We could already read, do multiplication.  My grandma [Lillian Seaton] taught us all that stuff, even, you know, before we'd even gone to school.  So then they put my sister in third grade, which was a promotion for her.  And then they put me in first grade, which was basically a promotion for me.  Then we took the, back then we took the California Achievement Test.  So you take that at the beginning of--for some reason, they took it at the beginning of the year then.  I don't know why.  So anyway, so we took that.  Then after about a couple of weeks, they came--I guess I got in trouble or whatever, behavior issues.  And then they came back and said, well, we think he needs to go back to kindergarten.  So my mom [Patricia Seaton Griffin] has always said that I failed kindergarten, you know.  So anyway, so they put me back into what was, you know, theoretically, my right grade.  But, you know, and that was probably a mistake, you know, on their part because when the California Achievement Tests came back, and I had gotten straight 99 percentile 'cause I'm already--I can already do multiplication, read, etc.  But socially, I mean I guess I was kind of, you know, rambunctious or something, you know, too much for--not mature enough for the first grade.  So they put me back in kindergarten.  So, my sister and I are two years apart in age, but three years apart in grades.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this, you had to be really bored in school, I guess, in kindergarten when--
Speaker 2: Or just really bad everywhere, you know (laughter).  Either I was bored in school or I was just a bad kid everywhere.  It was one of the two.  But, yeah, now, so that was the problem.  I just didn't like school.  I mean it was--my grandmother Lillian, was my preferred teacher.  This Ebenezer Church School was actually pretty good 'cause they just let each kid do what each kid could do, you know.  It wasn't a formal school-type setting.  So it was okay.  I mean they were heavy on discipline, but it was okay.  And then I get to the public school, and then, you know, it's a little bit different.  You know, I started off on the wrong foot with public school.
Speaker 1: So, you're at, was it T.K. Brown--
Speaker 2: T. A. Brown.
Speaker 1: T. A. Brown, okay.
Speaker 2: And it, yeah, it's still there, so I pass by it on a regular basis.
Speaker 1: All right, so T. A. Brown, and then, so did you finish grade school at T. A. Brown?
Speaker 2: No, we moved, so then I went to a school called T. G. Harris, [Thomas G.] Harris Elementary [School, Austin, Texas].
Speaker 1: I'm noticing a pattern here, T. A. Brown, T. G.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a lot of Thomas's probably.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) They put the initials in front of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they put the initials in front of the school.  But we called Harris.  T. A. Brown, we called T. A. Brown, but Harris, we would just say Harris.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what grade were you in?
Speaker 2: Fifth and sixth grade at Harris.
Speaker 1: Fifth and sixth, okay.
Speaker 2: I went K through four, K through half of five at T. A. Brown, and then the rest of five and then sixth at Harris.
Story_ID: 152263
Speaker 1: Now, during this period of time, of elementary school, were there any teachers or figures that were like a mentor to you or--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I mean I had some teachers I could get along with better than, you know, other teachers.  You know, Ms. Ramsey [ph.], who--I was in her class for a week.  Then they moved me back to kindergarten.  But then I actually did have her for first grade.  And I thought she was--I remember her fondly.  I had Ms. Lopez [ph.], who was a young teacher.  I just remember Ms. Lopez.  She would come made up, get dressed all day, and then what--you know, dressed up, you know, for a teacher, I thought, and then they used to have it where the two classrooms, the doors open between the two classrooms.  Well, anyway, when we'd have our nap, she'd always have me come--I don't know why.  But I would take a nap between her and the other teacher.  So I'd hear all the, whatever it was that they were gossiping about or talking about.  So my mat was right there.  So I remember Ms. Lopez 'cause I heard so much about, you know, just her life in, you know, her talking back and forth to the teacher from, you know, having--taking a nap right there.  And then those are the two teachers I remember, you know.  Oh, and then, and Ms. Crawford [ph.].  She was the music, she was actually an African American music teacher that we had at T. A. Brown [Elementary School, Austin, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I remember her.  You know, she reminded me somewhat of my grandmother [Lillian Seaton] a little bit.  You know, she was an old school, you know, Coretta Scott King glasses, type wearing, you know, with the hooks on 'em, you know, type of teacher.  You know, and I thought she was pretty good.  But nothing, I can't remember anything in grade school by way of what you would consider to be mentors.  We had, they started the talented and the gifted program.  And there, based on your, well, it was the California Achievement Tests at the time, we took, you're automatically in it if you get, you know, certain scores.  So then I do remember, you know, pull out, you know, they pull you out of class, and then you go to that for an hour a day.  But nobody who I would say, you know, was a mentor.  I did have--the PE [physical ed] teacher, Ms. Scales [ph.], you know, she was always a, I felt like, something of a, you know, fan of mine to the extent that she was like, man, you could--she was like, you could really, you could really be something, you know, like she just felt that way.  But it never was--because she was the PE teacher, I didn't have her for classes or I didn't have her in any other way.  But, yeah, Mrs. Vivian Scales [ph.], yes, she felt that way.
Story_ID: 152264
Speaker 1: How were your grades?  Were they pretty good?
Speaker 2: Oh, my grades then were, well, then you used to have behavior grades.  So my grades used to be all "E's," which was grades, you know, "excellent."  We were on an "E," "S," et cetera scale.  So my grades were excellent.  Then we had just as many conduct grades, "U's," terrible.  And then my handwriting grades were always S-minus which was the minimal level (unclear) passing.  It turns out, I didn't learn this until much later, I had dyslexia.  And I had a version of dysgraphia.  So my handwriting was atrocious.  And, you know, and that was something that my teachers always got on me about, and my mom [Patricia Seaton Griffin] got on me about, which was how bad my handwriting was.  And it didn't matter how slowly I tried to, to slow down, it was just always small and bad.
Speaker 1: Okay, you couldn't do anything about that really?
Speaker 2: Well, I tried to slow down, but it frustrating, you know, so I just (unclear) said, so, you know, nobody worried--we didn't have anything, we had no interventions whatsoever.  And the reason, you know, why it wasn't really picked up is because I was testing so well, and I could do all my work so well that you would not have figured that it was anything other than me not wanting to do it, that I wasn't doing it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, were you involved in any organized activities like Boy Scouts or 4-H Club or anything?
Speaker 2: Well, I was in--I played sports all the time.  So soccer was the big sport that I played, soccer, youth basketball, youth baseball.  So every season I was playing something.  And I was at university--University Hills Optimist Club [Austin, Texas].  So I played every, every sport they had.
Story_ID: 152265
Speaker 1: And then, and then my mom [Patricia Seaton Griffin] had me do this Bible study with a guy who was a Jehovah's Witness.  So, basically, he was going door-to-door as a Jehovah's Witness.  And you get to like this role model and mentor thing.  You know, my dad's [Rodney Griffin] not, kind of on the scene.  So my mom said, okay, here's this black guy who came to the door with a Night Watch [sic, 'The Watchtower Announcing Jehovah's Kingdom'], and he is a nice guy, and he said, "Well, we do Bible study, etc."  She said, "Well, will you do Bible study with my son?"  So probably for about seven or eight years, once a week I'd do this Bible study with this Jehovah's Witness.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What was that like?  I mean did you have a home church?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we had a church, yeah, Black's Memorial [Missionary Baptist Church, Austin, Texas].  So, (unclear) another point, so then, so our day basically would look like this.  And here's a typical Sunday.  We get up.  We go to Sunday school.  Then after Sunday school, we stayed for church.  Then after church, Sunday was the day my mom did cook.  You know, we cooked the other days, but then she would cook on Sundays.  And then we'd eat.  Then on Monday, we go to school.  After school, we'd go to BTU, Baptist Training Union.  So we'd do that every Monday night.  Then on Saturday, depending on whether I had a game or not--my sister [Elizabeth Bert] played soccer too, then we get up.  Then we go to youth meetings.  So there's like a youth meeting at church, and then after that, we'd go to choir rehearsal.  So we're in church three days a week, you know.  So we're in church three days a week.  And then we do sports.  Sports were different then.  Like my kids now, the way they do sports, we could never do it then.  We practiced once a week when I played, and then you play on Saturdays.  Now, you know, my kids are practicing two, three, four days a week.  But that's how we did it, and then, but we were in church three days a week.  So my mom, she'd go to church some, but at some, one point she kind of stopped going because Sunday was kind of her rest day.  So then she'd literally drop us off at church in the morning and then come get us around 2:30 or 3:00 or we'd walk home.  You know, it wasn't that far.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, what was the name of your church?
Speaker 1: Black's Memorial [Missionary] Baptist Church.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's in Austin [Texas], right?
Speaker 1: Yep, yeah, it was in the neighborhood, St. Johns.  We lived on Blessing Avenue and I, the church was on, I think Providence [sic, Bennett Avenue, Austin, Texas].  They're all New Testament names in the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is, yeah, that's a lot of church.
Speaker 1: It was a lot of church.  It was a lot of church.  So I have that working on me--my mom's biggest thing I think, I think her biggest goal for us was to not get in trouble, you know.  I think that was--'cause she wasn't there to monitor us, and I just think she really just didn't want us to get in trouble.  And so when I used to get in trouble at school, that's why she thought that the Jehovah's Witness, you know, the Bible study thing would be good.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, because he would, you know, throwing stuff in there that kind of happened during the week and trying to relate it back to whatever it is that we were, we were, we were studying.  It was okay.
Story_ID: 152266
Speaker 1: So you're at T--you're, you're at [Thomas G.] Harris Elementary [Austin, Texas] through the sixth.  And did you go to middle school after that?
Speaker 2: I went to middle school at Pearce Junior High [later, James E. Pearce College Preparatory Academy, Austin, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, here we have, we do the junior high school system, so, at seventh and eighth grade.  Well, we did.  Now, they've moved the middle schools.  When I was, well, it's sixth, seventh and eighth.  But when I was growing up, it was seventh and eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in those years, I mean, well, you were saying before that you couldn't watch a lot of TV and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Same, never, never could--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Your mother [Patricia Seaton Griffin] would feel the TV to make sure it wasn't warm (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and (unclear) seriously.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: We never watched TV until--now, I'm in TV.  I've got TV's everywhere.  I'm watching TV like screens all day.  But growing up, we didn't watch a lot of TV.  Like I didn't have anything, any reg--you know, a football game every now and then or basketball sometimes.  But I didn't have any regular appointment programming at all.
Speaker 1: So, yeah, considering your career is now in popular culture--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so what was your fix on popular culture in those days?  I mean did you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, once I got to the radio station, and I had the hip hop show.  So once I started doing it, so they had a weekly radio on KAZI [Austin, Texas], there was a weekly--
Speaker 1: This is in high school [at Lyndon Baines Johnson Early College High School, Austin, Texas], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in high school--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It seems like in middle school--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Middle school?
Speaker 1: And during this juncture--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I wasn't even on pop culture.
Speaker 1: Who was your, yeah, I mean did--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I wasn't even on it, like I don't even know--
Speaker 1: Did you know who was on the radio or who the popular--
Speaker 2: Oh, well, yeah, yeah, my mom used to buy a lot of records.
Speaker 1: Eighties [1980s] would have been like--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: This would have been '82 [1982], '83 [1983], '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--yeah, the music video age was, and all that (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so my friends had MTV [Music Television].  They were watching David Bowie, Michael Jackson, you know, so like, so from--and this is when I got to Harris from Pearce [Junior High School, Austin, Texas]. So I'd walk home instead of taking the bus--I'd take the bus to school, but home I walked.  And, you know, when we moved, that probably became kind of like a three-mile walk.  But, so then I'd go over a friend's house. I had a friend named Homer Park [ph.], you know, they had cable.  So you could see like all this stuff going on, on MTV especially.  I mean I was, it was mainly MTV.  We weren't, you know, it's the middle of the day.  And no DVRs.  We're not catching up on any primetime shows, but, you know, they had MTV.  And I thought that was actually pretty cool.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, this is the age of big cultural shift with the MTV and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --BET [Black Entertainment Television]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, BET, it was later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, later, and especially down here.  You know, so like BET was on for like four or five years in [Washington] D.C. and New York [City, New York] before it even got down here.
Speaker 1: I did not know that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Austin [Texas].
Speaker 1: It didn't get to Texas until four--
Speaker 2: Well, we were, it was, Time-Warner down here, they had TCI [Tele-Communications, Inc.] up there.  So they were on, you know, a different system before.  It took a long time for BET to get fully distributed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I remember what you were saying about, you know, Texas being like ten years behind, or at least on some things--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: On, on social culture.  Popular culture, we're up on, but social culture, yeah, definitely.
Speaker 1: And I was thinking about Juneteenth [June 19th] when you said that (laughter).
Speaker 2: Still, yeah, we were late on, yeah, we were late on getting that news.  And, and, and the interesting thing about Texas is, they can be late and still export it out elsewhere, you know.
Speaker 1: Right, 'cause people celebrate Juneteenth now--
Speaker 2: People celebrate Juneteenth--
Speaker 1: --in Chicago [Illinois] and other places.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and other places, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 152267
Speaker 1: So you're, you're seeing some of the cable, music, pop culture--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, MTV [Music Television], MTV was pretty much the only thing in middle school.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite performer or--
Speaker 2: Well, Michael Jackson, yeah, definitely.  I mean Michael Jackson was, you know, from the moonwalk, I mean when he did 'Motown 25[: Yesterday, Today, Forever],' and he hit that moonwalk and the glove and the socks, the jackets, it was over.  So that's what we were all on down here.  You know, I mean that's what, I mean that's what we were all on, I mean especially, you know, young black boys.  That was, Michael Jackson was it.  So we had the, we had the jackets, the Members Only jackets, the zipper jackets, the socks, the different color socks, the S-Curls, the whole thing.  I mean it was Michael Jackson down here, you know, for a good number of years.  You know, in my middle school years, definitely.  You know, rap had not really taken off.  It was around, you know, and we had it, but until--and there were people, and we'd, you know, we had pop, locking and breaking and the whole thing, you know.  At lunch--this was before they banned all that kind of stuff, you know.  Kids could do whatever as lunch was our free time.  You know, so people would bring out the cardboards, and they would spin, and they would pop lock, dance.  You could bring a jam box back then.  It wasn't against the rule, you know.  So that was really what was going on in middle school, and it was the first time because we had taken a step up from elementary.  That was the first time where we really had control over our own time.  I enjoyed middle school much more, you know.  Elementary, everything was directed.  Everybody in a straight line to do everything.  You know, once you got to middle school, we had this big courtyard basketball, and people brought cardboard.  They'd bring their music, and they would dance pop lock, hang out.  Yeah, it was good.  And then MTV, you know, showed some.  MTV didn't have any rap on it at all, not any.  I mean I don't think they played their first rap video till like the early '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, so Michael Jackson was it, you know, a little bit of Prince later.  But, you know, really, it was Mike.
Story_ID: 152268
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now what was your, now, your mother [Patricia Seaton Griffin] came along about the same time that I did, but was she into popular culture at all?  Did she listen to funk or jazz or anything?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so she had a record, huge record collection, I mean like thousands of records.  So Brass Construction, The O'Jays, so she had a lot of gospel, you know, but then she also had every, really everything black, man.  I mean she had Minnie Riperton, comedy albums, Richard Pryor comedy albums, like so that's the kind of stuff.  Like you wanna talk about popular culture, that's what I would do.  I would sneak and get those records.  I'd play 'em, and then, you know, before she got home, you know, I'd listen to 'em before--you know, she came home a couple of times.  She caught me listening to Richard Pryor, you know.  She was less upset than I thought.  You know, she's just like, just don't scratch my records.  I mean that was her biggest thing, you know.  If you do your work, but just don't scratch my records.  That was really what she was (laughter), concerned with.  But, you know, she was into all of that, you know, Four Tops, Temptations, Peabo Bryson, you know, everything in that era, you know, she had.  And she would, she would play those, and then--but she never had a tape deck in her car.  So when we were in the car, radio just ain't on or NPR [National Public Radio], you know, I mean that was it.  You know, I mean I still listen to NPR now pretty much.  That's, you know, but I mean I have music in there now, obviously, but, yeah, she never had a tape deck in her car.  But she had a lot of records, and she would play 'em.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I wondered 'cause, you know, she sounds like, sounded pretty prudish at one point, and I said, well, the era she grew up in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she's not really--she wasn't a prude, but I mean, really at all, you know.  But what she really was, was she did not want us to make mistakes.  And she didn't want us to get in trouble.  That was her greatest fear that we would do something that would get us in trouble and mess up.  And so she was just really, really, I would say almost neurotic about that, you know.  And it didn't take much to, you know, for her to perceive that we were going kind of down the wrong track--
Story_ID: 152269
Speaker 1: My sister [Elizabeth Bert], not really.  She was like, like I said, she was an only child--I mean older child.  She would do--whatever my mom [Patricia Seaton Griffin] wanted, she would do, like really, she did the most cooking.
Speaker 2: I'm sure she was almost like a surrogate mom.
Speaker 1: Well, not to me.
Speaker 2: Even though she was three years--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but not to me, just only in responsibilities, not in--she couldn't tell me what to do.  I mean she knew that.  I mean that was a, you know, you know--yeah, not really (laughter).  She, just duties wise.  So, you know, she would do the cooking.  She did all the cooking, all the--I could cook too.  But she could do most of it, you know, the washing of the dishes and the whole nine.  So she was pretty independent.  So she never did anything wrong, all A's, never--excellent reviews and commentary, very quiet, you know.  I'd go to church, you know, I--you know, we were going three days a week.  I mean that lasted like a long time, like until--when I became a freshman, from I guess fifteen, I was given the option of whether or not I wanted to keep going to church or not.  And I decided to stop going to church.  But my sister kept going, you know, just to give you a sense of like, you know, but it was--I didn't lose my religion.  It was just I couldn't do no three days a week, you know.  And then I started deejaying on the Saturdays, so I wouldn't get home till like 2:00, 2:30.  So Sunday school was out of the question, and to get--you know, by the time I got to, you know, 11:30 rolled around, I don't know if I was really up by then either.
Story_ID: 152270
Speaker 1: Okay, so this--so high school.  Now, were there any special teachers or mentors at Pearce [Junior High School, Austin, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a teacher named Ms. Michaels [ph.].  And I was the student--I was student government president over there.  And so she--and I was in every club.  I would join anything that had anything after school, I would join.  So I did track, and I had gotten most outstanding in track.  I did student government, I did the Spanish club, even though I hated Spanish.  I did National Junior Honor Society, like everything.  And Ms. Michaels who--she wasn't my teacher, but she was the advisor of student government.  And she said, "William, you are a doer.  And doers are winners."  And she even wrote that in my yearbook.  My mom [Patricia Seaton Griffin] had a fire at some point, so it's kind of--all that stuff had kind of burned up.  But I just remember that.  And, I'm like, okay, that's one way of--you know, that's, I'm okay with, you know, seeing myself in that way.  You know, as, instead of being hyper or overactive, I'm a doer.  All right, I'm okay with that.  And so I really took that for a long time.  That really kind of became my identity until I got into college, that I'm just gonna--if I like it, if I'm interested in it, I'm gonna do it.
Story_ID: 152271
Speaker 1: So your energy basically was becoming more organized in junior high school?
Speaker 2: Only in my mind.  And it became more organized in my mind what I was doing, you know.  I was just doing a lot of stuff.  I don't know if I ever became--prioritized my activities any better.  But in my mind, it framed what I was doing.  You know, it wasn't so much I'm trying to stay away from home or I'm trying to meet people or I'm just trying to hang out.  But I just liked doing stuff.  And actually--
Speaker 1: Oh, was that the real motivation?  You just didn't wanna go back--
Speaker 2: A big part of it.  Yeah, it was nothing to do at home.  I mean, you know, nothing to do in the house.  And these were as good a reasons as any to be somewhere else.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and these were, you know, acceptable reasons to--now, keep in mind, after every one of these activities, now, I get the opportunity and the time and some freedom to walk home.  So if I wanna go over somebody's house and watch a little bit of MTV [Music Television], no problem.  If I wanted to go somewhere and play some backyard basketball, it all works out 'cause at least I had a legitimate reason for being out of the house, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, that makes sense.
Story_ID: 152272
Speaker 1: So high school, now, you're going to what high school?
Speaker 2: LBJ [Lyndon Baines Johnson Early College] High School [Austin, Texas].
Speaker 1: LBJ High School.  And what was the--well, I guess throughout, are the schools that you're attending integrated for the most part?  Or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, at this point, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they are.  I mean, so, LBJ was probably a third, a third, a third, black, white, Hispanic.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and Pearce [Junior High School, Austin, Texas] was probably the same.  You know, maybe a little less Hispanic, but pretty, pretty, pretty integrated, all of 'em.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And LBJ, the interesting thing about this is there was a, they, all--the City of--Austin Independent School District wanted to start a magnet school.  This is, you know, during the height of the magnet school movement.  And it was gonna be called the Science Academy.  And they were going to put it in some other areas, but then, and my mom [Patricia Seaton Griffin] was in a group, in a committee, who basically were saying, the magnet school should be at LBJ, which was in the--it was an integrated school, but in a black neighborhood.  And so, ultimately, the magnet school did get put there, and then that's where I went in the ninth grade.  It's called the science--it was called the Science Academy then [later, Liberal Arts and Science Academy, Austin, Texas].
Story_ID: 152273
Speaker 1: So LBJ High School, Lyndon Baines Johnson [Early College] High School [Austin, Texas].  Did you all have a keen sense of who he was in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause we, we had been taking Texas history since the seventh grade.  So, you know, you take Texas history every year.  So I mean we were very well aware who, who LBJ was.
Speaker 1: Now, you were saying when we were talking off the record when I came in, about how Texas history is pushed.  They really have a Texas identity--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --thing here in Texas.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  So one of the things that my great-grandfather [John Gooden] spelled out in his dissertation was how Texas came to have that identity.  So Texas has--and that's where "Six Flags of Texas" [sic, "Six Flags over Texas"] came from.  I mean Texas has served under and as part of six different nations, including its own as a nation.  And it's fiercely independent in that way.  And the public education system actually was developed for, partially for the purposes of teaching people the history of Texas, like that was one of the rationales for doing it because there was a belief that when all these other people migrated here from all these other states, they didn't have a good enough appreciation for why things are different in Texas.  So they thought that if they had a public education system, they'd be able to teach these new migrants as they got here what's different about Texas versus whatever other part of the Union they may have come from.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it's big, it's deep in the fabric of the identity.  And then, at the time, LBJ was the only president from Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean since, you know, obviously, we had the Bushes [George H.W. Bush and George W. Bush], etc.  So it was a big deal.
Speaker 1: Was he still alive when you were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, no.  No, he died shortly after he left office.  He went out here to his ranch and just kind of got depressed and died [in 1973].
Speaker 1: He was around for a while.  It wasn't that short, but--
Speaker 2: Seventies [1970s], yeah.  I mean--
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, about ten years, I guess he--
Speaker 2: No, I think he was, maybe even less.  Yeah, I mean he got depressed when he was out.  I mean we could, yeah, but not long.  But his wife, however, was a force down here until she died a few years ago, Lady Bird [Johnson].
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But, yeah, no, we knew who he was, definitely.
Speaker 1: All right, so did they talk about his civil rights involvement in class, and did they dwell on that?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean every year during Black History Month, obviously, we would go--they would, we would talk and teach civil rights and LBJ's role in it.  But he wasn't lionized any more than, I mean, you know, when you talk civil rights even here in Texas, you know, it's [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].  You know, I mean and it's taught in the context of Black History Month, you know, not so much, you know, that LBJ ushered in the legislation, etc.  It wasn't until recently that people really even focused on that element of, of civil rights.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, now, this is an era that the King holiday was in the news, right, when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, yeah, it wasn't until '86 [1986], yeah, it wasn't until '86 [1986], but, yeah, the fight about it, et cetera was going on when I was a freshman.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 152274
Speaker 1: Did you listen to the 'Tom Joyner Morning Show'?
Speaker 2: We don't have it--we didn't get it down there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we didn't get it down here.  Oh, do I listen it now?
Speaker 1: No, then?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't get it down here.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting 'cause he was living in Texas half the time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but he was in Dallas [Texas].  Yeah, so see, Austin [Texas], we didn't--KAZI was the only black radio station.  And it was a community radio station.  So it couldn't afford to syndicate shows and that kind of thing.  So, yeah, we never, we never had any Tom Joyner, [HM] Doug Banks, any of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was the format of KAZI at this juncture when you were in high school [at Lyndon Baines Johnson Early College High School, Austin, Texas]?  What was their--
Speaker 2: It was community, so it would be three-hour time blocks.  So you're subject to hear anything, I mean gospel, R&B, jazz, public affairs, hip hop, oldies, slow songs.  It was a wide variety format.  It tended toward, you know, R--it tended toward black music mostly--almost all the time, but the diversity of it was broad.
Speaker 1: Okay, was it a political force in terms of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Definitely.  Well, mainly because the Warfields [John Warfield and Jeanette Warfield] were, and then KAZI became a way to get information out.  So candidates would have to come in there and get on there and talk.  I mean it worked like a version of an NPR [National Public Radio], but for that community, you know.
Speaker 1: Was it public radio?
Speaker 2: It's community radio.  So it's a nonprofit radio station.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so it's not technically public radio 'cause it's not government controlled, but it was community radio in the sense it was a nonprofit, and it was grant-funded, and you'd, we go in there and we'd have an on-air fund drivers, you know.  So, you know, I'd have, I'd have CDs to give away for the next caller who will give ten dollars, you know.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Story_ID: 152275
Speaker 1: So, now, how did you get involved in becoming a deejay in high school at LBJ [Lyndon Baines Johnson Early College High School, Austin, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Well, my mom [Patricia Seaton Griffin] was on it, so my mom was on the radio station [KAZI, Austin, Texas], and they had a youth, it was called 'Teen Scene' on Saturdays from three to six.  They had a teen show.  So I hopped on the radio and became one of the D.J.s on the teen show.  Once I started doing that, pretty much all the kids in this community listened to that radio station.  So if they were having a birthday party or we had a skating rink here called Playland, which had a Soul Night or if a club had a teen night, we were the known personalities that they could put on a flier.  And then they would come to the radio station, and they'd know that we would go on the radio station and mention that party or that event.  So then they would pay us to come and be the D.J.'s.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're becoming, you became, you know, a big personality by being on the radio?
Speaker 2: Well, as big as you can be in a small, a very small pond.  But definitely, yeah, I would say anybody who came through--'cause hip hop was just taking off, just really beginning to take off then, and we were the only ones in town playing it.  We're literally the only ones playing it, so, and then we would do concerts.  We'd bring tours here.  So we had everybody come down here, the Sugarhill Gang, 2 Live Crew, Run-D.M.C., [DJ] Jazzy Jeff, Fresh Prince [Will Smith], like literally everyone in rap who came through Austin [Texas] would come through our station.  And then we promoted a lot of those events too.  So then obviously, that increased my popularity in, you know, at least in my age band, you know, a lot.  And then we only had one place to congregate when we were that age, and that was the mall, Highland Mall [Austin, Texas].  So basically, I'd go on the radio from three to six.  Then at six, I'd head straight to the mall.  And then there, the mall would just--they don't let this happen now.  But back then, the mall would be packed, and the food court would be packed.  And then the bus stops outside the mall would be packed.  And then we'd probably just hang out there for another hour and a half or two.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, I remember the era, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they don't let that happen anymore.  But then, it was beautiful.  Now, life started to get beautiful in high school, like ninth, tenth grade, you know, mainly because, A, I was making some of my own money.  I had a job too.  I worked at a grocery store, H-E-B.  So I'd D.J. on Fridays and Saturdays.  I worked as a, at first I was a bagger, then I was a checker at--and this is pre-scanner, so you actually had to key punch the prices in at H-E-B, which is a big grocery store here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The irony is my mom worked at Sears [Roebuck & Co.], and I worked at the H-E-B, right next door to it.
Story_ID: 152276
Speaker 1: So things, things are starting to jump a little bit and, so what about in terms of high school teachers [at Lyndon Baines Johnson Early College High School, Austin, Texas]?  You have any mentors in high school or at the radio station?
Speaker 2: Well, at the radio station [KAZI], yeah, I mean I had a couple guys, but they weren't life mentors, you know, but they were sea--you know, for that season, they were the mentors 'cause they were older D.J.s.  I had Jabari Warfield.  He was the son of the family's [John Warfield and Jeanette Warfield] of the radio station.  He was called "the Bear."  And then I had another guy named Harry Marshall [ph.].  D.J. Thriller was his D.J. names, and they were very good at getting gigs and then Jabari was very nice--you know, nice, 'cause the gigs he didn't--his name was the Bear.  The names that--the gigs he couldn't do or he didn't get, he would pass on to us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, you know, we're not close in any way now, but at that period of time, you know, he certainly meant a lot to me.
Story_ID: 152277
Speaker 1: And as far as high school teachers [at Lyndon Baines Johnson Early College High School, Austin, Texas], well, so, I was in the student government.  I was running for president, my first or class president, in the ninth grade.  So I get in, I write, I write my speech out, you know.  I was just conscientious.  You know, some kids, my son and daughter are like this.  Some people are conscientious little kids, you know, just precocious in that way.  And so I was.  So I used to write a lot.  So I wrote my speech out, had it on a notepad, and freshman year, so first semester, freshman, you run for class office.  So in the first week.  So then you go into the office, and then you do it on the P.A. system.  So I had a little rap at the beginning, and then I'd go into my speech, long speech, totally inappropriate length for what I'm doing.  It's the morning announcement.  I probably had like a six, seven minute speech 'cause it's written out, you know.  I'm not--just long, and I'm sure the kids are like in advisory listening to this, like, who is this dude and what is he doing?  Well, at any rate, I wound up losing that election, you know.  It was like 900 and something to like 947-something to like 915 or something to another kid who was actually very--a really nice guy, who actually wound up--he himself wound up going to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] going--he had circumstances, he to wind up leaving there.  But he was a good kid.  And, but the debate coach was like, who is this kid?  You know, and then a girl in my class named Alice Holden [ph.] who Alice now is the technical director for the Academy Awards, you know, she--but she was in the magnet program.  She said, well, he sits next to me in geometry.  So then the speech teacher said, I need to get this kid.  Her name was Ms. Terrell [ph.].  And so then, so then Alice came to me and said, "Hey, do you wanna debate?"  And I'm like, well, my sister [Elizabeth Bert] did speech a few years before, so, and I--the only thing I really knew about it was they took these weekend trips out of town.  And they stayed in hotels with pools.  So I'm like, all right.  So then I go, I meet the teacher.  She said, "I loved your speech."  You know, I'm like, "Well, I didn't win, you know."  "No, I loved it."  So then, so then probably two weeks, we're driving down to Corpus Christi [Texas] for a debate tournament.  Alice Holden was my debate partner.  And then we get to the debate tournament.  I can talk, but I didn't know enough about the format, like I just didn't know enough about debate, itself.  So anyway, so we wound up going two and two, so we didn't make it to the elimination rounds.  So as a result, we went into these, they have these set of events that you have for people who don't make it to the elimination rounds.  And so impromptu speaking was one of them.  So then, I signed up for impromptu speaking, the event.  So I go in there.  You pull out a topic, and you have one minute to prepare, and the question was, "Can you get chicken pox from a chicken?"  And so, anyway, I came up with some whole kind of alliteration-rhyme scheme where if you can get chicken from a fox, if you can get chicken from a box, of course, you can get chicken pox from a chicken.  And then, you know, I go into it.  So then we have this--at the end, they have the big awards ceremony in the auditorium at the end.  And then they get to it, and "Impromptu Speaking," and they go through the reverse order.  So they said, the sixth, through fifth, through third and your trophies for third, second and first.  And then in second, and then they didn't call me yet, so I'm figured, you know, okay, I didn't get anything.  And then he said, and first place, with "Can you get chicken pox from a chicken?" you know, William Griffin.  Bam, I'm at my first debate tournament, and I win an event.  So I'm going home with this trophy, and I figured the debate coach was reasonably happy.  I mean she had a whole big team at the--you know, it was a van full of kids, you know, but she was like, "Wow, you came to your first tournament and won something."  And then from then on, I was hooked.  So I debated all the way up through college [at Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire].  That's, in fact, that's actually how I got to college, and I also believe that's probably how I wound up getting into all the top law schools because I had done so well in debate and, you know, it's known to translate very well to really life success, but definitely law school success.  But, yeah, no, it changed my life.  I mean it literally--it was the first time I did something where I said everything that I'm capable of doing, I can throw into this.  So it's energy, you know, reasonable ability to, you know, think quickly, advocacy.  You know, I can be--you can be as passionate as you want in debate.  There is no turn down, tone it down element of it.  You are supposed to bring all of that.  Now, there's polish that comes later, but everything you feel, you think and you feel, you can put all into debate.  So it was awesome.  So then, so then I started doing about ten debate tournaments a year and became--it became my central, really, my central academic pursuit because as it related to school, I was in all the right courses--
Story_ID: 152278
Speaker 1: Testing, I stayed 99th percentile, like all the way through, every--LSAT, the whole nine.  But grades varied, based on really the format of the class, you know, and the teacher.  But in debate, I never stopped learning, you know, and I dove into it.  I went to debate camps, you know, American University in [Washington] D.C., Baylor [University, Waco, Texas] in the summer.  Baylor had a very good debate program and then went to a bunch of tournaments and researched all--like all the time.  So when I wasn't doing the deejaying, I was doing this instead of homework.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) instead of homework--
Speaker 1: Instead of homework.  No, I didn't like school.  I mean I never did like school, but I did love being in school because at that point, hey, I was--the radio made me popular, not popular in the, you know, Miss Congeniality sense, just, you know, completely known.  And then I had a growth spurt, you know, between ninth and tenth grade and then especially between tenth and eleventh grade.  I'm winning trophies every weekend, you know.  And back then, it wasn't, you know, now, people want these big, you know, goofy trophies.  Back then, you used to get bowls and chalices.  So like, really nice, you know, awards.  So I'm winning these things at all of the debate tournaments.  And then I got my little job.  I'm making money on Sundays at H-E-B.  So, then, my mom [Patricia Seaton Griffin], at this point in time, she's still working two jobs, but she's more, you know, really after ninth grade, say eighth or ninth grade, probably around ninth grade, the corporal punishment stopped all together.  Yeah, because I'm doing stuff.  You know, she wasn't the type to check grades or any of that kind of things, you know.  You know, all she's just--she just didn't want the school calling.  So then that slowed down when I got to high school [Lyndon Baines Johnson Early College High School, Austin, Texas], you know, when I actually had something to do, you know, and something productive, you know, that I was doing.  So, yeah, and so I was just kind of doing my own thing.  And then my sister [Elizabeth Bert] was a senior, that freshman year, and then she was off at the University of Texas [at Austin, Austin, Texas].  She moved out to her own apartment.  So it's just me and mom at that point, and mainly, kind of me.  She's just letting me, you know, do my own thing.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is an exciting time then.
Speaker 1: It's awesome.  Yeah, life's good, yeah, life's good, you know, life's good, you know.  I took for granted the roof over my head.  Now that I am responsible for providing one, I have a much greater sense of everything that was involved in that.  But, yeah, I'm just--I live across the street from the school.  So I don't have a crazy long walk, and I had something to do.  And, and socially, I was doing okay for myself, you know.
Story_ID: 152279
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, now how did you decide on college or how did that work?  You end up going to Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire], which is a, that's a big deal.  So, how did you--
Speaker 2: Well, Dartmouth was the best debate program in the country.  And so the other coaches voted it the debate school of the decade in the '80s [1980].  So I had never been there.  When I was at debate camp--where I wanted to go was Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  So I was at their debate camp and I was at a debate camp at American University [Washington, D.C.] and my lab leader was a guy named Dallas Perkins [Jr.].  And Dallas Perkins was the debate coach at Harvard.  My other lab leader was Steve Mancuso.  He was from [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  But he was the debate coach at Harvard, and he said--and he's from Dallas [Texas], ironically, from Texas.  And he said, you have to be the best debater in Austin [Texas].  This is what Dallas is saying.  And I'm like, that's probably fair to say.  I'm the best debater in Austin, but, you know, Dallas and Houston [Texas] were kind of like the dominant state, I mean teams in the state.  He said, now, can--"Would the best debater in Austin come to Cambridge, Massachusetts?"  Like, yeah, definitely, definitely, I would go there.  No doubt about it.  So that's where I thought I was gonna wind up going.  But then my, then my senior year [at Lyndon Baines Johnson Early College High School, Austin, Texas], I wound up, I started winning elections.  So I became the president of the student body my last year.  So I was hanging out, going out and then I was applying there.  And then I wound up getting into--a friend of mine wound up getting into some trouble.  I was with him, and, well, anyway, long story short, wound up getting into--my friend got in some trouble.  I wound up getting suspended and removed as the president of the student body.  So when that happened, my principal essentially rescinded her recommendation.
Speaker 1: What happened?  What--
Speaker 2: A friend of mine was, him and another girl did, had, basically, they had some kind of sexual contact in a, on school premises.  And so I was supposed to stop that.  And I didn't.  Well, I wasn't supposed to, but anyway, long story short, I didn't--I'm the president of the school.  It happened after school.  I was with--and so I was with him after the fact.  So then the principal said, well, it was your responsibility to keep them from going in there.  So at the end of that, then that hurt me.  Well, the principal pulled--now, there's a kind of side story to that is that her nephew was in my same class.  He was also applying to Harvard at the same time.  So that was the complicating element of that.  So at any rate, so that, that hurt my candidacy.  So then I wound up applying to Dartmouth instead.  And, and without, without the principal, you know, because I had her as my recommendation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, so then I wound up applying to Dartmouth instead, and they took me.  So I went there.
Speaker 1: So her nephew was--
Speaker 2: He wound up going to Harvard.
Speaker 1: Well, you know--
Speaker 2: I'm okay with it.  It's--I'm okay with it.  I'm okay with it.  You know, and it was, it was a bit of an issue at the school, you know, too because my counselor was just really upset with the principal and the way the whole thing transpired.  And then I had a bunch of teachers who also felt the same way, but one thing I will say about my principal, she was consistent.  She was a law and order type of principal, you know, and I think that's what made our school a good school.  But she was unreasonable, you know.  And, you know, so anyway, that bothered me for a long--I mean it bothered me for a long time.  It wasn't until I got into Harvard for law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] that I was, you know, totally over it 'cause that's where I wanted to go to school.  And she knew it.  Everybody knew it.  That's where, I mean you can never take anything for granted.  But anybody who knew me at the time would say that dude should be at Harvard, period.  I, I just, you know, no doubt about it.
Story_ID: 152280
Speaker 1: And that's, that's you know, a situation that makes you scratch your head, and you know, you hate to think the worst but--
Speaker 2: Well, it just makes me think that I'm lucky because I could be at any other, number of other schools where that kind of stuff will happen routinely, you know, without any precipitating event, you know.  I mean at least here the pretext is, well, we expect you to, you know, essentially be a principal--as the student body president, the expectation is you are going to be like a principal.  And you're going to, you know, enforce the right thing all the time, you know.   But I was a kid and people, and you can't necessarily control people.  You know, it would be different if it was, if it was me involved in a situation.
Speaker 1: That's kind of an obtuse model of representation.  I mean as student body president, I would think you'd represent the students, not the principal.  But, you know--
Speaker 2: You do, but, yes, definitely.  No, it was ridiculous.  It was just ridiculous.  She, she, you know, you hate to say it.  Look, I'm forty-three years old.  I've done most, almost everything that I wanted to do, you know, in life.  But sometimes people just don't like you, you know.  And, and I can't imagine what I must have been like at eighteen.  So I'm not saying that--if I was in her situation, I would never--and that's why I feel this way now about my kids, and I do coaching now.  You know, like youth, sports teams.  I would never--I want kids to know what's out there and I want them to be able to go out there and to pursue those things, and I would never do something to diminish their opportunity of pursuing those things, to prove a point, you know, type of thing, to hurt--you know.  You know, I think in that case a principal's biggest thing, which she told me that I shouldn't be hanging around this friend, etc., and then now this thing comes up.  And she said, I've been telling you, you know, you don't need to be hanging around with, you know, certain friends.  But like when I was doing the D.J.--first of all, I lived across the street from the school [Lyndon Baines Johnson Early College High School, Austin, Texas].  So I'm different from the other kids in the magnet school [Science Academy, later Liberal Arts and Science Academy, Austin, Texas] because I'm going--I was going to that school anyway.  This is my neighborhood school.  I'm not being bused in for the magnet school.  This is my school.  So I have all my friends, neighborhood friends.  Then I was a D.J., and so that's a whole little community of people, you know, the dancers, the breakers, the rappers, you know.  We got that group of friends.  So that's my crowd.  It's, I'm not--I was not the science and math crowd.  Those are not, you know, I wasn't in orchestra or any of those things, you know, all the stuff my kids do now.  But that wasn't my crowd.  These are my friends, you know, these are my friends.  You know, so her point had been that, well, you need to be hanging around people who we feel good about, you know, essentially, you know, essentially.  And just like, well, this is not, this is not--that's just not how I was at the time.  Now, as an adult, I'm more sympathetic to her point of view because, not because she should be able to dictate, you know, who kids hang around with, but kids should also be mindful that there are opportunities that are available for you that you don't want any mistakes or anybody else's mistakes to keep you from.  So what I tell my son is, I don't tell him, stay out of trouble.  I tell him--'cause he's not a trouble person, I tell him, stay away from trouble, you know, just stay away from it, you know.  If you know people--like right now, the biggest thing going on in middle school is sexting and e-cigarettes, you know.  So I just, I know you're not doing those things, and I'm--don't want you to think I think that you're, you may do those things, but what I'm saying is, stay away from those things.  So there are people who smoke e-cigarettes, and they go do it at lunch.  Stay away from those people.  So I'm not saying--and it ain't enough for me to tell you, hey, don't do it yourself.  What I'm saying is stay away from those situations.
Story_ID: 152281
Speaker 1: And I think that kind of, that episode during my, my life made me a more conservative person socially, more conservative.  You know, not, not politically, just socially, you know, say, well, I just can't hang out with anybody at all times.  You know, it made me more circumspect.  You know, it's like, you know, people will deny you life opportunities if they have the oppor--if they, if they can and they felt like you didn't listen to what they had to say.  You know, that was a problem, and then, you know, my mom [Patricia Seaton Griffin] went down there and she was just upset with me for being in the principal's office.  You know, and I'm like, that's not really what I need right now.  You know, what I really need right now is an advocate to say, hey--they wound up over--you know, as a student I could appeal the suspension to the district, which I did.  And they overturned the suspension 'cause that was ridiculous.  But they didn't do the reinstatement of the student body president thing 'cause that was at, at her discretion, you know.  So that was, yeah, that was, that was a low point.
Story_ID: 152282
Speaker 1: You applied--had you applied to Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire] before this--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, I was going early Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So all that's derailed by this--
Speaker 2: Well, it may not have been.  I thought it was.  So I, I thought it was, so then I acted to make sure I was set up (laughter), you know.  I mean, you know, so, yeah, I thought it was.  And so anyway, so anyway, so I wound, there was a guy named Neal Katyal.  And he wound up becoming the acting solicitor general of the United States, but I was debating in a tournament and Neal--debated for Dartmouth.  He was going to Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut], but he had taken a year off.  And so he was coaching debate.  And he was judging at a debate tournament.  I was debating, and he said, "You should be at Dartmouth."  And I said, all right, 'cause I had not considered it even though I knew it was a great debate school.  So then when Neal said that, I looked at picture, you know, I mean 'cause I had never been to New Hampshire, you know, I had never been to Boston [Massachusetts].  I mean I'd never been up really in New England.  So when I saw all the pictures, I saw how beautiful it was.  I knew the debate reputation, didn't have a lot of African Americans at all, but they were on the quarter system.  I was like, I would definitely go there.  So I did my whole application, got it in.  They accepted me, and I went there, sight unseen.  I had never been to, that far North.  So I didn't know really where it was.  So I flew into Manchester [New Hampshire].  Now, Manchester is like six hours from Dartmouth.  I had no idea--maybe like four and a half.  I had no idea how far it was.  So I had to take a--and I got there like ten o'clock at night.  And I had to take a cab, which the guy made me a deal, eighty dollars.  I remember it now.  It was like almost all my cash money.  It's a lot of money to take me from Manchester to Hanover [New Hampshire], which is where Dartmouth is.
Speaker 1: Now, the summer before, I mean did you--I mean did you go there for the fall or did you go there early?
Speaker 2: I went there for a summer, yes, a summer.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went right after graduation [from Lyndon Baines Johnson Early College High School, Austin, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I go up there, and they have a thing called sophomore summer.  So they actually do have classes in there.  So the classes and all that stuff are going on.  So I get over there, and I'm there in the middle of the night.  I have a sheet saying where I'm supposed to go, but I don't know these buildings from that.  It's dark, it's--so I actually slept on a couch in the basement of a dorm the first night.  And then I got up and then went to the administration building and got, you know, all my stuff together.  But then I--
Speaker 1: So your mother [Patricia Seaton Griffin] didn't go with you or no other relatives?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Nobody--
Speaker 2: No, well, my mom and I weren't on the best of terms, you know, for a couple of reasons.  One is, I did not feel like she stood up for me, you know, back in high school as it related.  So now, I'm kind of on my own, you know.  She wasn't involved in filling out applications and very reluctant to fill out the financial aid forms, late, you know.  She had done something similar with my sister [Elizabeth Bert].  My sister had gotten into Rice [University, Houston, Texas], but she wouldn't fill out the financial aid forms.  She didn't wanna--who knows?  Anyway, so my sister wound up going to Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas] on a--she had a full scholarship, but, you know, Rice was kind of where she wanted to go.  But then so, and at this point, we're not on the best of terms, no support whatsoever from my dad [Rodney Griffin], which was kind of why my mom was somewhat upset because she's like, why is this my whole--why is this my burden?  You know, she felt alone.  And, but my grandfather [Orville Seaton] was willing to help me--
Story_ID: 152283
Speaker 1: --Anyway, so I go up there [to Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire], and it was the best place I've ever been in my life, like literally, the first week I'm walking around there, I couldn't believe my luck.  I just couldn't believe it.  I couldn't believe how beautiful it was, how nice the people were.  Once I got my room, I had a little corner room in this dorm, Butterfield [Hall], and other than going--and you only take three classes at a time.  So it's a quarter system.  So, and then, there literally was--there was an expectation, obviously, that you go to class, you perform, and you do well.  And there were--but there was nobody telling me anything.  I'm like, I'm on my own.  And then I had a, I did have a meal plan.  So my, I'm not worried about food.  There's nowhere to go, so I don't need a car (laughter), you know, I'm like everything that I need is right here in this little world, right now.  The only challenge was just how expensive long distance was, you know.  I mean this is still, you know, back in the--you know, even when I was in Dartmouth, you know, it was still in the, what became the early '90s [1990].  You know, long distance was still very expensive, and that was a rural area, and it was, it was very expensive.  So I couldn't talk on the phone all that much, but, and then we only had three channels, so I wasn't watching TV anyway.  I was listening to a lot of music then.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is 1989, this is--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, George H.W. Bush is president.
Speaker 1: Yeah, through the '90s [1990s], and through, so yeah, Clinton [President William "Bill" Clinton], Clinton was the president at the end.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So every year, it just got better.  I mean every year it got, every year school got more awesome.  Now, it's, it's--
Story_ID: 152284
Speaker 1: When you were in high school [at Lyndon Baines Johnson Early College High School, Austin, Texas], I guess, those were the years that [HM] Jesse Jackson ran for president, the "Run Jesse, Run."
Speaker 2: And those were awesome 'cause he would come down here, and he'd go to church in '84 [1984], come to the churches in '84 [1984] and '88 [1988].  The energy was electric.  And my mom [Patricia Seaton Griffin] had bought me the record--in fact, I wound up meeting [Richard] Dick Griffey, who's SOLAR [Sound of Los Angeles Records]--who had had SOLAR Records, who put it out.  So anyway, so I, yeah, and I said, man, I had that record, 'Our Time Has Come,' his [1984] DNC [Democratic National Convention] speech.  In fact, I might have plagiarized part of that speech in one of my speeches, I think when I was running for student body president, I think I might have taken some from Reverend Jackson and put it in my speech.  I think I might have used 'Our Time Has Come' as my speech when I was running for office.
Speaker 1: I thought about him when you were talking about debate, and I just thought about him being such an orator in the debates.
Speaker 2: Oh, he was the Michael Jackson of that era for debate.  So if he did it, I did it.  So I would repeat phrases.  Even though in debate, you don't really do that 'cause you're actually wasting, you're losing time by repeating.  But it does have a rhetorical effect.  I would steal phrases all the time.  "Our time has come," "I want to be where the big boats are," you know, stuff like that.  I would take a phrase from him, you know, from him, cadences.  I would steal--yeah, I used to listen at, like all the time I used to listen to that speech.  And (unclear) but, you know, at a time when I thought, you know, I wanted to do political office or go into, you know, electoral politics and that kind of thing.  And, you know, he was really inspirational.  I mean his subsequent years, he's kind of undermined all the work that he did, but in the '80s [1980s], he was the Michael Jackson, you know, of even politics.  I mean Jesse Jackson--I mean [William] Bill Clinton has stolen from Jesse Jackson.  You know, you listen to Bill Clinton and you hear cadences and you hear phrases, you hear repetition.  You see the, you know, the gestures.  You know, he took a lot of that and incorporated it into his own style.  I mean, you know, just like people borrow from Michael Jackson.  I mean he would, I can't imagine--no one's been bigger.  I mean [HM Barack] Obama got bigger definitely, you know, I mean, you know, without question because of the reach.  But not because of his style per se.  You know, I mean Jesse Jackson got big like stars get big, like they blow up and everybody wants to imitate 'em.  You know, that, you know, and I'm not denigrating President Obama in any way.  I'm just saying on sheer force of personality, Jesse, what Jesse Jackson did in the '80s [1980s] was palpable and strong.  So at any rate, that left a very strong impression on me.  And then when I got to Dartmouth [College], the irony is I was thinking like, man, I'm where the big boats are, you know.  I really felt that.  And it felt different from the way I thought it would feel.  You know, I thought it would be like, oh, man, it's gonna be all this grandiosity and you have to build yourself up to deal with it.  But it's really kind of the opposite.  It's so low key that it's so easy for you to just be yourself, explore yourself and, you know, figure out what you wanna do with yourself.
Story_ID: 152285
Speaker 1: Now, was there an appreciation for the hip hop culture at Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire]?
Speaker 2: Definitely.  They're kids, yeah, yeah, I mean, yeah.  So I mean by that time, I mean by the time you get to the, you know, really, the full blown by the early '90s [1990s], you know, everybody's on the same thing.  You know, I will say the biggest, the biggest uniter as far as music goes was Bob Marley.  You know, so everybody had a Bob Marley CD.  You know, anybody that you would meet and come across.  So when the fraternity houses or the social houses would have events, they always had a reggae band.  You know, I mean they--there were different shows, the rock bands, etc., but I would say the most prevalent type of band was gonna be a reggae band, just people identify, you know, it felt more universal.  But, you know, hip hop was--
Speaker 1: That's, yeah, I wouldn't have guessed that, but that's--okay.
Speaker 2: I bet you it's probably still true today.  I mean, you know, 'cause it just sets a vibe, you know, that you want at a college.  But, you know, a lot of people were getting into rap and hip hop.  And you go to any party now--back then, there was a lot of crazy hip hops, like stupid stuff too, you know.  Sir Mix-a-Lot, "I like big butts, and I cannot lie," you know, that kind of stuff.  Young MC, Tone Lc with 'Wild Thing,' like that was huge on campus at the time.
Speaker 1: And 2 Live Crew.
Speaker 2: 2 Live Crew was huge.
Speaker 1: But then you had the political--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Public Enemy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Public Enemy and--
Speaker 2: You know, KRS-One was somebody I really like, but he wasn't as universal on college campuses as any of them, I mean, you know, he might have been too deep.
Speaker 1: KRS-One, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but Public Enemy was, you know, despite the message, still pretty universal then.
Speaker 1: So this is the age of, I know all the rap videos were on, 'Yo! MTV Raps' [1988-1995] was taking the steam from BET [Black Entertainment Television], I guess, in terms of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, 'Yo! MTV Raps' was like around '91 [1991], '92 [1992], I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but where we were, we didn't--there was no cable in Hanover [New Hampshire].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They didn't have cable TV.  So we're only on UHV, VHF.  And it wasn't worth it.  It wasn't worth it.  The only time I ever watched any TV, really in college was when A, we'd travel for debate because we'd go to the airports and--or, you know, hotels that would have cable or sometimes I would watch PBS 'cause that came in pretty clear.
Story_ID: 152286
Speaker 1: The only Texas group I can think of I know for sure is from Texas was the Geto Boys.
Speaker 2: Oh I loved them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because, so my family is from Third Ward [Houston, Texas], but my grandfather [Orville Seaton] and grandmother [Lillian Seaton], when they got married, they actually moved to Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas], and that's where the Geto Boys are from.  So basically, my time in Houston [Texas] was spent between Third Ward and Fifth Ward, so my grandparents split up, but when they did, my grandfather stayed in Fifth Ward.  My grandmother moved back to her family home in Third Ward.  So I'd be there in Fifth Ward, going to Finnigan Park, Mount Corinth [Missionary Baptist Church, Houston, Texas], you know, which was the church across the street and where they had vacation Bible school.  You know, all my friends were around there, and then one of my friends growing up down there is named Anzel Jennings actually wound up working at Rap-A-Lot Records.  And then my uncle woud--my mother's [Patricia Seaton Griffin] brother wound up--he grew up with all these guys, J. Prince and so then he wound up working at Rap-A-Lot Records.  So, you know, the Geto Boys, I was, I just loved them.
Speaker 1: Yeah, then they popularized the Fifth Ward, "Droppin' them Fifth Ward B's on 'em" and all that--
Speaker 2: Definitely, exactly.  Oh, yeah, definitely, definitely, they put Fifth Ward on the map from a, definitely from a musical point of view.
Speaker 1: It's almost like the old Archie Bell & the Drells, where he starts off playing--he's about the only recording artist of that day that would say, "I'm from Houston, Texas, and this is how we play"--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: 'Tighten Up' and all that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so that's the kind of thing, yeah, so anyway, so (unclear), so at this time, you know, I'm in college [at Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire], and I'm forming my identity.  And I'm in a place where not a lot of people from Texas are from, and I'm like, well, this is Texas.  This is, you know, some of the nonsense that we are about, you know, basically (laughter).  You know, and now, 'Mind Playing Tricks on Me' was a very big song that they would play at colleges, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, but they, people had a hard time getting into the rest of the catalog.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  I still remember some of the lyrics, and I'm sixty-five (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, it's true.  Yeah, it's true.  I mean, you know, it'll, it'll hit you.  It's hard--it'll hit you, and they talk different, sound different.  No group, nobody's been, no group has been like 'em.  Now, the only one who could really rap--now, people might debate it, was Scarface.  The rest of 'em, you know, could rhyme, but Scarface could actually, you know, rap over and above, which is the reason why he was able to have, you know, a longer independent career.  But I appreciated 'em at the time 'cause that was kind of explaining where I was from.  And there were no rap artists from Austin [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, so you--Houston was carrying the weight of Texas, you know, on the hip hop scene, definitely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 152287
Speaker 1: All right, so now, who were some of your instructors at Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire]?  Did you get on the Dartmouth--Dartmouth debate team?
Speaker 2: Dartmouth debate team, yes, so, that's why I went there, for debate.  I mean, only.  And 'cause I hadn't seen it.  I didn't know a lot about it, hadn't really heard of it; knew the weather was probably gone be a challenge, you know.  That's why I wound up going in the summer.  It's beautiful in the summer, you know.  It'll get you, and then the winter'll pop on you, and then that won't end until late April.  But Ken Strange was the debate coach at Dartmouth.  He's still the debate coach at Dartmouth.  He was there for--he's been there for a long time.  He's won a lot of national championships, and, you know, he just an all around, great guy.  And, you know, by vouching for me and giving me the opportunity to go there, you know, it changed my life.  I, I wouldn't say he was a mentor in the sense that in order for somebody to be a mentor, you've gotta be willing to be a mentee.  And, you know, ironically, you know, just during that period of time, I really felt like I had a lot more things figured out than I realize now that I had figured out.  But he was definitely somebody that was instrumental in helping me.  We also had another dean there.  The dean of the college at the time was a guy named Lee Pelton, and Lee--he's African American.  He was the first African American dean at Dartmouth College, and he's now the president of Emerson College in Boston [Massachusetts].  He was the--he left Dartmouth to become the president of Willamette [University] in [Salem] Oregon.  And then now, he's the president of Emerson College in Boston.  So I would say at Dartmouth, Dean Pelton who's now president, was the most instrumental in helping me get my head right and helping me focus on trying to make the most of opportunities that I had.  And one of the reasons why I was able to listen to Dean Pelton, I believe, was because it was never conditional with him.  He was like, "I support you, period."  What you need to do is really focus on, you know, at that point in time, being less social, getting your grades up, you know, because, you know, he's asking, well, what do you wanna do.  And I'm like, I wanna go to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  You know, that's why I came here.  Neal Katyal, who I was telling you, he's--who became the acting solicitor general, now, he's a professor at Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] and in private practice.  But he's probably one of the, he was a student then.  But now he's a huge constitutional law guy.  But anyway, he told me, it's like you come here--he asked me what I wanna do.  I said, I wanna go to Harvard Law School.  He said, well, you get excellent GPA, and you get so and so on the onset, and it'll be easy to do 'cause he was going to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut].  So he was saying that Harvard was easy to get into, he felt.  You know, but he said it just the way I'm saying it to you.  And so it made me believe that, you know, it's possible from there, and that really was my main goal for college.  And then, so then I was not on that track because I had a habit of doing well in classes I liked, and blowing off the classes I didn't like.  And that's a high school habit.  In college, that's impossible to survive that way, you know.  So I was getting A's and C's.  You know, the C's make it impossible for you really to go anywhere top later.  So what, so then Dean Pelton was, he just reinforced that fact; didn't say he wasn't going to write my recommendation when the time came.  It didn't say he wasn't going to--'cause, you know, he was inviting me on different student committees, etc.  He was still doing all those things, but he also said, "But, you have to, you know--and it was mainly about, be less social and get your grades up."  And I appreciated that because it wasn't conditional.  You know, he said, I'm gonna help you, period.  But my help was only gonna go so far.  It's just a layer on top of whatever case it is that you make for yourself.
Story_ID: 152288
Speaker 1: And so by the time I got to the end of Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire], we had won a lot of debate.  I had gotten a speaker at the national debate tournament.  The squad had won a national championship.  I had gotten my grades up at least in the spring.  In the spring, I'm doing great, you know, I'm like 3.7s, 3.8s 'cause debate winds down by that time.  So I kind of, was kind of tugging the rest of my average along.  And then I killed the LSAT.  So then I got my recommendations.  One was from an anthropology professor, and her name was Deborah Nichols.  And she went to University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] [sic, Pennsylvania State University, State College, Pennsylvania], and great teacher.  And the way I started majoring in anthropology was the first course I took was Archeology 101 with her.  And she had a policy of, on her tests, she would give back from each, each test for each question, she would give back the best answer from the class on that test.  So this is my first term in Archeology 101, and on the first answer on the first test, when she gives out the sample answers--this is before you get your test back, I'm looking, and I'm seeing my horrible handwriting, right here at the top, at Dartmouth College, on my first test, I'm a sample answer with my bad handwriting right there.  So I became an anthropology major there.  I'm like, hey, she's, she under--she feels me.  She respects what I'm doing.  So like--and I remember the question, and the question was basically like, what was the difference between the kinship trends for leaders and the kinship trends for the regulars, you know, just regular society.  And so I just started out, well kinship ties for the classes is different from kinship ties for the masses, and that's kind of how I started off.  Then I go into, you know, what, you know, it was like a 150-word, you know, answer.  You know, and it resonated with her off the top, so that's how I became an anthropology major.  I'm glad I did it.  It was a small major, small department, small major.  I wound up doing an ethnography of black Muslims in Harlem [New York, New York].
Story_ID: 152289
Speaker 1: So during that time, my, my brother-in-law was from New York [City].  He had a lot of [HM Louis] Farrakhan tapes.  So I started listening to those, and then rap had turned that way, you know, between Poor Righteous Teachers, KRS-One and the thing that resonated with me with that was, the notion of the black man as God, and I had always been taught that there's God, there's Jesus, and then there's us.  And then, but this said something totally different, you know.  It said that you are, you are little gods, and that just resonated with me.  So then I, so then--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So that's a tenant of the Nation of Islam that,--
Speaker 1: Core tenant, yeah, and then the Five Percenter Nation [sic, Five Percent Nation] had taken over a whole strain of hip hop at the time too Poor Righteous Teachers, KRS-One, Public Enemy, they were really, you know, so I'm feeling myself.  And I'm trying to make sense of--I'm trying to make sense of this ego that I have that, you know, it seems like some people had such a problem with.  I'm trying to make sense of it all, and I'm like, "Well, man, this answers it right here.  These people are just not understanding me, you know.  I'm--I am a god on earth," you know.  So that--so then I just started getting into everything, you know, [Lawrence] Neal, [Louis] Lomax, you know, Malcolm X, and James Baldwin, 'The Fire Next Time,' and Elijah Muhammad, 'Message to the Blackman [in America],' 'How to Eat to Live.'  Then they have these study guides which I still have, these study guides.  So I'm all in it.  You know, I never could really get into the Quran [Koran] because I spent so much time in the Bible, you know, that the Bible--church was over here, but the Bible always made sense to me.  You know, like I could always go in there and get a verse out of that.  So I never really got into the Quran.  It might have been the Arabic that threw me off or I just never could get into that.  But I got into the political part of the Five Percent in the Nation of Islam, and then obviously, I'm into ora--I'm in oratory.  And Farrakhan in the early '90s [1990s] is, I mean, you don't wanna put it in musical terms, but I mean this guy was at the top of his game.  And then I used to go--I went to, I remember I went to one in [Washington] D.C., twenty thousand people in the convention center.  I went to another one in Boston [Massachusetts], the old Boston Gardens, eighteen thousand, like I'd never seen--you know, I went to some black college football games, but never seen that many black people in one place at one time, like on their best behavior, you know (laughter), like everybody's attentive, everybody's respectful.  You know, and he was just spitting fire.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the heyday of Minister Farrakhan.  That was the biggest period, I guess--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: The 'Stop the Violence' tour, especially.
Speaker 2: Did you hear Khalid Muhammad at that time too?
Speaker 1: Khalid Muhammad was, so he's from Houston [Texas].  He's a Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas] guy.  So I feel him right off, so Ka--so (unclear) Khalid Muhammad is from Fifth Ward.  He's from Houston.  He has so much fire, so anyway, so as I'm doing this ethnography, I'm going through the history of Mosque Number 7 [later, Masjid Malcolm Shabazz] in Harlem [New York, New York] and who led that mosque.  And that's a very historic mosque, you know.  It went from Malcolm X to Minister Farrakhan to Minister Khalid Muhammad to Minister Conrad Muhammad [Conrad Tillard].  That was kind of, you know, the little genealogy of that mosque.  So on the ethnography, you know, I took all the written material.  And then I went down there for the summer, the summer of '92 [1992].  So I'm down there all summer.  So I got a grant from the Rockefeller Foundation.  Also, registering voters for ACORN [Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now], so I get a dollar for every voter registration 'cause I'm out there in Harlem.  That was how I was staying in the dorm at Columbia [University, New York, New York] with my now wife [Christine Griffin].  And then, so then I'm out there doing the research at Schomburg [Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] and then I put together, you know, I wound up, you know, being about an eighty-page, you know, about a eighty-page ethnography.  And the stronger that mosque was, the better the community was.  And then as that mosque got progressively weaker, Khalid Muhammad was kind of part of the problem.  He was too controversial.  He was a very good spokesperson, passionate spokesperson, but he wasn't a good manager.  So as a result, he didn't have the FOI [Fruit of Islam] out on their temple posts in view.  So they're not out on 125th [Street], they're not out on Adam Clayton Powell [Jr. Boulevard].  They're not out on all the places that they were when Minister Farrakhan--Minister Farrakhan is big on numbers.  And he likes the, the, the, having the physical presence.  And, that requires organization.  He's a very good organizer, totally underestimated, underrated, you know, or, and people say whatever they want about the Million Man March, but his operation very--he's a very good organizer.  And subsequently, they weren't as well-organized.  Malcolm X was a very good organizer.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's who taught him.
Story_ID: 152290
Speaker 1: On that score, I mean the Spike Lee movie ['Malcolm X'] brought the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So that came out when I was in--so that came out, I actually got interviewed for the school paper about that.  And on an esthetic level, I loved the movie.  You know, I thought Denzel Washington, you know, did as well as you could.  But when they put the real face of Malcolm X, and that smile popped up there, you say, man, that's even a whole nother level even from the way Denzel portrayed him.  But, yeah, I thought it was a good movie.  I didn't feel like it was totally, factually accurate at the time.  But now, I just appreciate it for what it was.  It was a movie.  I mean I might have been putting too much on it back then, but as far as movies go, I thought it was excellent.  It came out when I was at Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire].  I actually saw it in--at Dartmouth.
Story_ID: 152924
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about the African American Society at Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, yeah, so it's--the African American Society is called the AM.  I was the editor of the journal of record for that.  It was called The Black Praxis.  When I got there, it was kind of a, it was a newspaper format.  But then I, along with another guy, Rohan McFarlane, he did the layout, and I did the editing.  We turned it into a magazine.  So, and in there, we'd have, you know, anybody could submit, professors or students.  So Dr. Arna Bontemps was there.  It was at Dartmouth.  So, he was an African American Studies professor there.  So he would, he would, he was actually the advisor for our group.  But then he would, he would submit stuff, and I'd write stuff, and we'd get stuff from, you know, [HM] Manning Marable, would submit some stuff.  And then students could submit stuff.  Our biggest issue then was The Dartmouth Review.  And really what we, our issue with the review was, you know, be less concerned about the Dartmouth Review, and then do more for building up our own, you know, newspapers and magazines, to be able to counteract them on campus.
Story_ID: 152925
Speaker 1: Tell us about The Dartmouth Review.  I know, historically, people can find references to it all throughout the late '80s [1980s], early '90s [1990s] (unclear).
Speaker 2: So basically, The Dartmouth Review is a place for people who are young and intellectual and are ardent, conservative advocates.  So it's not the regular newspaper where people just wanna work on their craft of writing.  It's people who want to ultimately become warriors in the conservative, intellectual revolution.  And as soon as they get there, they catch fire, like they believe that, and they are passionate about it and in a precocious way.  So you have these nineteen-year olds over here, and we're interested in--we're partially interested, we're interested in our major.  We're interested in kind of having fun, and we're interested in making sure our grades are okay 'cause we're gonna do something in the future.  Now, you got these people who may have--hold certain views against people who are already on fire for the conservative movement.  So that's what The Dartmouth Review is.  So then they produce a weekly publication that they would put at the door of every student on campus, which is 99 percent of the students who go to Dartmouth.  I mean less than 1 percent live off campus 'cause everybody's in the dorm.  So, and they hand it out for free.  And it's well written.  They have an awesome quote page on the back, so it's like fifty quotes, essentially, on the back, just an awesome quote page.  And then they have all the points of view that you would expect from William F. Buckley [Jr.] wannabes, you know, who have a ton of energy and advocating against--I mean who are advocating in an area where a lot of kids don't have time or energy to respond back.  So The Dartmouth Review--and so people, every week it was something offensive in there.  You know, if you're an African American, Native American, Hispanic, woman, liberal, something is going to offend you, but everybody read it, you know, because they produced like clockwork. So--
Story_ID: 152926
Speaker 1: We had a controversy there [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] where a kid who--so in our magazine, we're Black Praxis, we did--the first time we endorsed a candidate to be the president of the African American Society.  This is, I'm going back literally twenty years.  It's just--I'm just thinking about all this stuff from the high school stories and just how ridiculous everything is, you know, was, really.  But at any rate, so we endorsed a guy for president.  So the woman running against (unclear) is upset 'cause why are we using the Praxis to endorse a candidate.  But I thought the guy would be good.  At any rate, he wins.  So a freshman beats an incoming senior.  That's really, you know, really was the heart of the issue.  How did a guy who just get here--that's media.  You know, how did he beat, you know, somebody who's gonna--been working in the African American Society all this time, is gonna be a senior.  So at any rate, this guy goes out.  And he takes it upon himself to get a trash bag and start picking up Reviews [The Dartmouth Review] from every dorm room.  And he did this for two weeks.  So anyway, The Dartmouth Review is upset.  You know, they're mad so then it becomes an administration issue, an issue at the administration.  So then--and then Nat Hentoff, the writer from the New York Times hears about it.  So then he starts following it, so they--'cause, you know, he's a civil libertarian, you know, really.  So he was totally against the idea of somebody picking up and, basically, picking up speech, that they would have a right to.  So then, my point of view on it was we should not be offended by, enough to the point where we try to keep the National Review [sic] from being able to get their message out because then, that means that people would do something similar to try to keep us from getting our message out.  And his point, the guys for--the African Am president's point of view--and this was the first time I really disagreed with anybody there, you know, but his point of view was, well, it's trash, and I'm just picking it up.  The people don't subscribe to it.  They just leave it.  And then, you know, just he got so unreasonable, he got so unreasonable in his position on the issue that we actually wound up impeaching him and bringing in the woman who he beat.  Just, he was just so unreasonable because he became upset with us, African American community, that we didn't feel the same way, that we didn't feel like this was the tactic that needed to be taken.  And I'm like, really?  The only way to answer speech is more speech.  It's not to try to suffocate their speech.  And, anyway, so I wound up giving a quote to Nat Hentoff, and then he actually published that on the editorial page in the New York Times.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, it was something to the face that ignorant--neither race has a monopoly on ignorance, you know.  Once you become unreasonable, then you can't help the cause that you purport to serve.  And then once you start denigrating the people who you say you're doing it for, now you put your ego out in front of your cause.  [sic, "It makes it clear that neither the black nor the white race has a monopoly on fools. Ignorance transcends race and bridges the generation gap."] So that was a problem.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But it was a college problem (laughter), not as it turns out, it wasn't a life problem.  It felt serious to me at the time, but in the long run, it really is not.
Speaker 2: Well, college is a time to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Explore, yeah.
Speaker 2: --explore a lot of questions--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and the issues around The Dartmouth Review made national news--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: 'Nightline,' '60 Minutes' and so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: --you know, that's (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, and, yeah, this whole thing went the whole gamut, New York Times, [The] Washington Post, '60 Minutes,' it went, it went, it went the whole gamut.  Yeah, it was a, and it was a big issue, you know, it was a big issue on campus--
Story_ID: 152927
Speaker 1: --That was one of the things I think that, that Dean [Lee] Pelton at the time appreciated about me too because here he is a black dean at the college [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire].  This issue breaks out.  He did not think picking up The [Dartmouth] Reviews was the right idea.  It put him in a--and everybody's gonna be for free speech.  I mean you can't be at a university and not--at a college and not be for free speech, which he totally was, but he also was, you know, by nature of the college and the location, it was him, and it was Arna Bontemps.  I mean these are really the only two thoughtful, black mentors, faculty, administration really on campus that were thoughtful.  And--
Speaker 2: Did--you mentioned [HM] Manning Marable, did he have any association with the--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No, he was at Columbia [University, New York, New York], but no, he was just a prolific writer.  So we could always get, we could always get material from him.
Speaker 2: Okay, and so a weekly column, yeah--
Speaker 1: Yeah, and there was actually [HM] Dr. [George] Langford, but he was a scientist.  He's a biologist, so he wasn't really into--(laughter) he didn't weigh in on any issues, you know, as it related to that.  So these, so he didn't wanna, he didn't want the black students to feel abandoned, you know, so I was able to go back and caucus and really get that point of view, that we just didn't agree with what the president was doing, of the [African American] Society was doing, you can't limit speech.  And in no way, shape or form were we gonna be for that.  And so me being reasonable and being able to, you know, articulate that, I think was an episode where the dean started to see that there was a little bit of maturation going, at least, going on at least on my part that, you know, that his, his, his mentoring me, his helping me was, you know, probably gonna turn into something.
Story_ID: 152928
Speaker 1: So as you say you did good on the LSAT--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and so you're, you're, you're in '93 [1993], is it, you graduate [from Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire]?
Speaker 2: Ninety-four [1994].
Speaker 1: Ninety-four [1994], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, 1994, this is the second year of [President William"Bill"] Clinton's term.  This is the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What else goes on in '94 [1994]?  It seems like it's a--
Speaker 2: Recession.
Speaker 1: Recession, okay.
Speaker 2: So, economy's bad.  So I went to go, work at Goldman Sachs.  So I did all this, you know, the thing about Dartmouth [College] is, everything's set up for you.  So you go to career services.  You say, "What field do you wanna be in?"  "I wanna be in investment banking."  "Great.  Give us your resume."  They give you a resume.  They circulate it to all the recruiters.  And then the recruiters then schedules you for time slots if they wanna recruit you.  And then you go to the Hanover Inn, which is the on-campus hotel.  And then you go from room-to-room interviewing.  And if they like you, then you get asked to come back to the bank.  So wherever the bank is, New York [City] or, you know, mostly New York was mostly--there was in Baltimore [Maryland], but mainly New York.  That's where I wanted to go.  And did all those interviews and I got a job, I got a couple of jobs, but at Goldman Sachs was where I was going.  And at that time, Goldman had, Goldman was huge.  I mean it was the most profitable bank.  Wall Street was getting--well, they, Wall Street had had a bit of a heyday, but it was going into, it was about to hit.  Nobody really knew, it was about to hit a rough cycle.  And then so, yeah, I wound up going there.  But, yeah, the corporate recruiting was great.  I got a job at McKinsey & Company too, for consulting, but just felt like I wanted to be on--I thought Wall Street was the place to be.  I didn't have any money.  I had grown up more or less broke, and I just thought, well, you go, you go where you think the money is.
Story_ID: 152929
Speaker 1: So 1994, well, tell us about--now, graduation [from Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire], did your mother [Patricia Seaton Griffin] come down?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my parents [Patricia Griffin and Rodney Griffin] came.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, both my parents came to my graduation.
Speaker 1: All right, and did you graduate with any special honors or anything or--
Speaker 2: Nope, no, no.  I was, I was shy of--anyway, I just think about all this ridiculous stuff.  Yeah, no, I'm a Spanish class shy of cum laude, you know, (laughter), and, but I did a bunch of stuff.  So like I was in a senior honor society called Palaeopitus which was for campus leaders.  Obviously, I'll tell you, it's part of a national championship squad for debate, and I got a national speaker award for that.  You know, I edited, you know, I edited the paper, the [Black] Praxis.  And, you know, I was a good student among great students.  But I was a great test taker, among great test-takers.  So you put the good student with the great test-taking, and then the other leadership pieces with it.
Speaker 1: Well, being really good at what you're focused on is really good.
Speaker 2: That's the, and that's the main thing.  Yeah, I mean that was the, that was--with the debate--now, don't get me wrong.  We have Phi Beta Kappas who debated, who were excellent debaters.  And they were just better students.  I mean they were better students.  In fact, some of 'em didn't do as well on the LSAT.  Some wanted to go to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], didn't get in, different things.  But they, and what I learned to appreciate there is that being an excellent student really starts in middle school and high school.  You don't pick up those habits.  You can get better, and I did get better as a student over time.  But their endurance for studying and, and organizing themselves was just impressive.  I mean, you know, they could take--they could eat--they could go to class, have a thirty-minute break, go to lunch, process what they just--the notes right there, get them set, put 'em in the binder.  Bam, now, they're ready to study later, even if it's later in the semester.  Me, it took me a while to get my notes down, you know, just to get my notes in a--'cause part of it was my handwriting.  So now, I got a laptop, and that changed my life 'cause I could type.  And then I was able to at least read all my notes.  And then once I was able to read all my notes, it made it a lot easier for them, to organize them.  So I got, became a better student as each semester went on.  But it was hard for me--not that I was getting killed 'cause there were some things I could do pretty well.  But it was hard for me to organize myself in order to study every day 'cause those weren't my habits coming out of high school [at Lyndon Baines Johnson Early College High School, Austin, Texas].
Story_ID: 152930
Speaker 1: Immediately after graduation [from Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire], you go to Goldman Sachs?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And, now, you--so Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] would start in the fall?
Speaker 2: No, no, Harvard started after that.  Yeah, no, so I worked at Goldman Sachs as an analyst for a year, and then I went to law school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you just wanted to have a break or do some work?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted to make money.  I mean I really was broke, like I spent my whole, I spent my whole time in New Hampshire, and then except for the summer I was in New York [City], I was broke.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, but it's set up where you have--you know, and then I had my, you know, and then I had the--my girlfriend, who's now my wife [Christine Griffin], you know, I couldn't even, I really couldn't afford the long distance, even to call.  You know, and then I'd take the train down there to go see her, and she was in [Washington] D.C. at Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.], and then she lived in New Jersey.  So I'd take the train, and, you know, so I just was, was just really tired of being broke.  So I thought, man, let me go get a job.  Let me go work, make some money (laughter), you know.  That was before I got to New York, realized how expensive everything is.  But at least I was making money, and I learned a lot doing it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now what did you learn by working at Goldman Sachs?  I mean what was the most important thing?
Speaker 2: Well, I learned how to work a job-job.  You know, like I had these other jobs, but when I got to Goldman, I mean this is a ninety - one hundred hour week job-job.  And I just learned how much work is really involved in working a job.  I had never--all my jobs up until then were part-time or work-study, and then now, this was an actual job.  You know, it was the first time I was really, you know, independent because I had an apartment that I had to, you know, pay all my, you know--I was never there because of the way the job worked.  But, you know, I was still responsible for upkeep, rent and so on.  I learned a lot.  That was my first time living in New York, so about being independent.  I learned how to try to have this adult relationship--you know, we had a college relationship, and then we start trying to manage an adult relationship.  And then I also learned that I really, to the extent possible, would prefer to work for myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, you know, because there, it's a lot of--and I don't say this as a bad thing 'cause I see why it's a high performing culture.  But you go in, and it's something of a hazing process, just by the sheer volume of the work.  And then you ultimately become, enter a fraternity and, you know, type of thing.  And, so it's just a lot of work--
Story_ID: 152931
Speaker 1: And it was me and a guy from Texas A&M [Texas Agricultural and Mechanical University, College Station, Texas] actually, who was--we actually were roommates.  He was an associate [at Goldman Sachs].  He subsequently became a partner there, and then wound up getting taken down in the mortgage scandal.  He was, he became the partner--we were in mortgages.  I was an analyst. He was an associate.  We were roommates on 74th Street [New York, New York].  Dan Sparks, is A&M.  We got along famously.  You know, this was when I was still messing around with, you know, I had the [HM Louis] Farrakhan poster, you know.  And he's very conservative.  He's like, I like them, you know, he said, I like them.  He said, "I like the Muslims.  They're clean cut.  They believe in self-reliance.  I like what they stand for."  He's a white, you know, white guy, conservative, you know.  He was, he's that kind of conservative where they overlap.  He's got some civil libertarian in him, but he was, you know, just on an interpersonal level, he was a nice guy.  He's a Texan.  Well, anyway, so he bought into the culture completely.  And he had already been there for five years when I got there.  And so, you know, we would talk from time to time, and he'd say, look, I wanna do this, become a partner, go back to Texas and teach.  That was his goal.  He, and he did it.  He became a partner.  I don't know about the teaching part 'cause he was the head of mortgages.  And he got called before [U.S.] Congress and the whole testifying.  I mean he was the central figure, you know, in all that.  But I know he wasn't, to the extent something happened, he wasn't trying to do the wrong thing.  He was a nice guy.  But, and so what I--but what I really learned is how hard to work, and how much I would wanna work for myself.
Story_ID: 152932
Speaker 1: Okay, now, Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], now this is 1995?
Speaker 2: Yep, fall of '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: Okay, and I read that like [HM] Dennis Hightower who was a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --tremendous influence on you, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, well, first just getting out of Goldman [Sachs].  Recession was hitting.  It was a bad time for the bank.  I applied to, you know, I had applied to a bunch of law schools, went to go see 'em.  I thought I was going to Stanford [Law School, Stanford California] just on the weather alone.  Then I got admitted to Harvard.  Then I went up there for the student, admitted students weekend.  [HM] Jesse Jackson was the speaker.  And Abyssinian [Baptist Church, Harlem, New York, New York] pastor, Butts, [HM] Calvin Butts, was there.  And it was just so much energy there.  I just said, you know, I definitely have to be here.  So when I got admitted there, it was probably one of the happiest times of my life, and it made everything else, you know, it, it, it you know, it made me feel like I was really on the right path at that point.
Story_ID: 152933
Speaker 1: So then when I got to Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I--it was the twenty-fifth year of something called the Harvard Report on Urban Music.  And the Harvard Report on Urban Music was a Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] study that was commissioned by LeBaron Taylor.  I don't know if you've heard--LeBaron was, I think he's probably a HistoryMaker.  He's passed now, but he was the first African American A and R executive at a record label.  And so he had this study commissioned--well, Clive Davis actually had the study commissioned.  Clive Davis went to Harvard Law School, but he had some Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] students who were interns do a study on, should they create a black music department.  And obviously, the recommendation came back, yes, at CBS Records and LeBaron Taylor was hired to be that first black executive, black executive of a black music department.  So anyway, that was coming up on the twenty-fifth anniversary of that report when I was in law school.  It was, the report was done in '71 [1971], and we were in '95 [1995].  So then I came up with the idea and got a few other students involved.  And we were gonna do a report on--Harvard report on urban music, twenty-five years later, basically.  So then I wrote all these CEOs and presidents of these record companies.  And the only one who re--and [HM] Russell [Simmons], who I subsequently became partners with, and, you know, Sean Combs, and the only one who wrote me back was [HM] Clarence Avant, who, at the time, was the chairman and CEO of Motown.  And so I got--once--Clarence just called me up on the phone.  First, he wanted to know if I was black.  That was his first question, you know, because I'm asking about black music.  Then he said, "What can I do for you?"  And he called me like at 6:30 in the morning.  You know, I just happened to be up, you know, that day 'cause of class.  But, and then he said, well, what can I do for you?  I said, well, I'd like to find another couple of people to interview.  I wanna come out and interview you.  He said, fine.  Literally, about an hour later, everyone that I had written to called me to set up a time for me to meet with them in New York [City].  So Clarence opened all that up.  So then I went down there.  We did all those interviews, and then we actually published a report on how the industry had, how the industry had changed.  We made a bunch of recommendations about how they should be organized, you know, going forward.  And the only ones who really took it to heart was LaFace Records, [Antonio] L.A. Reid, and [Kenneth] Babyface [Edmonds].  And so they did a lot of what we recommended, and they actually wound up selling their company back to Arista [Records], and then L.A. Reid became the CEO of Arista and had a really long run based on that model.
Speaker 2: Okay, wow.
Speaker 1: And then that's how I really got into entertainment, to be able to work in it to make a living in it.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, now, was the report ever--did anybody cover it in the media?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, Boston Globe, Billboard, New York Times.  Variety picked it up, yeah, it got covered.  And then we had a period--we had, well, we had a recession which is essentially like a press conference.  Dick Griffey came out, Clarence, Russell.  Yeah, it was quite a few people there.  But it was, it was covered in the press, Billboard, Boston Globe, [Boston] Herald, and Variety had some pieces on it.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 152934
Speaker 1: Now, [Harvard] Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] as such, I mean was it, was it difficult for you at all?
Speaker 2: Very.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, very.  So the things that made it--I mean let me just say this.  Of all the academic experiences I ever had, my first two years of law school were the best ones, like just awesome.  So at the time, I had Arthur Miller, who was the biggest civil procedure professor.  I got in a lucky section.  There was one section full of stars, and it was section four.  And I was lucky enough to be in it.  We had, I had Alen Dershowitz, and this is during the O.J. [Orenthal James Simpson] trial.  So he, so Miller is the legal analyst for ABC News.  So he's covering the trial for ABC.  Dershowitz is on the dream team, you know.  So he's on every channel and in class every day.  And then I had Mary Ann Glendon who was, is a big property professor, but her claim to fame was she became [President William "Bill"] Clinton's ambassador to the Holy See.  So she is Clinton's Ambassador to the [Roman] Catholic Church.  And then we had Charles Nesson who wound up creating the Harvard Center for Internet Society [sic, Harvard University, Berkman Center For Internet & Society], who's like, you know, and he was a big part of Electronic Frontier Foundation, you know, a big, you know, a big professor.  So we had the star section during the O.J. trial.  So everything, and cameras were there all the time.  It was just action.  And you really felt like you had a school, but you're at the forefront of the law.  And it just happened to dovetail with pop culture at the time 'cause of the O.J. case.  What made it hard was, so all those great students that we had at Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire], the tip of the spear of those guys, and a bunch of their buddies and the women (unclear) from across the country now go to Harvard Law School.  So these are just like monsters at this point, you know, as far as preparation goes.  And then there are people there who now are, you know, judges, partners, solicitor generals, who will become, [U.S.] Supreme Court, like people who--when, how I was interested in music, that's how they felt about the law.  You know, they just loved it.  And so that's kind of what we had there.  And so then I wound up getting into a group of guys who wanted to be in business.  So we were like entrepreneurs.  So we had done investment banking before.  We had done consulting before.  And that was our plan for the future.  So then we wound up cross-registering into--I did, I took nine classes at the [Harvard] Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] through cross-registration.  That's how I met [HM] Dennis Hightower.  He was my advisor over there on a--we had to do an independent study.  And he was my advisor over there, and he's also a great guy.  And he was a hitter too at one point.  You know, he was president of Disney Telecommunications, done a ton of boards.  He became deputy secretary of commerce.  Yeah, he's hitter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but this is when, this was after Disney, he came to the business school for a year and taught and did research.  So I was fortunate to be able to catch him in that year.
Speaker 1: So he was just for an instant, just for a little while?
Speaker 2: Him.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you happened to catch him when he was--
Speaker 2: Catch him, right.  My timing of the law school, 'cause I could have kept working for another year, 'cause usually, you do analyst for two years and then not gone to law school.  But I was just really kind of ready to get back in school.  And then the back--there was a recession, and just the, the bonuses weren't--I mean, and I was only making forty [thousand dollars a year], you know, I was still just an analyst.  So it's not like I was about to get rich any time soon.  And then, school life just seemed much better.  So my timing was great.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was [HM] Charles Ogletree there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so him, I wasn't in his section.  So the way law schools work is, you know, you're in four--there're four sections.  You might as well say four different schools, especially at Harvard where the size.  So each section is comprised of about 160, 180 kids, and you do every, all your whole cycle is with those kids.  And so, Professor Ogletree taught in a different section.  So I didn't have him.  And then I wasn't into, I didn't, I was a member of BLSA [Black Law Students Association], but I didn't get into it 'cause by that time I was kind of like, I'd figured out that I don't really like the angle or the style of politics in general.  So then I wasn't doing anything--you know, I was a member of BLSA, I go to events.  I pay my dues, etc., but I really had gotten into this Harvard consulting project, the thing that I was doing the report on.  So on weekends, I was gone.  I was either in New York [City], mainly, or L.A. [Los Angeles, California], trying to--and sometimes, I'd take off Fridays or try to take off Mondays, and trying to actually turn this report into actual, paying, consulting clients.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, was [HM] Derrick Bell [Jr.] still there?
Speaker 2: No, he wasn't there.   No, he was at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] at that, by that time.
Story_ID: 152302
Speaker 1: As you're approaching graduation, well, people always say that the first year is the toughest year in [Harvard] Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but was that pretty much true for you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean definitely for me.  I mean it was the first year, I was trying to do this Harvard Report [on Urban Music], trying to get this consulting action going with these record companies, now that [HM] Clarence Avant, Mr. Avant had put me in the door.  I didn't wanna miss that opportunity.  And so I was going to these conferences and speaking at these conferences trying to get myself out there and only did a marginal job at paying attention to the school.  Now, contrary to popular belief what is doing a bad job at Harvard Law School?  A bad job at Harvard Law School is a "B" average.  So I did slightly better than that.  No one's gonna fail out.  You just won't.  You know, you would have to do--they would have had to make a tragic error on the admissions side or you would have to do no work whatsoever in order to fail.  They want you to succeed.  So I felt, I felt good, I felt good about what was there and that it was manageable, provided you managed it every single day.  So, but it's the hardest academic experience, the first semester especially.  The second semester was much better.  First semester is like, we don't have quizzes, we don't test.  We don't have pop quizzes.  We don't review.  None of that.  We're just gonna go to class all semester and then at the end, bam.  And no multiple choice, none of that.  We are, these are essay-based answers.  Yeah, so getting used to all that, you know, took a minute.  Second semester, I got the hang.  Second and third year fine, third year especially, yeah, 'cause you get into the stuff you're really, you're really into.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 152303
Speaker 1: So on the verge of graduation [from Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you, you had set up something with McKinsey & Company?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So when I was at the--I, I was, I was going to go work at Motown, be a general manager, something or other.  And then they had a regime change.  So that happened in January, before I'm about to graduate.
Speaker 1: So who did what?
Speaker 2: Well, there's a guy named--there was a group, [HM] Steve McKeever was the general manager.  I don't know if you--Candace Bond McKeever was his wife.  She was there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Steve is from Chicago [Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  So, and he actually wound up, you know, having a good record label.  Well, anyway, Jheryl Busby was running it, was their boss, essentially.  Then Jheryl--and so I was gonna go through [HM Clarence] Avant with Jheryl Busby.  They got ousted.  So then Steve McKeever and that group kind of took over.  But I didn't, I didn't have any relationship with them.  So the opportunity to go in there was gone.  So then I went back to, you know, the--I had worked at a law firm the summer before, here in Austin [Texas, sic, San Francisco, California], Brobeck Phleger & Harrison, but I really, you know--and that was actually very good summer associate pay.  But I just really wasn't that interested in practicing law itself.  The summer before, I worked in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] for Munger, Tolles & Olson which is Warren Buffet's law firm.  Charlie Munger is his partner.  And so this is--at Berkshire Hathaway.  So this was their law firm.  And I did that 'cause I was really interested in finance at the time.  I had just come out of Goldman [Sachs], and then I got out there and realized, well, wow, this is just the practice of law, you know, really in this firm.  And so I really wasn't interested in that.  I wanted to go into business for sure, and then ultimately, to become an entrepreneur.  So I was late in the game, but I wrote back to--I got the offer from McKinsey coming out of college.  I wrote back to McKinsey to their recruiter, and I said, "I got an offer coming out of college.  I really would like to become part of McKinsey & Company when I graduate from Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]."  And she said, well, it's really late in the cycle, but I'll set up an interview.  So then I did an interview with the, a partner in Boston [Massachusetts], like two or three people in Boston.  And I said, I wanna go in L.A.  He said, well, it's late for Boston, but I like you and I'm gonna recommend you.  I'm gonna pass you on to L.A.  So when they passed me on to L.A., I'm like, wow, this is--I'm already in.  This is just like the recruiting process works, you know.  So they shopped me out to L.A.  They saw my info, and they said, "Okay, we wanna interview you."  So I go out there, and we do the whole thing, the case studies, and the interviews, etc.  They asked for my records, transcripts, grades, you know, and then they offered me.  So then, like great.  So then I started at McKinsey in, in June.
Speaker 1: Okay, June of '98 [1998].
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 152304
Speaker 1: Now, what were you doing, you know, there [McKinsey & Company in Los Angeles, California] for the most part?
Speaker 2: Oh, entertainment and media consulting.  So my--the client, the first client I had was the Orange County Business Council.  The Orange County Business Council is basically like the chamber of commerce for Orange County [California], and all the business leaders there are on the board.  And what they were trying to do is come up with an economic--a strategic vision for Orange County.  And if you know about Orange County, the biggest landowner in Orange County is Disney.  So Paul Pressler, who was the president of Disney Theme Parks is on the board, and he's the one brought, because McKinsey does a lot of work for Disney, he's the one who brought them into Orange, to the Orange County Business Council.  So it was fascinating, and I was, I--my main job on that study was to do a bunch of research and gather up all the data on all of the cities in Orange County, the schools, graduation rates, curriculum of Orange County, the types of businesses, industries, employees by type in Orange County and demographics, and then ultimately, use that data as part of a team--which I'm an associate at that point.  (Unclear) kind of our meeting is associates and then engagement managers or partners.  But to work as part of that team and then to come up with a strategy for Orange County, fascinating.  You know, and the smartest people that I have ever worked with, they were at and probably still at McKinsey & Company, very, very, very, very--people who love thinking and coming up with strategy with just pure passion.  And [HM] Dennis Hightower worked at McKinsey in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, there was a guy, one of my mentors there.  I had two guys, Tony Miller [Anthony W. Miller] was one guy and Tony was--it was two African American, three African American partners in the firm.  And Tony was one of 'em.  Two of 'em were actually in the L.A. [Los Angeles, California] office.  So that actually worked out.  But at any rate, so Tony is now the deputy secretary of education, and he's on the, and he's on, you know, Vice President [Joe] Biden has that managed--government management committee, executive committee.  So he's on that executive committee.  But he's a very, very smart guy, very good mentor.  And then another guy, his name is Byron Auguste.  And Byron is also now in the [Washington] D.C. office.  He's one of the top probably two or three partners in the firm.  He runs the D.C. office.  But they all happened to be in the L.A. office at the time.  So that was good.  And so, and I had them.  Then I did, the last study I did was Time Warner and Turner [Broadcasting] merged.  So McKinsey was brought in to do the post-merger integration.  So I spent a ton of time in New York [City] with that.  And, you know, one of the big challenges for them was how do you reorg and what to do with all of the excess real estate space 'cause now you have two, now you've got two companies turning into one company.  But you have this, hundreds and hundreds and hundreds, millions of square feet of real estate, some you don't need and some very expensive, especially in New York.  So I spent a lot of time working on that.  It was good.  I mean I learned a lot, like ton--like a ton about--I understood entertainment from a certain point of view.  And then once I got into McKinsey and started looking at the media like then I really began to understand economics, what, what draws value, what are the most profitable elements of the industry, consumer demand curves, a bunch of things a ton, a ton now.
Story_ID: 152305
Speaker 1: Tell us about the transition from, I guess McKinsey [& Company] to FOX [FOX TV], I guess?
Speaker 2: So my roommate, who I went to [Harvard] Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] with, and my roommate in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], is a guy named Tom Smuts, and he was working at Fox.  And we did a lot of stuff for the Center for Internet Society [sic, Harvard University, Berkman Center for Internet & Society] together at Harvard [Law School], and then, so we decided to become roommates in L.A.  And he was already working at Fox doing essentially, business development.  So he was at a television production--the television production company that, and he was doing business development.  So that's like license, marketing deals, other deals around the TV shows.  So he was interacting with Peter Chernin, and then a guy named Roger Fishman--Peter Chernin was the president of News Corp.  And they basically said, "We need somebody who does what you do, but at the corporate level."  And he said, "Well, you should talk to my roommate."  So then I went in there and interviews, and then got the job doing marketing, and basically, strategy essentially, for News Corp.  The Fox part is, it was News Corporation, the Fox part is 'cause when you're in L.A., you're on the Fox studio lot.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --all right.  Well, okay, so was that--(laughter) did that remind, did you have any flashbacks of the Harvard Review, I mean The Dartmouth Review, I mean--
Speaker 2: When I was at News Corp?
Speaker 1: --working at News Corp (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, because, you know, Fox News was just getting started, right?  So what we used to do, there were forty-two portfolio companies at the time.  And Fox News was just one of 'em, and it was a, it was a money loser.  The distribution was not full, not full distribution, a money loser, and it was not as influential, nearly as it became by '99 [1999], to about 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was more straight-up news, and trying to work its way into markets where there were already--
Speaker 2: Right, well, yeah.  So they had the straight-up news shows, Brit Hume [Alexander Britton Hume], et cetera, and then you had the point-of-view shows, you know, in the afternoon.  But they weren't pushing the agenda--the vertically integrated editorial wasn't being pushed all day.  And there were a lot of black and Italian--actually, I enjoyed those guys over there because they were straight up, no nonsense, you know, coming from my job, you know, coming from my job 'cause, you know, I'm a corporate--I was coming from corporate.  I'm going in there and different portfolio companies feel very differently about people coming in there asking for info, etc., but at that time, they weren't making any money.  So they were on the very receptive end of everything, you know.  And they would try anything, I mean (unclear), they would try literally anything, any kind of stunt--they were big into stunts back then and trying to gain traction, you know.  And they were in New York [City], and they were the ones who put the ticker up there, and that ticker is what really established News Corp as a physical--you know a real strong presence right there in Rockefeller Center.  So, you know, they were, they were a good corporate citizen.  Now, when it went--and we didn't have to bump into their policies that much 'cause [Bill] O'Reilly was more straight up back then too.  I mean he was just more entertaining, you know, blowhard.  He wasn't as, as strong in terms of his point of view as he became.
Story_ID: 152306
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I mean, what sent them left was the 2000 [U.S. Presidential] election.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, especially, when it got down to the recount.  Once the re--once the recount jumped in, man, they just, they caught lightening in a bottle, you know.  And then they haven't slowed down since.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's where the [U.S.] Supreme Court decided really, the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but remember the whole spectacle of, you know, the chads, the Florida--the chads was their first controversy because they're like the election's decided for the Republicans, and look how far they're willing to go to steal this election.  And then they started, they were the first ones to replay the footage of looking up at the hanging chads, you know.  They were the first ones to do it.  And once they figured out, man, this is, I mean they knew all the time.  But that was their seminal event where they could really hone on exactly their point of view.  And then the show it visually because it was just so ridiculous.  I mean, you know, looking at those chads to see dimpled chads and see what they meant.  I mean that was a 'Saturday Night Live' spectacle in and of itself.  And then the fact that this thing dragged on for the couple of months that it did drag on, and then their side won in the end, and their point of view won in the end, then they became must carry.  So they went from forty - fifty million homes to every home.
Story_ID: 152307
Speaker 1: You were with 'em [News Corp/Fox Entertainment Group] until 2000, until that time actually, was it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, until that time, yeah, right, 2001, yeah, close to 2001, yeah.
Speaker 1: When you were there, now, you were involved in Fox eDirect?
Speaker 2: EDirect, so basic--so this is why I was going around to the forty-two companies.  So James Murdoch at the time was the head of a company called News Digital Media.  And so James was in New York [City], and I was in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  So his responsibility was to collect--they ran all the websites.  So they were gonna collect all the data.  We had TV Guide in the company then.  We had Smart Source, which was a free-standing insert company in the company then.  And then you had all these television companies.  And so our goal is we had contracted with Axiom to, it was a big data project.  We had contracted with Axiom to put all of the News Corp databases into one central database for marketing and then market off of that database.  That's why it was called the eDirect Initiative.  So every touch point that you have with the consumer, whether it was 'The X Files,' 'The Simpsons,' create a way through call and response or whether it's website or direct response television, to get users to voluntarily give you their information or purchase something from you.  That way, you have the opportunity to remarket to 'em.  What we were reacting to at time were Internet valuations.  So, you had this very real media company with forty-two companies and assets all around the world that was valued less than, way less than Yahoo, Amazon, AOL, at the time, like ridiculously less.  News Corp was valued at $29 billion.  Yahoo was valued at $173 billion.  So, and Yahoo was down there regularly.  Jerry Yang was always down there, especially to James, saying why don't you just go ahead and let us buy you.  James never was for it.  He never, he never appreciated that, you know, that kind of thinking.  So at any rate, so the eDirect Initiative was our attempt to amass numbers and then began to make it so that they could go back and make the argument back to Wall Street that we have just as many customer relationships as any of these Internet companies, but ours are more meaningful because they actually spend "x" hours per day with us, and they actually spend "x" amount of money to be able to define their spend.  So it was a pretty, it was a pretty big initiative, but over the course, as opportunity strikes, going through this initiative, I met a company called eUniverse [later Intermix Media].  It was kind of like a start-up, and then they had a few different companies in it.  And what they were able to collect, it was a greeting card company, so--and funny videos, you know, dancing babies, hands that dance, all that kind of nonsense.  Well, any--but the thing that they didn't know how to do was something that I knew exactly how to do which was to create a tracking system.  So when, so like Mother's Day is now.  Moms are coming to their site.  They would send greeting cards over to their moms, but then they wouldn't keep the emails or they wouldn't ask for an opt-in.  They would just let it send, and then they were still trying to sell advertising just on visits.  But I'm like, well, if you get them to opt-in, then you're able to remarket to 'em.  So in the course of those discussions, then I wound up going to eUniverse.  You know, and they were, I was a director, about to be a VP at News Corp, but eUniverse was willing to make me a general manager and a--you know, an EVP [executive vice president] and a general manager which is really where I was trying to go.  I was trying to get as close as you can get to running your own business.  And this company had about sixty, sixty people working there.  It was growing in traffic, and they needed exactly what I was able to provide at the time.
Story_ID: 152308
Speaker 1: Okay, now, eUniverse [later InterMix Media] was responsible for Myspace, right?
Speaker 2: That was our biggest--that was our biggest claim to fame.
Speaker 1: And it's hard to believe that Myspace was big, but it--
Speaker 2: Biggest, it was the--it was the biggest thing to hit the Internet, period.  The biggest social media site up until that point was Friendster, and Friendster--well, no, well, the biggest social media site was Napster, all right.  And so Napster is where it all started because there's the, there was the peer-to-peer, and it took off like wildfire.  Then every song, you can get any song, but in order for Napster to work, I'm relying on my peers to post.  And then there was a little bit of a community in there, so there's a--you could go in and you could go into chat and talk about trading songs, whatever you wanna talk about.  So Napster was on fire.  Then Friendster came along and Friendster was pretty big, you know, but they weren't aggressive enough.  But then when we, with the greeting card companies, we learned about viral marketing and how often people are willing to send nonsense to each other, you know.  Hampsterdance, that, I mean, you know, (laughter), it's basically diversionary entertainment.  It's kind of how we ultimately coined the phrase.  But sponsors weren't coming in on this because Napster was scaring 'em.  Friendster had a weird factor to it.  And they just didn't like the esthetics of the greeting cards and babies, hampsterdance, same reason why they said they didn't wanna advertise on YouTube.  It wasn't ad friendly.  So what we did is we went and did a deal, I took 'em to do a deal with direct marketing companies.  So direct marketing companies, it's just numbers.  It's like, hey, we just need people to respond.  You know, it was like, it was before "proactive", but it's the proactives of the world, the Guthy-Renkers of the world.  So we wound up finding a very good business there because we had to, we had gotten about forty or fifty million users a month.  And a fraction, only a fraction of those needed to buy something in order for us to, you know, be variable.  It was only like fifty, sixty employees at the time.  So then the company became acquisition hungry and then there was this, so we acquired game sites, other greeting card sites.  And then there was this fan-page site, essentially, which is essentially what Myspace was.  You could set up your own page.  There was another goofy company that came to us about a partnership called Artistdirect.  And Artistdirect was the big, funded Hollywood company, and so--and they were in the building across from us.  We were L.A. [Los Angeles, California] on Wilshire [Boulevard], so we liked the idea, but didn't like their execution.  And they have more people than us, and they had no traffic.  You know, it was just, it went--they did it really Hollywood, you know, they build a studio and then start reading scripts.  It's like, no, and the Internet, you build traffic, and then out of your bedroom, garage, wherever you can get it, once you get traffic, then if you need an infrastructure to support that traffic, you go that route.  So we were a lot leaner.  And Myspace was two guys at that time, three guys at that time.  Then they acquired Myspace and then took the--so what we were developing it, I guess, is now--what we were developing at News Corp is eDirect Initiative basically, big data putting all the data together and get through opt ends, basically took that model to eUniverse.  And we put it on the back of dancing babies, greeting cards, etc.  And then that database just grew hugely.  And we took that same database and put it on the back of Myspace.  So instead of, you know, just Myspace at the time probably had about 500,000, you know, members or maybe a million and a half or two million.  And Tila Tequila probably had about a hundred thousand followers.  When we took that database of fifty million, that blew her up to ten to fifteen million followers, like instantly because we could market directly to that database and make them aware of her.  So then Myspace just blew, just blew.  So before it blew, I was already, you know, somewhat vested in that company and then went to--then I got another opportunity 'cause--in L.A. at the--L.A. Internet at this time was just like roaring, you know, I mean things were--it was a good time to be in there, you know.  Things--Go.com, I don't know, these were like, Cars.com, like all these--Cars is still around.  Go got acquired by ESPN.  Like all this stuff, NetZero was taken out, like all this stuff--you want, you were trying to get on something that was hot before it blew.  So then, so, yeah, that was my time at eUniverse.  I enjoyed it.  I learned how to become a manager.  It was my first time really around seeing stuff like payroll and HR [Human Resources] and really managing vendors, managing clients directly, like the product partners and the assets partners.  Yeah, it was good, good little--
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now you went over to--so you were with them how long?
Speaker 2: A year and some change.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Two thousand [2000], 2001.
Story_ID: 152309
Speaker 1: So, around 2001, that's when you--
Speaker 2: Started producing?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It says here, you served as CEO for Urban Entertainment and, with [HM] Reuben Cannon and [HM] T. D. Jakes.  Is that when you--
Speaker 2: Well, the Urban Entertainment thing, I think I adjusted my bio.  I was only there for like--I have another version of bio I think I sent over.  But I was only there for about, you know, three or four months.  And the thing I really did for them was just raise money for them.  I became the CEO as a result.  I did a deal with them and Time Warner Digital, I mean--well, it was part of Time-Warner Digital.  Well, anyway, Time-Warner had a thing called the opportunity fund.  So I brokered a deal between them and Urban--I wrote Urban Entertainment's business plan and then tucked them in there and got them funded.  But the more substantial thing, so that was one of the things I did, number one.  But the more substantial thing I did was I started working with Reuben.  So Reuben was--and Reuben's great too, and I would consider him to be, you know, one of my mentors, you know, a Chicago [Illinois] guy.  And Reuben had done 'Get on the Bus.'  He was a big casting agent.  Then he produced these movies independently.  And then he raised funds, so they'd done 'Get on the Bus.'  And so now he had another script--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Spike Lee movie.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Spike Lee movie.  And he, and then his producer, Paul Gunn--yeah, Reuben has put so many people on, yeah, he's up there with [HM] Clarence [Avant] in terms of--Reuben, let's has put talent on, so much talent, executive talent.  And then Clarence has put on a lot of entrepreneurs and also talent.  But those two guys are really, you know, if you wanna just boil Hollywood down to it, there's nobody who has gone through there in any way without them.  And so Reuben really, you know, really became a mentor of mine and partner on these movies.  So basically, we--he already had a model.  He just needed a little bit of, you know, execution and so then we raised the money for 'Woman, Thou Art Loosed' for Bishop T. D. Jakes.  So first of all, I did the deal, I optioned the book 'Woman, Thou Art Loosed,' which was really a nonfiction self-help book.  But we optioned the concept which, you know, which then--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: You said it so fast.  What is that?  I remember the movie.
Speaker 2: 'Woman, Thou Art Loosed.'
Speaker 1: What is it now?
Speaker 2: 'Woman Thou Art Loosed.'  It's from a verse in the Bible, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: So it-'Woman Thou Art Loosed' was one of his big, Bishop T. D. Jakes' big sermons, and then he had these conference--these women's conferences.  So we're talking Georgia Dome [Atlanta, Georgia], fifty thousand over two nights attendance, these women's conferences.  They were called 'Woman Thou Art Loosed,' and then he had a book which it sold seven million copies, which was essentially like a self-help guide.  So then we optioned the concept.  Reuben got a, the script commissioned.  Obviously, he did all the casting, and then produced the movie for that.  So that whole--and then the money was raised independently.
Speaker 1: Now, you were able to get Oprah Winfrey for this?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, so like I said, Reuben is the one who cast Oprah Winfrey in 'The Color Purple.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Before that, he cast her in 'Brewster's Place,' ['The Women of Brewster Place' mini-series] the TV show.  So he just has all those relationships.  So the movie, he had raised a million.  He had gone back to his, his, you know, the tried and true guys.  Then he was still about 200,000 [dollars] short and then he went back to Oprah, and he got the money so we could make the movie.  Yeah, she made the, she made up the difference.  And that was the good, that was a very good experience because then we were able to do film deals, shop the movie.  It went to film festivals.  I didn't get into Sundance [Film Festival], which was a very big disappointment, but it did get in the Santa Barbara [International] Film Festival and won jury prize there.  And then FOX [Fox Entertainment Group], because of their experience with the 'Passion of the Christ,' wound up becoming a distributor on the home video side.  And then on the theatrical side, Mark Cuban has a company called Magnolia Pictures.  So Magnolia did the theatrical run.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a good movie, good experience.  But what it did do for me is, it got me into the independent productions phase.  They're very, I mean, you know, it's very hard to make these, you know, leaps when you go from corporate, then I needed to get entrepreneurial space, and then from there, you gotta get into--I was able to hop into independent production.
Story_ID: 152310
Speaker 1: Now, you become the president and CEO of Simmons Lathan [Media Group] in 2002?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So basically, so, here it came from [HM] Reuben [Cannon] again.  Reuben, we had successfully done this 'Woman Thou Art Loosed' film that I think made, it began to make some money, especially, given, you know, the nature of budget  You know, the budget was only one and some change, you know.  And it did seven theatrical, but then it sold over three million DVDs.  It was a pretty good success.  Then, so then Reuben was over, just, you know, just, you know, pure happenstance in some meeting with [HM] Stan Lathan, and they were discussing, you know, Stan was saying, well, he and [HM] Russell [Simmons] wanna, you know, figure how to grow their business, et cetera.  So then Reuben said, "Well, you should go over there and talk to Stan."  So then I went in there and talked to Stan, and then Stan was basically--Stan Lathan had his own very, very robust television directing and producing career.  And at the time, it was still going.  He was doing the Cedric the Entertainer Show, ['Cedric the Entertainer Presents'] Steve Harvey Show ['Steve Harvey'] had been going, 'Def Poetry [Jam]' had not quite geared up yet, but it looked promising that they were about to sell it, et cetera.  So he had that going.  And then Russell had the clothing company, and it was in--Stan was L.A. [Los Angeles, California], Russell was in New York [City].  He had a clothing company, etc.  So no one had really focused specifically on growing the production company, their partnership together.  So then Stan thought, well, hey, where there's like an opportunity.  It's like, we don't have money to pay you per se, you know, for this.  And I'm like, well, that's good 'cause I'm really, at this stage of my career, not looking to be working for anybody (laughter), you know, honestly.  That's not, I wouldn't come to this type of opportunity, you know, for a job.  I'm, what I'm looking for is an expansion of an opportunity.  So then, so then I said, but in order to get the--I'll go out, and I will raise the growth capital.  And then I'll be a partner, and then you've got--I'll be a partner.  I'll join as a partner with you guys.  And it was about a year, you know, and I'm going out to New York meeting with Russell and, you know, people who he thinks we should meet with.  And, you know, and I'm going out to [Washington] D.C. at this point.  I was talking to Syncom which Tony Thomas was my guy, but Herb Wilkins [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.] and [HM] Terry Jones--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So I'm talking to them about, you know, raising the funding.  So this whole process--'cause they did not wanna invest in a production company, and it's not--they're more on the cable side, media side.  They, you know, it is a speculative investment, no doubt.  So it took us about a year to get them to think that this was worth throwing some money at.  And then during the process, the year that I spent, you know, which is kind of really how I earned my partnership, was, you know, Russell was like, man--'cause they would say, all right, we'll cover your expenses for this and that.  I'm going nah, no, I got my own expenses.  Don't worry about that.  You know, and then Russell was like, "Man, you must really think you gone make some money with us," you know.  So that helped build his confidence in the prospects of it, and then I think it built confidence with Stan.  But the most important thing for me is it allowed me to go in there as a partner, you know, with very established guys, I mean, you know, established is an understatement for really how strong they've been in our field.  And so I went in there, and I had the operations expertise, so, yeah, as a partner and then president-CEO there for, you know, a good long, good long while, I mean like probably about five or six years of that.  And then in that, I created this little cable company, Hip Hop on Demand, which was a video-on-demand channel.
Story_ID: 152311
Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute.  Before we get to that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We don't wanna--I want, I want, you know, I need to ask you about the 'Def Poetry Show' [sic, 'Def Poetry Jam'] and the deal with HBO [Home Box Office]?
Speaker 2: Right, well, the deal with--so, the deal with HBO, I really can't take, you know, credit for because they had, with 'Def Comedy Jam,' they had a longstanding deal with HBO in the '80s [1980s].  So my only involvement as it related to the comedy part was, they were reissuing home video, you know.  And the home video for 'Def Comedy' just became this, you know, just this huge, monster hit, you know.  So [HM] Stan [Lathan] would ask me to, you know, just take a look at, just take a look at it and review how they were doing with that.  But that, HBO deal was very longstanding for them--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, so that happened--
Speaker 2: It predated me.
Speaker 1: --before you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that, so I say that to say, so 'Def Poetry' happened while I was there, but they had already been so deep into HBO that they could have sold them, you know, anything.  So that was really, I would say mostly Stan's relationship, mostly Stan's project, and Stan probably could have done that on his own, to be honest.  But Russell's [HM Russell Simmons] name, obviously, added value, and he had the HBO relationship too.  But, yeah, those are really their projects.  I mean, you know, without question.  You know, I would go to them and the tables, etc.  You know, I knew a lot of the artists that opened up opportunities for us as potential talent that we could deal with later, but that was from, like preexisting relationships they had.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--was, I know Julieanna [Richardson] said that there were some aspects of the HBO deal that weren't that good for, you know, Simmons Lathan [Media Group], right?  Is that true?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, well, the first deal was great because they owned it, the show.  The second deal, didn't own as much, and so it's more a backend thing.
Speaker 1: Or maybe it wasn't as good for HBO?  Maybe that's it.  I don't know.
Speaker 2: No, I think, I don't know if HBO, I don't know if any of those--'Def Poetry' actually subscribers rates (unclear).  I'm sure 'Def Comedy' did, and 'Def Comedy' is very, very lucrative still for Simmons Lathan, no doubt about it because they owned that show.  I mean any time you own a show outright, and any exploitation that happens comes directly to you and you're not on a participation, it's a beautiful thing, you know, and so--and they're pioneers in that respect in this business, definitely for African Americans.  Now, Tyler Perry--and that was the thing with Reuben, we were able to do that with Reuben Canon Productions because the shows were funded independently, and then Tyler--then when Reuben went down to Tyler Perry Productions, he took that model down there, and Tyler owns all his stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and I think for, I think HBO, I think 'Def Comedy' was great for both parties.  And 'Def Poetry' was good for both parties.  It was a different kind of show.  It wasn't as big of a hit.  It was a strong cult hit, but it--nothing beats comedy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it won the Peabody Award.
Speaker 2: And that was beautiful, and it should have because there's nothing like it on TV, now--then or now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 152312
Speaker 1: Now, so, so, so you were there--so you were there in 2005 when The HistoryMakers series--
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, no, I did that, yeah, I did, yeah, I did that.  So Payne Brown who's at Comcast was, was--told me about The HistoryMakers.  And so then I got [HM] Stan [Lathan] to sit, [HM] Russell [Simmons] to sit for, and then so we just started talking, and, you know, Julieanna [Richardson] was saying she wanted to (unclear).  I'm like, "Well, we have this little deal with this, you know, company Image Entertainment, and, you know, we could go through a select, you know, some of the bigger names in there and, you know, sign a producer to it and have them cut and edit it."  And so that's what we did.  We did at least three, maybe more.  We might have--
Speaker 1: No, it was--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --six volumes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, three, yeah, there're three.
Speaker 2: Yeah, three, but in it--but each, yeah, on 'Hope,' 'Faith' and--
Speaker 1: 'Courage' [sic, 'Success,' 'Faith' and 'Courage'].
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Courage,' 'Hope' and 'Faith,' yeah, nah, it was good.  We're proud of it.  That should have won, it should have won a Peabody [Award].  But we didn't have any broadcast.  We didn't get broadcast outlet for it.  And then it turned out later, Centric, yeah, I think it might have been Centric who--well, Centric had it on.  And now, you're saying 'Inspire,' you know, had it on.  But, yeah, no, we were proud of that little series.  And we did some screenings of it ourselves and we took it to about five or six markets.  The one with, actually, the one with [HM] Isaac Hayes in it.  And then, and then I know she would show snippets at her events, you know, from it.
Speaker 1: Right, I mean did--now, when you produce something like this, are you actually looking to the education market, I mean, you know, schools, for example, high schools (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, yes, but it's a very hard market to crack mainly because schools are in the scale game.  And here we are with this one title.  So then, so we're not gonna be back with, you know, we're not gonna be back with fifty educational, these--so if you see a series, a history series like '[America:] The Story of Us', right, so that's History Channel.  They're gonna be back all the time.  So they did that six-part--I can't remember, maybe nine-parter.  It was a beautiful series, well-produced by The History Channel and a number of titles, but The History Channel will also be back with more and more titles.  So that is being sold in the educational market.  We had basically a one-off series.  We may or may not be back with any other titles.  So it's hard for us to get in.  So we were using a distributor, Image Entertainment to try to distribute that and get that into the educational market.  Then they wound up having their own challenges, and [Robert] Bob Johnson ultimately bought them out.  And I don't know where it is now.
Speaker 1: I know I've seen the series in the Wal-Marts and, you know, other shopping venues and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we did, yeah, I mean it did, it did go retail.
Speaker 1: Yeah, retail, okay.  But unless, if you're doing educational stuff, you really have to commit yourself or dedicate yourself to doing--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there have to be specific educational distributors, you know, who can really, really take that on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then as far as the sales, I mean we were in some Wal-Mart's, but, you know, I think the thing sold like 4,500 copies.  I can't remember, but it was a very limited amount, you know, if I remember correctly.  You know, it cost us about 150 [150,000 dollars] to do, you know, between the producer and (unclear) then we had a producer (unclear) editing the whole thing.  So, I know we were under, but I left the company, you know.  I had moved on to Hip Hop on Demand before we could totally reconcile it.  I'm proud of it.  It just wasn't going to be a moneymaker.  You know, and we had the opportunity because we had this deal to produce a certain number of documentaries that--and I wanted to help her out.  I'm like, okay, yeah, we, we actually can do this.
Story_ID: 152313
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well, in 2005, you--okay, so Hip Hop on Demand started off as Def on Demand--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and why did the name change?
Speaker 2: Well, it's rights issues.  So, with-[HM] Russell [Simmons] owns Def Jam, the brand, and that's licensed out to music.  So when he sold the music company, he gave them a license for music.  But everything else outside of that, he owns that with a couple of partners.  And so any time he uses the brand, whether it's 'Def Comedy [Jam],' 'Def Poetry [Jam],' et cetera, then it goes into a pool and then he has this split with these partners.  Well, with Def on Demand, I think the thinking was, well, this is really out of Simmons Lathan [Media Group], and he wanted to do something that, where everything would basically stay into this pool.  And so if we used Def, now, we're in business with these guys.  If we come up with another name, now, you know, we're in business with the guys that we basically had signed up to do business with.  So that was the name change.  I enjoyed Def on De--I thought Def on Demand was the right brand, the right time, and we spent a year and a half on that.  And, you know, we thought it was right.  But then once it was clear that it was about to happen, once I negotiated that deal with Comcast, and with Payne Brown, it's gonna happen, then this group began to pay attention to it and had all kinds of interests and ideas in it.  So then, it was gonna become more of a, more cooks in the kitchen than probably was necessary.  So that was the reason why that we changed the name.  I still love the name Def on Demand.  I still think it would--I think in the DOD acronym, I still think that if you leave it just as a brand, and you leave out, you know, ownership interests, etc., I think, I think it would have been a beautiful name.  But as it turns out, we had to launch with something because we'd already committed to launch with Comcast in '95 [1995].  So anyway, so we spun that out of Simmons Lathan into its own company.  At that time, my son, Chase, was about to go to kindergarten, and we didn't want them to grow up in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and I said, well, Comcast is in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  The majority of people who were working on Def on Demand, DOD at the time were in New York [City], and we can do it from anywhere.  So I said, all right, we'll try Austin [Texas].  So I've been here ever since.  So then we came down here, and we had to launch by November with Comcast.  So we just launched with the acronym DOD.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause we had already said what it was.  And one of the reasons was, at the time, we wanted to be Hip--I said, well, then let's just go Hip Hop on Demand.  Let's take the category.  And we got the trademark and the whole nine, but then Comcast said they didn't want generic category names as channel titles.  There was no, there was no rhyme or reason to it.  I mean it was just kind of arbitrary decision that they said that.  So we couldn't be Hip Hop on Demand at the time.  So we were DOD.  But then, ultimately, after we started going, we were growing, and we had, started getting a lot of viewers, my relationship with them got better.  And then, ultimately, they let us just move from DOD to change the name to Hip Hop on Demand.
Story_ID: 152314
Speaker 1: Okay, and so, so what's the programming [for Hip Hop on Demand]--
Speaker 2: Nonsense for kids.  So music videos, dance battles, whatever the latest dances are, rap battles and artists interviews.  That, that is what it consists of, pretty much 90, 95 percent.  We used to do fashion shows.  We used to try to do urban culture, but the beauty of the on demand is just like the Internet business.  You know what people like, based on views.  There's no speculation.  So the things that I described are what they like on demand.
Speaker 1: So it's nonsense for kids (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean that's what I call it now.  You know, well, it's stuff that, as it, when I was in high school [at Lyndon Baines Johnson Early College High School, Austin, Texas], it's stuff that I would love because it lets me stay up on the latest dances, lets me stay up on the latest music, lets me stay up on the latest fashion.  It lets me stay up on the latest influencers, you know, the musicians and actors through the interviews.  So, and they enjoy it.
Speaker 1: So, so how much, I mean do you have to commit to producing a lot of new material or is it material you get from other social (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, in the beginning, we tried to produce a lot, but the truth is, we can't produce in the volume as well as we can acquire.  So we licensed a bunch of--so we license the majority of stuff.  And then we have DJs or hosts, you know, kind of like personalities who introduce and intro and outro the content and conduct the interviews.
Speaker 1: Well, who are some of the personalities that are--
Speaker 2: Who?  On our air?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That we interview or that we have on our air?
Speaker 1: That you have on--I mean as the host?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, like Noel Carter has been a D.J. for us a long time, Ebro [Darden], who's the station--the program manager at [WQHT] Hot 97 in New York is one of the hosts, Sarah Jay  is a host.  She's an actress.  But I usually--Noel is "go-to", and, you know, 'cause she's been doing it so long.  And then Ebro is very good, excellent.  I mean he's a pro's pro.  I mean he runs the, he runs the number one hip hop station in the country.  And then for a while there, we did a thing with Radio One for a few years where we used to have the cameras set up in, kind of like Howard Stern style, we'd have the cameras set up in their studios.  And then we would shoot as they interviewed guests.  And we did that at the stations in Baltimore [Maryland] and Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And that worked actually very well for a while, and then they started really trying to build up their own interactive arm.  And so I think they thought that they'd rather try to keep those, that content in house.
Story_ID: 152315
Speaker 1: How did the acquisition of NBCUniversal by Comcast affect the--
Speaker 2: Well, it turned out for us [Hip Hop On Demand] to be a positive, but mainly for practical reasons.  One is, I was--we have the only African American owned video-on-demand channel.  When we started, there were like five other ones.  Vibe had one, and it was called Vibe-on-Demand.  Soul Train had one, and it was Soul-Train-on Demand.  TV-One still has one, but they tried to do more, something of a peer play at the time in a competitive way.  All those have--and then there was a gospel one, but all those have since passed.  So we're the only ones who still have a video-on-demand channel.  We've been running for nine years, that's African American owned.  And as a result, and it was just us and [HM] Alfred Liggins [III].  That was, those were the only African American-owned entities on Comcast.  So they asked us would we be willing to share our experiences 'cause [HM] Maxine Waters was really pushing the diversity issue hard.  And she was, rightfully so, you know, for her to be pushing the diversity issue hard.  So then I, along with Alfred, you know, did some congressional testimony for them, just really laying out our experience.  And we kind of talked about what we thought should happen, and that was the creation of more channels.  And then as a result, you know, REVOLT [TV] was started and ASPiRE [TV], you know, came into existence with [Earvin] Magic Johnson.  And then I know there were another couple other channels that they're talking about launching.  So, and then for us, we were renewed for a second five-year deal, carriage deal.  And I will just have to say they're generally supportive.  The one thing that I felt like they could do is do ad sales on behalf of independent channels too because it's a scale game.  And right now, they do ad sales for their in house, and then we do our own sales.  But it's more or less the same inventory.  And if they sold our inventory and worked out a revenue split, I think it would be something that would help make us more viable.
Story_ID: 152316
Speaker 1: What would you like to see happen next in terms of--you said, like more, more channels and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, in the media landscape?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, positively, more channels that have a chance of getting to scale.  So you need to be in seventy - eighty million homes to consider yourself, really, say eighty million to consider yourself fully distributed as a cable channel.  Right now, there's only--there has only been and there currently is only one African American-owned channel that has ever reached full distribution, and that's BET [Black Entertainment Network].  None of these other channels have ever done it.  One of the reasons why I believe that that hasn't happened is, there's a bias on the part of the cable operators who believe that they have subscribers who don't want it.  And so to charge their subscribers for it in the form of an increased rate fee to compensate for the license fee they pay the cable channels, would be unfair.  But really, that's an argument for why they just don't wanna pay it.  They don't wanna pay the license fee which it takes for these companies to sustain themselves.  So, as a result, it's very expensive to launch a full out cable channel.  And it takes time.  The return will not be soon.  So that means you have to be very good at infrastructure, blocking, tackling in the cable industry.  And there're only a few companies that are really good at it, and that's why they own ten channels each, you know, fifteen channels each.  That's why you don't see one-off independent companies.  And so the only ones who are really the one-off independent companies are the African American-owned, a couple African American-owned channels and the couple of Hispanic-owned channels.  And it's very difficult to sustain yourself that way.  Like you always need to have management talent, executive talent.  You need to be pushing and have more distribution.  You need an increased license fee.  You need to have a sales force, all these things that you need to sustain, and that it takes talent, executive talent to sustain, well, now, I'm competing with Disney.  I'm competing with Time Warner's own channels.  I'm competing with Comcast-owned programming networks who have the ability to compete for talent more aggressively, more sustainably and to give more options of places to work within a company for that talent.  And they can deliver more scale back to the advertiser.  So these companies don't really grow more than, to become more than one channel.  So very few have ever existed, and even less grow to beyond that one channel.  And so what the cable companies need to do--and this is something that I'm gonna push for in this, right now, Comcast and Time Warner are trying to merge.  And I wanna come out more publicly and advocate for what I would consider to be something like a turnkey incubator.  And it means that there are resources within Comcast that they use to support their own independent, their own cable channels.  That infrastructure should be plugged into these minority channels that they are committed to launching.  And it would get--and charge them at the same rate that they charge the Comcast channels.  And that will ensure that they get up and that they can run and that they will be able to sustain themselves.
Speaker 1: Otherwise, we're outgunned, outnumbered and outgunned.
Speaker 2: Outnumbered and outgunned, yeah, and, yes, it's a--you're a one-man band in an 'American Idol' world, you know.  It's very hard to compete.  You're not consistently on the stage, and you're not able to get all the talent that you need to sustain and grow that business.  I mean I applaud what Comcast did because it's not always true that you get a license fee from day one when you have a cable channel.  So the minority channels that they did launch, they are paying them a license fee from day one.  But they don't have the scale distribution to attract premium advertisers and it's not clear that they have enough horsepower to break open more distribution and more markets or consumer demand--or that they can generate consumer demand.  Like if you can get consumers to say, if you don't carry my channel, I will disconnect cable, now, you have leverage, very hard for one channel to do that.  People will disconnect over the suite of ESPN channels.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: You lose ESPN, you will disconnect.  If DirecTV loses the NFL [National Football League] suite package, people will stop subscribing to DirecTV.  HBO [Home Box Office] has a suite of channels.  Well, people pay premium for HBO--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --but it would make a difference if I was deciding between cable and Dish, if you didn't have HBO.  And it's because of the scale.  TV One, am I disconnecting over TV One?  If I heard that, they would be the first.
Speaker 1: The same would be for Turner Classic Movies [TCM], maybe or some would anyway or History Channel.
Speaker 2: Well, but see, Turner goes in there with CNN.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: They go in there with TNT.  They go in there with TBS.  So you're taking Turner Classic Movies or you're not getting TNT, you know.  So that's where the scale game comes in.  You know, they have leverage.  So if, if Turner Classic Movies was on its own, you can hang it up.
Story_ID: 152317
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything on the horizon that would present a kind of opportunity that cable presented in 1978?
Speaker 2: Internet, I mean prevents--presents a much bigger opportunity.  And Netflix is the perfect example.  I mean 'House of Cards' is one of the biggest shows in popular culture, but it's only available on Netflix.  And there'll be more shows that are going to be developed that will be on Internet-only delivery.  And right now, people are trying to become that cable.  So Netflix is trying to become a cable system of the Internet.  So they have the deal with PlayStation networks.  They have the deal with X-Box Live to where they can stream directly into your gaming console and they can stream directly onto your computer.  So when I talked the work we did at News Corp, the eDirect Initiative, the goal was to plan for this future which is to--we produce a television show, and we can go to our viewers, who we have in our database and we can stream that show directly to them without having to go to the cable system or having to go through the satellite system.  But they never got on top of it 'cause if they did, then they would have bought Netflix or a piece of Netflix.
Speaker 1: So Netflix is more successful at it than--I know Hulu started a few years ago, and it was, they had some success but--
Speaker 2: Well, they have success.  I mean News--I mean so News Corp went into that partnership with Hulu to try to do that as a group.  They have success because they have a safe ad environment.  You know, everything is professionally produced and they already have incumbent relationships with sponsors, so they're--it's easy for the company who owns Fox News and the Fox Broadcast Network to go in there and sell some incremental advertising for the same shows on a high-speed platform.  But what they don't have that Netflix has is, they don't have all that consumer data about all their preferences and all their choices.  And Netflix is ahead on technology.  And Netflix has a better model because they've already gotten you to pay every month to have your credit card billed, whereas Hulu is, was mostly--they started free, and then tried to create pay walls whereas Netflix started costing you money.  So they just have a much better model, better management, more aggressive and to--when you asked about Def on Demand [later, Hip Hop On Demand], Hulu has all, had all these owners in there.  And so they hired from all these companies, some NBC, some FOX, etc.  Netflix doesn't have that problem.  It was started by Reed Hastings, one entrepreneur and his group.  And they're single minded, and they're focused.  They're publicly traded now, but they're single minded, focused and have a specific direction.  But, yeah--and they're also winning big data.  They're winning the big data battle.  The reason why Amazon thinks they have a chance, and Amazon through Fire is trying to do what Netflix is doing, which is, you know, direct down load, and they have their own TV shows.  So they're coming, and they also have big data.  So they can compete with Netflix when it comes to big data in knowing my preferences and the things that I'm most likely to like.  It's the--and that's the future.  And cable does not have big data in the same way.  The way cable is going to get it is through what they do on their high-speed access and Internet platforms.  So they need--and they're trying with Xfinity to try to get you to interact more and more with them so they can learn more of your preferences.  But the old cable subscriber model, they got your name and they got your address.  And if you're on autopay, they have your phone number and credit card.  But they don't have your whole click stream of all the movies you watch, all the TV shows, when you started, when you stopped them.  Netflix is unique in that regard with that kind of data.
Story_ID: 395517
Speaker 1: Well, my, my hope is that when Comcast takes over Time-Warner, that they do create something of this incubator where they allow new channels to share their infrastructure because right now, there are only a couple of ways to get on if you're a cable--if you wanna be a programming network or a programming channel.  And those ways are going from two to one, once Comcast acquires Time-Warner.  Otherwise, it'll be practically impossible.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, you are--I have a note here that you are considered a "thought leader."  Now, what does that mean today?
Speaker 1: Oh, I don't know.  I mean I think, I, I'm asked to come into a lot of different companies, and a lot of different groups to discuss what their issues are that they're thinking about.  So whether that's things related, with Aspen Institute, you know, I've done a lot of their, a lot of their seminars and meetings.  I've consulted every company in our space, so I've consulted, whether it's PlayStation when PlayStation was going to--PlayStation, so all this Netflix and Hulu going on to the platform, well, at any rate, I helped them come up with that strategy for how do you get content on the PS-3.  So when the PS-3 was launching, now this box had the capability to stream content.  And they beat everybody to the market on that.  And so, I helped put them together with producers to create original series on there, come up with the strategy of which, which service providers to let on the platform, you know, the Netflix and the Hulus, the Redboxes of the world.  So I helped them create that program and department, hire the people and just think that through.  I've done the same thing with production companies who wanna go into mobile, and I just recently got a call about a company that is being squeezed right now.  They're an over, they're an over-the-air broadcaster, and they have these digital channels, three digital channels, but the cable operator will only take two--only take one of the channels.  But they want the other two to be distributed too.  So they wanna come up with a strategy on "A", what do cable companies need right now that maybe we could adjust our channels to fit and they wanna figure out long-term strategies so, well, if the cable companies don't take us on, what are our opportunities on Netflix or what's our opportunity on Amazon Fire, etc.  So I think what people want--why I get these calls from people asking me to come in is because, "A", I think about all these issues like, I think if somebody looks at this interview and went through it, I mean there's probably two places where lighting up, you know, whenever I'm talking about my kids and whenever I'm talking about where my industry's going.  And so they know I'm passionate about it, and I stay on top of it.  And I'm not a publicity type person, like I'm not the, you know, I do it because I like seeing good ideas happen, not because I wanna go get the next gig or, you know, be recognized for it.  And I think CEOs in this business are under a lot of pressure.  It's a very competitive business.  It's a very high-profile business.  And finding people who are outside their company that they can trust, that don't go out and say, "Oh, this company's in a world of trouble, is something that people value."
Story_ID: 395518
Speaker 1: Okay, oaky.  Now, you advised the black ad agencies too, right?
Speaker 2: Yep.  So I have UniWorld now, yeah, so [HM] Byron Lewis, who's obviously giant in this industry, so you don't have any of the black publishers, any of the black television stations, radio stations, Byron Lewis with Uniworld was not able to go into the Burger Kings, the General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan] of the world, State Farms, Procter and Gambles [Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio].  If he couldn't get them to understand and buy into the value of the black consumer, none of what we talked about would even exists, like so, the whole MediaMakers category would be out the window because there are no radio stations.  There are no television stations.  There are radio and TV shows.  So Byron Lewis at Uniworld, you know, the industry owes a huge debt.  Well, at any rate, he retired formally, last year.  And his company was bought out by a long-time executive with him, Monique Nelson.  And so as she acquired the company, she just wanted, you know, new energy, new thinking and she had a-she, she, she had her own vision, a very strong vision about where she wants to go and what she wants to do with the company.  And, you know, just every now and then, she likes to, you know, revisit her thinking and where she needs to go with the company.  That ad agency, you know, even though a lot of black ad agencies are in trouble, that one's not.  That's a very smart agency, very young leadership and very in tuned to where media is going, you know, in the different platforms.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And the agency is historic.  I mean everything I just said about Byron is completely true, you know.  And the question becomes if you wanna become a new entrepreneur in this space, going into the future, who's gonna be your Byron Lewis?  Who's going to be that agency who's going to go in there on your behalf and tell these big brands you absolutely, positively need to be advertising on that platform.  And right now, you know, outside of Monique Nelson, the other agencies are really spots and dots.  They're really just numbers and demo, you know.  People aren't out there passionately saying, making the case in the way that they need it to in order for even a BET to happen.
Story_ID: 395519
Speaker 1: Yeah, things are changing.  Today, I just heard in the news that Jet magazine is going digital.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they've been in trouble a long time.  So, I was out there--so she was, you know, when Linda Johnson Rice, you know, took over the company [Johnson Publishing Company], we were talking--anyway, so I went out there, and she had a bunch of ideas about what she thought she could do with that company.  And, and we talked about some things and Simmons-Lathan potentially doing, you know, some of those transactions that she ultimately did with some other companies together.  And I would have been very excited about that, you know, 'cause I'm a big believer in--I love start-up, but if there's a legacy there, you wanna try to preserve that if you can, yeah.  But, you know, she still--she's still--I said, so still beautiful, you know.  It just comes down to, you know, if this group--and she has a lot of smart people out there.  She just hired, they hired a really smart chief revenue guy, a guy named Todd Brown, who I worked with before.  And he was at Comcast before.  So I feel like they'll probably be able to hang on, you know, and maybe even grow.  But they gotta move out of, probably out of print.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, they've made the step already.  They had a beauty shop owner on public radio, you know, lamenting the no Jets in the beauty shop anymore.  You know, so what's gonna happen?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and even on a ceremonial basis, you know, even in a limited distribution basis, you would like to think that you could figure that out.  And I think a big part of that, are the advertisers.  I don't think that the brand markers and brands and advertisers understand the value of cultural connection because any one advertiser could have stepped up and said, look, you were at 3.7 million, whatever your distribution was for Jet, I can subsidize a 200,000 or 300,000 volume run at these locations.  I'll sponsor that to keep that alive in the community.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--it's gonna be a loss.  I think it's not--
Speaker 2: Yes, the end of an era, and somebody should be able to go out there and to make that case.  I mean somebody--you would think that somebody could go out there and make that case.  And, but it's gotta be your life's work because it's hard, you know, because all the economic forces are really against you, you know.  All you're really doing is selling this, what they consider to be this one demographic, and they're trying to make the case "Well, I can get those same people in 'American Idol.'"  It's like, yeah, but my mind, when I'm watching 'American Idol' is a lot different from the way my mind is when I'm getting a haircut.  When I'm getting a haircut, I'm actually fairly connected to where I am.  When I'm watching "American Idol", I'm just at home, just trying to get through Monday night.  I'm in a different space all together, but somebody needs to be persuasively making that case.  And I just don't think that--we don't have enough people who are making, enough institutions making that case.  And then with the few we have, you know, it's probably a real hard battle, and some people probably get fatigued over time.
Story_ID: 395520
Speaker 1: Okay, now, are you satisfied where you are right now?  Or what are planning to do next?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not satisfied in any respect.  So where I am right now, I'm forty-three.  I have a thirteen-year old son [Chase Griffin], eleven-year old daughter [Rose Griffin] and a eight-year [sic, month] old son [Gage Griffin].  My plan was because of the way my, I--you know, once I started looking back at my history, I feel like the most important thing that I can do with my life right in through here is be a father to my children because I feel like if they can have the base and the belief and the support that I really didn't have, and, you know, to a little, to a certain extent my parents [Patricia Griffin and Rodney Griffin] before them, you know, because they came from broken situations, if we could kind of end that cycle, then that gives us the opportunity to begin to build a family.  And then all these pieces of narrative that I kind of described earlier and we've heard about our family, and we know accomplishments they had, they all can come back to a central base.  And so that was a real goal of mine, to build a family.  And so by being an entrepreneur and by doing the consulting, that gives me an opportunity to--I take my kids to school.  I pick my kids up.  I make sure they do homework.  I'm on top of their schedule.  They know where I am at all times.  I know where they are at all times.  There will never be a time, God willing, that my kids need me in any real way and not know before they ask, that I'm already on it.  And that's important to me.  So that's the most important thing that I can do.  And so I've been blessed to be able to--my wife's able to stay home.  She's a teacher.  She's an educator, but she's been able to stay, and then I've been able to work from home for the most part, you know, for the last eight years.  So my goal was to get my kids through high school on that strategy, keep my business alive, keep the consulting going.  But then we had this baby (laughter), you know, so God had other plans.  So he's eight months.  So I can't really do that for the next nineteen or twenty.  So what I really wanna do now is get funded for a company along the lines of what I described with Comcast, either grow this current--either take this current business, put it in another company, you know, in partnership with the cable entities to grow that or get funded for an independent programming venture and then partner up with a Comcast or, you know--well, Comcast would be the best one 'cause they're about to buy Time-Warner and they're unique in that respect, you know.  So that's my goal.  So I'm forty-three now.  The last company I started was when I did that growth venture with Simmons-Lathan, and I was about--I was thirty-one, thirty-two then.  So kind of run this whole cycle of companies to now.  So by the time I'm, you know, probably about forty-five.  It'll take me about a year and a half or two to raise, you know, the right amount.  And then I can spend the next forty-five to fifty-five, you know, making that kind of run along the lines I described to try to get programming ventures up to scale.  But, no, never satisfied, never satisfied, I never--I don't read enough.  I read every day.  I don't read enough, you know.  If I see somebody interesting that I hear about, I'll call 'em up.  I'll talk to 'em.  I wanna learn what they do.  I don't call enough people.  And I call people, five or six times a week, I call somebody new.  I don't go to enough conferences where thought leaders theoretically are, and I'll hit three or four a year.  Never do enough, I never feel satisfied that I'm doing enough, but, but I feel confident and I'm poised to keep plugging away.
Story_ID: 395521
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  In regarding, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything major you would do differently if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: Well, a couple of things I would do different.  One is I would be more humble as a young person.  I think I was, I was--when I was a younger person, I'm like, "I'm smart.  I have gifts.  I've capabilities.  I can do things.  I'm gonna show you that I can't be ignored or," you know, these type of things.  So I was very, acting out, demonstrative, wasted a lot of time thinking that's who I was, you know, like, you know, "Hey, I don't care if people, you know, if this rubs people the wrong way, 'cause I'm like this," you know (laughter), you just get your identity built around, hey, I'm this type of person.  I'm just one of those kind of people who, you know--so I wasted probably till my thirties (laughter) as that guy, you know.  And I like everything that I did because my competitive drive, you know, made me go after these things.  And I'm proud of all those things that I did, but the tone at which I approached everything would be totally different.  I'd be much more humble in my approach with the way I interacted with people.  And that's why I try to, you know, pass on to my kids, you know, it's possible to--everybody's not gonna like you, everybody's not gonna respect you, everybody's not gonna necessarily value you, but it is possible for you to have that kind of demeanor where people are like, man, I disagree with him.  He's not all that, but I don't have a problem with him.  You know, Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] is like that on an interpersonal basis, you know.  It's like, hey, I don't have a--I disagreement with him vehemently.  I like him personally, you know.  Well, I was one of those kids where you could agree with a hundred percent, but personally, you know, just the volume at which it was coming at you might have been, might have been a lot.  And I would have changed--I would definitely change the tone, but not the things that I've done, but definitely the tone.
Story_ID: 395522
Speaker 1: Okay, now, likewise, if you look back over the course of everything you've done to date, what do you consider to be your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't feel like I'm anywhere near, anywhere near legacy level.  I mean when we start talking about, you know, [HM] Clarence Avant and [HM] Reuben Cannon and, I mean these are guys who have helped me, you know, [HM] Russell Simmons, man, I mean these guys are just Titans.  And so I won't get to the point where I feel like I'm even in the legacy conversation until I start helping people actually get on and pursue their dreams.  You know, so like it's one thing for me to be able to make a referral, help people get jobs and, you know, and we've, I've had a lot of referrals.  A lot of people have gotten some very substantial, like, really, really meaningful jobs.  But that's something I would just do as a friend or for a fit.  It's something I would consider to be legacy.  I mean there was no reason for Clarence Avant to help me meet all those CEOs. There was reason really for Russell and [HM] Stan [Lathan] to say, just 'cause I raised the money that they would want me as a partner.  There's no reason to do that, you know, even Reuben, he had already raised, he had already funded two movies, independently, before I even showed up to do these, to do the last couple.  So he didn't need that, you know, but I think part of it--and they've said on different occasions, when they see me, they see some of, you know, some of themselves a little bit.  You know, it's like, and I know how it feels to, you know, not wanna give all your energy and talent to somebody else, but wanna to build something for yourself.  You know, those are all quality, family guys, the ones I named.  So that resonates with them.  So until I'm able to--and I want my legacy to be that I did something in a way that was important to me, and I was self reliant and autonomous and entrepreneurial and then I also created opportunities for other people to be able to do the same thing.  Until I get to that point, you know, I'm just a beneficiary from the guys who helped me.  I'm not really a legacy person who's opened enough doors for people.
Story_ID: 395523
Speaker 1: Okay, and what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, my hopes are the people who are being successful, you know, who see Obama and feel a kinship, you know, see success and feel destined for it, my hope is that those people become so successful that even if they didn't have a black consciousness, it would still benefit black people.  So I'll give you an example.  Bill Gates, with his foundation.  He has Educational Scholars Foundation, which funds a lot of African American students.  He has Guinea Worm Disease, Pneumonia Eradication, Small Pox, which is saving, HIV Initiative which is saving tens of millions of lives in Africa.  And he's the Education Initiatives.  He's not African American, but he's a person who feels like he has an obligation back to the world.  What I want is for, my hope is that enough African Americans get to that stratospheric level that just by nature of their sheer volume of wealth, that their benevolence is going to touch and help out the community because right now, Howard's gotta go ask, "Can I get a $20 million donation," you know.  NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] needs "x", "y" and "z" grant.  If somebody gets into a smallish Delta Sigma Theta scholarship fund, they need the members to kick in 20,000 [dollars] to give the $1,000 a year.  So that requires me to have some kind of consciousness and connection to these institutions in order to help.  And I feel like that consciousness is becoming more tenuous every day.  You know, these kids are growing up totally different.  They don't, they don't feel--my generation felt it less.  These kids feel it even less, the sting of the things that bind the community together, you know, the slights are fewer and further between, the visceral nature of everything.  They're growing up with a black president.  It just boggles my mind, like I'm thinking of Jesse Jackson [Rev. Jesse Jackson], but when I think president in my childhood, I only think Carter [President Jimmy Carter].  That's who I think was the--like that was my childhood president in my mind.  And Jesse Jackson was running when Reagan [President Ronald Reagan] was the president so I've given a lot of energy to Jesse Jackson in that respect.  But my kids are growing up with Obama as the president.  They're not thinking, I wanna get to--the first black president, they're not thinking about that barrier to break.  That's their president, just like Carter was my president.  So I don't know if these kids are gonna have that same consciousness.  So my hope is that we get enough people who are so stratospherically rich that even if they don't intend to, they're going to do things that help the community in a major way in the same way Bill Gates does or the Rockefeller Foundation, the--you know, that's, over a hundred years ago, that's set up, and I actually did my ethnographic (ph.) study in Harlem on a Rockefeller grant.  And that's how I was able to, the first time, live in New York.  And that's what made me think, okay, I could try Wall Street because I--at first I didn't think I would like living in New York.  I mean and just that.  And that was a $1,500 grant, based on something that started a hundred years ago, with no way in hell, John D. Rockefeller or John D. Rockefeller, Jr. had me in mind in any way, maybe not even my class--maybe not even my demo, couldn't have even, maybe not even been involved.  My race maybe not even enter into their minds.  And that created an opportunity.  So that's my hopes, that we get to wealth on that level.
Story_ID: 395524
Speaker 1: And then my biggest concern is, dads.  You know, dads, I mean there are the dads who aren't there because they shouldn't have been dads.  The value is bad, raised bad, never had a dad.  So they're not there, you know, and so that's, say half of the kids, black kids being born, not just bad dads, absent dads.  So they're gone.  Now, so 70 percent of African American kids born out of wedlock now, so half, 50 percent of 'em are this dad.  Other 20 percent are dads who probably wanna be dads, don't know how to be dads, don't realize and wanna make commitment to how much work is actually involved in that.  Hey, try to be the provider.  The provider means if no one else does it, they can always count on me doing it.  It doesn't matter what mom's doing.  I'm doing that because that's my child.  I am going to provide for my child.  And then even around here, you know, we have dads who, they got time, they got money, they have some sense.  They should know better.  They had dads, but they don't coach their kids on Saturday.  They don't come to the games.  They do--they don't do the homework with their kids.  You know, they don't need you to buy 'em stuff.  They need you to be a dad, provide, guide.  That's where it gets back to the nation, you know, you need to be on your temple, post and view.  Always be on your job if you're a dad.  And I worry about that.  And I think that the good dads are, are fewer and far between, and, and good dads don't mean rich dads.  Good dads mean a dad who's there, trying the best he can to do his job.  And that is to provide and guide for his kids.  And that's my biggest concern.  They're just not there.  And there is no ethic telling them, there's no outrage, saying, "Ew," you should not even be able to walk your head around in the community if you got kids and we know you're not taking care of 'em.  Like, you should be shunned, literally.  It ain't no, I'm not hanging out with you (laughter), no, I will not, no, we're not gonna play pickup basket--no, I'm not working with you.  You have your priorities completely out of whack.  And it's impacting, you know, my daughter more.  I'm like, "Who's my daughter marrying?"  You know, I mean, you know, she's a cute girl.  She's smart, she's got her options, you know.  But, you know, it's, it's a very sad state of affairs, and I'm not even talking about the 50 percent who are born in poverty to moms too young and out of resources.  I'm talking about people who supposedly have some sense about this, and we're just not doing a good job.  It's just not doing a good job of that.  And I saw, when President Obama came out with that initiative about a month ago and no one's asked me, probably won't ask me.  I'm thinking about writing an editorial on this and seeing if I can get it circulated.  I think that one of his issues in his post-presidential life and one of the missions of his library because his, his, his--he didn't have a dad.  His dad was not there.  And that is to teach, and it sound ridiculous to most people, but to teach boys, then young men, the obligation of fatherhood and how you execute that.  That needs to be, that needs to be taught because it's not being modeled because there're not enough guys in the, in the home.  And I, I think that should be a central part of his agenda because I think he's uniquely situated to do it.  One, for his, because of his personal narrative and, two, because of the influence and the amount of money and attention he would be able to bring to it.
Story_ID: 395525
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us something about your family, your wife and your children?
Speaker 2: Well, my wife's name is Christine Griffin.  We met when she was at Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.].  I had a friend who I went to high school with who went to Georgetown for college, and I met her, and I just, first sight, I knew that she was gonna be my wife, just on sight.  And then I was staying with him for over the weekend, and then there was a, kind of like a show or performance, and she was singing.  And I was dancing with my friend, and the name of our group was our phone number.  So anyway, the phone number to the apartment that he had leased.  So anyway, so then after that--so during the rehearsal, she came off the stage, and she looked nervous, and she asked the director, you know, the woman who organized the show, how did it sound.  And I just said, "It sounds good to me."  And then that's when, you know, we exchanged a look.  She smiled, and then the next day, she just called and left a message and said, "Hey, this is Christine."  She sang "Harlem Blue".  "I sang "Harlem Blues" in the thing.  This is for Will, you know, I know you may not get this message, but if you do, call me."  So I did, and that was 1990--oh, oh--1992--'91 [1991], yeah, '91 [1991].  So we've been together since then.  We got married in '99 [1999], but we've been together--yeah, we met in April '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she's a teacher, so she went to Georgetown.  Then she went to Columbia [University, New York City, New York] for Teachers College.  She got a master's there.  And we were in--and then she moved up to Boston [Massachusetts] when I was in [Harvard] Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], or Summerville [Massachusetts], the town right next to Cambridge [Massachusetts].  And then she moved out to L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  Then she moved to Texas, and she's still in--she's right there in the kitchen right now (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: The living room or wherever they are, yeah.  And then I have--and then we had, after we--didn't get married till we were ready to have kids.  So then we got married, and then a year later--we got married in June '99 [1999].  And then in September 2000, we had a son, Chase Griffin.  And he's just, man, he's just awesome, you know, I mean as soon as I--it took him a long time.  It was a long labor.  He was supposed to be born on September 11th, and then, but he took a long time.  He was a long labor.  So he was born on September 12th.  So the day he was born, J.P. Morgan and Chase merged.  You know, we already--we already liked the name Chase.  We were between a couple.  Then we were like, "There, it's over.  It's a wrap, you know, (laughter), his name is gonna be Chase."  And he's just awesome.  You know, as soon as I saw him, I came to grips with kind of my responsibilities.  I, love my wife.  There's no doubt about it.  And I learned to love her 'cause I wasn't, you know, really raised like that.  So I had to learn to love her.  When he showed up, it was natural, like right there.  No one had to brief me or we didn't have to work our way around to it.  I had no hesitancy.  So it made me a better husband, a better father--just I loved him right off.  And he's smart, he's even keeled like this, you know.  He doesn't get too high.  He doesn't get too low, and now, he's into, he's into sports and science.  So he's a quarterback and so he's had some success with that.  He's, he was in a commercial--that was during the NFL draft yesterday for USA Football's, "Heads Up" campaign.  He's training with a guy, George Whitfield, who's like the top trainer in the country, he got Johnny Manziel, Cam Newton, etc.  So he's been able to do a lot of work in that field.  And he's an excellent, excellent student.
Story_ID: 152327
Speaker 1: All right, now--oh, your daughter's name.  We have to talk about--
Speaker 2: So my daughter, Rosebud, so her name is Rose Elizabeth Griffin, and she's eleven and whip smart, just, just sweet, you know, just sweet, energetic, pure whip smart.  She's just awesome, (laugher) yeah, so Rose, my daughter, she's a lot of fun.  And her thing, she's into soccer, orchestra.  She says she wants to go play soccer at Stanford [University, Stanford, California].  That's where she is right now.  We, she, when she did the Stanford camp a couple of years ago.  She did, Mia Hamm, she did--had a camp back in December and then she plays for a select soccer club here.  And for some reason, she wants to be a veterinarian.  So, if she wants to, we're gonna, I mean, you know, if she continues to, you know, want that then, you know, whatever she wants to do, we're gonna support it.  But, no, she's fun.  And then I have an eight-month old son, Gage Griffin, Gage William Griffin.  And he just came last year, and he's just (laughter), every, he's made everything better.  So we were kind of on a, my daughter is going into the fifth, sixth grade, you know, cycle, where, it's like, okay.  In seven years, you know, we're thinking, you know, you start counting down, when you start seeing grade, you're thinking about grades, and, you know, kids going to college.  But then when my, when the baby was born, it changed us back to the beginning.  Now, we're counting up again.  You know, we're like back up to--so I think it probably has added some energy, you know, and vitality to our family life, really, you know, and babies obviously, man, it's just--they're just fun.  And then my hope is I get--keep my health together 'cause I'm gonna be a sixty-year old, you know, dad when he's still in high school.  So I gotta, that's an impetus to try to keep my health together and be energetic so I can be there for him.  And his brothers and sisters are great with him, and even being ten or eleven years younger, being born in 2013 as opposed to being born in 2000 or 2002, he's entering into a whole different world from the one that they entered into.  So to the extent that we can get this family foundation on the right footing, he's gonna be able to project--my kids already passed me, and I say that because they value things that are important that I didn't realize were important until my thirties.  They value them already, so like if we go out there, and we have a verse a month.  So every month you gotta memorize a verse.  It's only a little whiteboard on the stairs.  So on their way up, you know, and so they gotta recite these, you know, they gotta recite these verses.  I went to, you know, be baptized when I was--it was around twelve.  My sister [Elizabeth Bert] went, and I felt it, so then I went up and got.  And then my son, when he was like eight or nine, he just came in from the youth church, and they said, "Chase wants to be baptized."  And I'm like, "Do you know what that means?" you know--"Well, yes.  I wanna be with Jesus," you know, and he goes into this whole, you know, explanation as to why he wanted to be--you know, and he knew that young, you know, and my daughter, my daughter accepted Christ young, and they come home.  They do their homework immediately.  My daughter does her homework in the car on the way home, like they just hop on the right thing just by instinct, you know.  That's just their instinct to do the right thing and to get it done, and they're very, very good with people, very good manners, nice with people empathic.  I mean they get that from my wife [Christine Griffin].  I mean that's just how--my wife is totally different from--my wife is similar to my grandmother [Lillian Seaton] in a lot of respects.  She's a teacher.  You know, when she talks, you know, you can hear her.  You almost feel like she's talking to a child, but you don't feel offended by it, you know (laughter).  She's saying things in a way that are totally acceptable to you, and that you understand them, and she's trying to get a read on how you feel emotionally about what's going on.  You know, and she's a love person.  You know, she's just a love being, you know, and I was, I hadn't been--I had not been around that, you know, before.  And I knew--my whole thing about her when I saw her is like, I'm gonna marry her, and we're gonna have kids 'cause I thought she would just be a fantastic mom, you know.  And it turned out, you know, she's a better mom than I thought because I had no appreciation for all the things that go into parenting.  So once I realized all the things that go into parenting, I'm like, man, I'm I didn't have a checklist 'cause I would have left all this stuff off and got the wrong person, you know.  So, and she's perfect for all that.  So I've been very, very, very blessed in that respect.  Beyond, way beyond, you know, measure.
Story_ID: 152328
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we have not discussed or we need to talk about or bring up before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: A couple of my--a couple of things I'm proud of?  Is that your last question?
Speaker 1: Well, sure.  No, that's not the last question, but go on.  Is there something else that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, you know, when I graduated from Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], I went--or maybe I could talk about it in the picture.  Well, anyway, when I graduated from Harvard Law School, I gave the commencement graduation speech, and I was very excited about that 'cause I was the student body president [at Lyndon Baines Johnson Early College High School, Austin, Texas], and the student body president normally gives the commencement speech in high school.  And then when that went sideways, I didn't get to give it.  And then at Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire], I was, I had won this, the best oratory competition, you know, as a speech contest, and then usually that guy, if he's a senior, is usually the senior orator, but I lost that on a vote to a guy who actually wound up going to law school.  So I was (unclear) bummed by that.  But then when we got to Harvard, and it was time to graduate--I know it seems like a silly thing to some people, you know, but, you know, for a guy who gives speeches, you know, being able to give the speech at graduation is pretty much the biggest kind of at-school speech you can give.  And then so they had a--they actually, Harvard did it a little differently.  They had a competition for that, and I wound up winning that.  And then I went, and I gave the speech, and it was my mom [Patricia Seaton Griffin]--and this is probably--my mom, dad [Rodney Griffin], one of my grandmothers came, and my grandfather [Orville Seaton] just kind of passed, so this was about, you know, so I dedicated a little bit of it to him.  And it's twenty-four thousand people out there, and, you know, it's Harvard's graduation, so, you know, C-SPAN and then the whole nine, and I killed it.  You know, it just, killed it.  And my mom, I just--I'll never forget this.  She was like, I--and she's sitting next--so here's my mom sitting next to the governor, Governor Weld, William Weld, who became like the ambassador to Mexico.  He's like Mayflower Harvard, you know, his--they're eight generations, you know, from the very beginning, Weld Hall, like founded--and here's Weld, my mom, my wife [Christine Griffin], my girlfriend, you know, at the time, wife now, and my sister [Elizabeth Bert].  And so my mom, afterwards, you know, she wanted to--she just said, "I never--I always heard about Harvard graduations, but I never thought I would be at one."  And I mean I said two things, and I just told her, I said, "Well, you're here now, you know, you're in the front, you're in the VIP seats, at one now."  And it just said two things to me, you know, one is, she didn't have a lot of expectations for me.  And, two, it--she probably didn't realize how much power she had in order to shape the life she wanted, you know.  It, it wouldn't, you didn't have to rely on something, circumstances and events to do something for you, but you could have done something to those circumstances and event.  You had more power and capability than you thought, and you had more influence than you thought too, because you are here, and you do have a kid here, and, and you did do it.  So you should feel--don't, don't have an out-of-body experience about this.  This is part of what you were, you were sent here to be doing.
Story_ID: 152329
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, my mom [Patricia Seaton Griffin] passed recently, you know, so I was, I have been thinking about that question as it relates to her, you know, like really feeling like I hope she realizes, like how important her life was and how much she meant to, how much she meant to us, you know, as we weren't a very expressive family, you know.  So I just wanted to make sure she knew that.  And so I was just kind of looking at my kids 'cause when your parents go, even if you're not really close--and it hit me, this is--even when--I wouldn't say we were like really close.  There was love there, but, you know, it wasn't that--I didn't talk to my mom every day type of relationship.  But when she died, it shocked me to the permanence of the fact that she won't be driving her little car down that driveway.  We won't be getting these little notes.  My kids won't be getting these Easter baskets, like, all--she's just not--and any petty issues we had, all that's gone, like none of that mattered.  And so the way I really wanna be remembered is really by my kids that my dad believed in us, my dad provided for us, and we were able to do the same for our family and then go out and help other people too, because he did that.  That's how I really, really wanna be remembered.  I have goals, you know, which is kind of what I said about the Bill Gates wealthy and foundations to help people think their way through, how to do all--I have those kind of goals.  But when it just comes down to it, when I was walking that cemetery [Arlington National Cemetery, Arlington, Virginia], I'm like, well, maybe John F. Kennedy because of the eternal flame, maybe there are some--and there may be, I'd say probably two dozen gravesites, you know, in America where people actually go by a large number, and they actually go there and they reflect on that person's life and what their legacy means to them.  Maybe, you know, down at--that's only happened to me at two places, or people that I didn't know personally.  The King Center [Martin Luther King, Jr. National Historic Site, Atlanta, Georgia] really hit me because the bodies are right there, you know, you literally can just walk right there to them.  And it was at night that I first went to go see [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.], so there I really felt something when I was at the King Center, when he was there.  And then John F. Kennedy, I didn't go there and feel, like really reflect on his life when I was there.  It felt somewhat touristy, you know.  But when I went to my mom's grave, I really felt something, and I really felt, okay, I want her to know, you know, her life meant something.  And I wanna make sure that my kids can feel that way about me, you know, when my time passes.  And I think that's the most important thing definitely to me.
