Story_ID: 624063
Speaker 1: So, my name is Julieanna Richardson, I'm the interviewer, and Scott Stearns is the videographer and observing today are Patrick Charles [ph.] and Hannah Richardson Simmons.  So I, I'd like to start out, we just start out by slating the interview, so I want you to state your name and spell it for us including if there's a middle, I don't think there is.  And I also want you to give your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay.  [HistoryMaker] Theaster Gates, T-H-E-A-S-T-E-R, G-A-T-E-S, Jr.  August 28th, 1973, Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: And I'd like to have our location and today's date?
Speaker 2: I don't know today's date.
Speaker 1: It is, that's how I feel, August 5th.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Fourth.
Speaker 1: Fourth.
Speaker 2: Fourth.
Speaker 1: Let me turn this off too, sorry.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: It's August 4th, 2014.  We're at my studio, which is at 7200 South Kimbark [Avenue] on Chicago's South Side [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: And I'd like to have your occupation?
Speaker 1: I'm an artist and I'm a professor at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] in the Department of Visual Arts.
Story_ID: 624064
Speaker 1: And we ask five People magazine-ish questions, just short answers, your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Sushi.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Kyoto [Japan].
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Right on.
Story_ID: 624065
Speaker 1: I wanna start out, you know, I wanna ask you about your name first and I'm sure you're asked about your name, but I, can you tell the origin of your name? You're a junior?
Speaker 2: It's my dad's name.  Theaster was apparently a gender neutral name that floated around the South.  Some say that it was originated from a British name Thester without the a, and that in Greek it means star of God.
Speaker 1: Now can we talk about your father, you know, give his name and what the year of his birth and what you know about his, his background?
Speaker 2: Yes.  So my dad, Theaster Gates, Sr., is still living.  He's seventy-nine years old.  He was born in Silver City, no Yazoo City, Mississippi and grew up in Yazoo City 'til about thirteen.  At about thirteen, he was pretty good in the fields and there was a gentleman in Silver City, Mississippi with the name Gates, I'm sorry, Allen and my dad started to work for Mr. Allen managing, at that time, Mr. Allen owned these cotton fields, he's, my [maternal] grandfather and they planted cotton, soy, corn, livestock and for another couple years my dad managed Mr. Allen's farm.  Met my mom [Lorine Allen Gates], fell in love and my dad was seventeen, my mom was fifteen.  They decided that they would leave Silver City and move from Silver City to St. Louis [Missouri] for a year and then made it to the West Side [Chicago, Illinois].  By the time my mom arrived, my dad was eighteen, she was sixteen, and she was with my first sister, Almarine [ph.].
Speaker 1: Did your father share any stories of growing up or being in Silver City, did he share any stories with you or do you know the grandparents, his father?
Speaker 2: My father's father's name was Shag Gates [ph.].  Shag also spent a fair amount of time in Silver City and then I think it was after my dad moved to Chicago [Illinois] that he brought my grandfather and grandmother to Chicago.  My mom's parents, Mary [Mary Allen (ph.)], and I can't think of my grandfather's name, but my mom's mom, you know, they're pretty much a matriarch family and it was, it was my grandmother who actually managed the grounds in Silver City and, and kind of, you know, kept the thirteen of them, my mom and her siblings a pretty tight unit.  So growing up I spent all of my summers traveling back by car to Silver City and Yazoo City to see family and yeah, I think a lot of my kind of ethic is born out of a southern mentality, much more than it is maybe my life as a young person growing up in Chicago.
Story_ID: 624066
Speaker 1: So a southern tradition in many ways, very steeped in the South.  So, your mother, can you give her name and her year of birth, and what you know about her background?
Speaker 2: Lorine Allen [Lorine Allen Gates], she was born in '37 [1937].
Speaker 1: It is Lor--
Speaker 2: I-N-E Allen.  And my mom was, you know, again Silver City [Mississippi].  She was pretty sharp, pretty ambitious person, and so when my dad [Theaster Gates, Sr.] offered a chance to go north, she was the first sibling in the South to, to take the leap and was one of the younger kids in the clan.  And so I think it was a really ambitious move on her part to move.  She came here and I'm the ninth of nine children, so she cared, cared for a family and worked for Westinghouse Corporation [Westinghouse Electric Corporation] for a number of years before I was born.  By the time I was born, she was a nursery school teacher and was my nursery school teacher.  She passed in 2011.
Speaker 1: So did your mother talk, share any stories of, of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well I mean she shared stories but she, you know, I also got to kind of see the house that she grew up in and be a part of that.  Then, when she talked about, the stories that I remember most were stories about her childhood with my Uncle Hubbard [ph.] and my aunt, my Aunt Red [ph.] and her Uncle Charles Van [ph.] or her brother Charles Van, my uncle, and just like kind of the, the network of what it meant to be a family in the South.  She talked a lot about hard work and then I saw that hard work demonstrated a lot and kind of participated in that.  But as I was growing, it was, it was already thirty years since she had been gone from the South.  And so what the farm had been, it was kind of becoming, you know, small farming in the South was changing.  These large corporation farms were growing and in some cases, smaller farmers were being paid not, not to farm.  That I remember very clear a vivid story about there being a ghost in, in the house where she was, where she had grown up, and it was the ghost of her grandfather.  And late at night you could hear him walking and that, that over the years, my family just became really, really comfortable with his presence.  I feel like so, so many other stories were stories about the kind of rel- relationship between things you see and things you don't see.  The kind of real and the lived experience and the eternal.  My mom was a fairly, kind of avid believer and it was just kind of fascinating to ha- to grow up understanding that there's this other dimension of the world that, you know, for poor people kind of was the thing that was the lifesaver for her existence that, that faith was really important and one's capacity to believe was the thing that would help you get from meal to the next, let alone one rent to the next, one more mortgage to the next, one car note to the next, that there's this kind of real, kind of belief based that lead to practical outcomes.  And I just remember anecdotes around just having to trust, trust God for rain, for crop, for the resources necessary to get by.  And just I feel like I got the very tail end of a very deep and unique kind of spiritual existence that feels really kind of absent today.
Story_ID: 624067
Speaker 1: Theaster [HistoryMaker Theaster Gates], you said you participated in life on the farm, what were your chor- what were you expected to do?
Speaker 2: Yes so, so I grew up on the West Side in the '80s [1980s].  West Side of Chicago [Illinois] when I was growing up was a pretty rough place and I think going south was about a few things.  It was about getting me out of the city, it was the time when my friends were being inducted into the Vice Lords or the Disciples, or Black P. Stones [Black P. Stone Nation].  But it was also about kind of like learning what, yes sir, meant, you didn't say, "Yes, sir," it's like, (pronunciation) sir.  I remember when I was very, very young it was, it was little stuff like helping my aunt shuck peas and shuck corn, and like and, and shell peas.  As I got older, I went to the fields which meant, you know, you wake up at 6:30 in the morning, you have an amazingly big breakfast with my Aunt Red's [ph.] biscuits and her eggs and sausage.  And you know, the eggs were like, you know, found that morning or the afternoon before.  Often it was we, you know, weeding cotton, so it's like, you know, chopping cotton.  May- maybe people understand that as different things, but it's essentially us caring for these bulbs, you know, in their infantile state and watching out for rattlesnakes.  And we would do that every day from 7:30 'til 4 or 4:30.  In the middle of the day a truck would come with sandwiches and more water.  And you would just labor in the fields, you know, and, and I don't know what the acreage is, maybe around four hundred acres of planted things, but it was, it was just kind of this vastness of black land ownership.  And I remember just my Uncle Hubbard [ph.], he would drive around in his old pickup and everybody knew him, and he was the respected kind of patriarch of the town.  And so when we would pull bushels of corn to take to Clarksdale [Mississippi] or to, to Belzoni [Mississippi], you know, they kind of expected his truck and he would make his rounds and we would sell these bushels of corn, and then he always had ten or fifteen bushels that were for folk who couldn't afford to buy corn.  And it was like one of those early moments where I saw what abundance looked like and how generosity was shared in real practical ways.  That when it's, when it's agriculture when it's just like, you know, it's like the early ways, you realize that like oh wow, you know, if we don't eat these tomatoes they'll go bad.  But it's like we planted a lot of tomatoes and we can be really generous with them.  So it was this direct relationship between labor and generosity, and I feel like in some ways that's really been a big part of my artistic practice.
Story_ID: 624068
Speaker 1: So Theaster [HistoryMaker Theaster Gates], I wanna take you to the West Side of Chicago [Illinois] now.  What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: The earliest memory was like a, it was a birthday party for me.  I was two, there were a gang of people around.  There was a spoon in my hair that was like my favorite spoon, and my dad [Theaster Gates, Sr.] who then was, you know, he was a builder, really muscular guy, him you know kind of like that 'Roots' moment where he's like throwing me up above his head.  And the reason I remember this moment so well is that as I got older, they would pull out these old pictures.  My mom [Lorine Allen Gates] would pull out these pictures and there I was with this Pamper and this spoon in my hair and my dad.  It's like I remember the first time seeing it and then recalling, you know, maybe I was ten when I saw it.  But I remember a lot of Afros (laughter), you know, and I remember like Aretha Franklin's presence (laughter) in the house.
Speaker 1: Musically?
Speaker 2: Yeah musically in the house.  And you know, people like The Platters and The Chi-Lites.  Like there's this, it was cool, like Saturday mornings, it was like okay Marvin Gaye and Sunday morning was Mahalia Jackson, you know.  There, there were these like really interesting codes that are just kind of around you musically.  I remember my sisters being like, a lot of ways, on the West Side, there was, the house was so big or it seemed so big at the time, and there were so many people there that there was just no reason to leave the house.  And I never realized that they were maybe protecting me from things that were outside, but it was more just like house of love where everything you needed was in this world and family was, you know, was everything you had and everything you needed.  And so my sisters say that I wasn't really raised by anyone, I was just kind of like bumping between them.  And I feel that way. I was like given a tremendous amount of freedom to just be weird and kind of do my thing. It was great.
Story_ID: 624069
Speaker 1: So who are your, give your siblings and birth order, their names?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Almarine [ph.], Glenda [ph.], Gertrude [Gertrude Gates], Robbie--Robin [Robin Gates], Larissa [ph.], Vernette [Vernette Gates], Lynette [Lynette Gates], Carey, Carey Lee [Carey Gates].
Speaker 1: So, so you're the only boy?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then me.
Speaker 1: So you, it took, it took nine--
Speaker 2: Eight, eight, eight kids.
Speaker 1: Eight, eight kids and nine tries to get it right, your father [Theaster Gates, Sr.].  My father gave up after four (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah you know I think when I was born my, my mom [Lorine Allen Gates] was thirty-eight, my dad was forty, and my next eldest sister, there was seven years between us.  And so I think they had stopped with eight girls and then I was a happy accident.  But yeah, it is, it made for a very interesting childhood (laughter) of just like, not only, not only the gender dynamics which were interesting, but just feeling like I was part of an old world way of thinking about family size and what family meant.  And that this new world of two kids or 1.5 kids per family, that, that I was just on the brink of something very old and a very, a very different way of regarding family.
Story_ID: 624070
Speaker 1: Do you remember where the house, the address of the house, Theaster [HistoryMaker Theaster Gates], that you grew up in, what's the address?
Speaker 2: 701 North Harding was the four flat, and then 726 North Harding Avenue [Chicago, Illinois] was the two flat that my, my dad [Theaster Gates, Sr.] bought maybe in my teens, maybe earlier around twelve.
Speaker 1: So describe family life.  You were des- starting to describe some of it, but describe, you know, you're talking about life in the household, can you describe it a little bit more?
Speaker 2: Well, so again it, it's a matriarch.  My dad, my dad went to work.  He worked for a company called Jero Products [ph.], they made refrigeration parts, and he made motors.  Extremely crafty brother to have had a sixth grade education.  My mom [Lorine Allen Gates] had near high- completed near high school by the time she left.  She was a freshman in high school and then did correspondence courses when she was young in the city.  In my dad's absence in working every day two or three jobs and then being an entrepreneur and a land- you know, building's owner, my mom and my sisters really kind of like held down the fort.  They, they made the laws, they enforced the laws and they kept a pretty tight ship.  So, you know, folk had chores.  I mean they ran it like we were in the far- like we were on the farm in Mississippi.  In growing into that, by the, like I said, by the time I was of age, ten or twelve, I already had sisters that were thirty and out of the house.  And so we, we lived in this four flat building and so my eld- my older sisters they had their own apartments downstairs and then the smaller kids all had an apartment, and then my mom and dad lived in one wing.  And it was like, this was like our mansion, you know.  It was just a four unit building that my dad had bought from a Russian Jewish family that was like the last family on the block to leave the block.  They held out for a long time, they held out.  But when they met my dad, the, the gentleman offered my dad the building for what was twenty-two thousand dollars, maybe in 1975 or so.  And it was already below the value of the building, but I remember that it, it took my parents, you know, almost twenty years to pay off the twenty-two thousand dollars in part because of interest, but in part because we were just getting by.  But it was our mansion.  And so I'd bump around to Glenda's [ph.] apartment downstairs or Almarine's [ph.], and there we, my nieces were around, there were always things to do.  It, it really was a kind of world.  And then the basement, my dad over time and my mom were extremely entrepreneurial so they had like pinball machines in the basement that they would like, you know, open up this little candy shop to the neighborhood and you know, we sold snowballs in the summer and, and I kind of just grew up around like industrious people, you know.  It was also the time when there were federal programs that helped, you know, young mothers go to nursing school.  There were grants, the Pell Grant was still an active way to help a person get from high school to college, and four of my sisters benefited from Pell Grant funding.  And, and it's so interesting to think about like kind of where the state of private funding for schooling is, but those Pell Grants meant that four of my sisters became science and healthcare pract- practitioners.  All in their own way, but, but because of, because I had a you, a sister who struggled with diabetes, home healthcare became a kind of strand of care of in our family.  And so four of my sisters are still practicing healthcare technicians.  So there was this kind of like combination of like God, science, entrepreneurship, you know, culture, like it was kind of all in there.  And, and I could just kind of, you know, see it all, understand it all.  I, I was often, you know, somebody had to babysit me 'cause my mom was working.  So would end up at the, at Triton College [River Grove, Illinois] and then Rosary College, which became Dominican [Dominican University, River Forest, Illinois] and so it was like, you know, starting to see at a very young age the worlds outside of the West Side, you know, in these kind of long commutes from Chi- from Chicago Avenue and Pulaski [Road] to Forest Park [Illinois] or Oak Park [Illinois].  It seemed like a journey that would never end.  You know, but it's really cool.
Speaker 1: But you're seeing other things too, other, other looks and feels of different neighborhoods, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Story_ID: 624071
Speaker 1: Now Theaster [HistoryMaker Theaster Gates], I want you to, take you back to that, you're, you're neighborhood and I want you to tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of your growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights.  Well there was the Golden Dome at Garfield Park [Chicago, Illinois] and the conservatory [Garfield Park Conservatory, Chicago, Illinois] which were kind of early monuments for me.  I didn't know who Frederick Law Olmstead was when I was a young person, or Jens Jensen, but these, these folk that were kind of planning these large plots of land to be set aside for green space.  I grew up, you know, and I fell like the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] was one of the places where one of the most beautiful co- you know, conservatory spaces was made in the country.  I remember that being very important.  I can remember Ray's [ph.].  Ray was an entrepreneur who owned a grocery store in the neighborhood.  He sold cut meats and cold cuts, and I just remember being fascinated by like this meat slicer and like how thin you could get cheddar cheese, you know, it's just like, just like, you know, and that they could shave ham that was like paper thin.  I remember Ray was better than everyone else.  He would freeze the ham so that he could get a better slice and he had all these, like all of these tactics.  And just remember from very early on being kind of fascinated by like machinery and like, like hand ability.  Like your ability to manipulate a machine to do something that you need done that's like out of the blue or just by necessity.  So those sights of like, you know, kind of these big monuments, and then, you know, my dad [Theaster Gates, Sr.] had this tire shop at one point and it was like this tire shop it was like the local club, you know.  There'd be music playing.  And then my, my Uncle Calvin [ph.], my dad and you know, whoever, whatever man locally that didn't wanna be at the pool hall would come over to my dad's tire shop.  And it was just a spot where men who were underemployed could go and still have dignity and change a tire every once in a while or give advice on a car, and those things were really important.  In addition to owning the grocery store, Ray also owned Tweety's [ph.] which was like the local burger spot, and you could go to Tweety's again, whatever you needed.  And then next, I remember next door to Tweety's was like the first Chinese restaurant I'd ever seen, and then Tweety's was a little nervous because like now all these black people were eating egg foo young, I'm like what's egg foo young, it's like, my sister loved this stuff.  Anyway I was a shrimp fried rice guy.  But there'd be these moments where like things were the fabric of the neighborhood were starting to shift and it was interesting.  But I could smell Ray's, Tweety's cheeseburgers coming from down the street.  Sights and sounds.  You know, I grew up with a fairly religious upbringing and the deal was I could go skating at Hot Wheels [Hot Wheels Roller Rink, Chicago, Illinois] on Saturday if I went to church the, the Sunday prior, and that if I would miss church, I couldn't go skating.  So I never missed church, because roller skating was a really big part in my life.  And so I remember early on just these, both in Chicago [Illinois] and in Mississippi wailing, just like kind of Deacon Bond [ph.], this guy who had the most amazing prayer song that he would sing every Sunday, and Sister Dyson [ph.] and Reverend Dyson [ph.].  Sister Dyson was our organist who smoked a lot, and so her voice was extremely raspy.  But she could sing 'Take Me to the Water' like nobody.  And I think the sounds part of my life was so much about not only hearing gospel music, but kind of being, being transformed, having the capacity to transform a situation or an environment with your voice, like it was like, it was not just singing.  And so I, I can remember, you know, like growing up and kind of there was a senior choir and then there's junior choir, I became part of the junior choir, became a choir director, became minister of music [at New Cedar Grove Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois], all with a gift that seemed marginal relative to the folk around me, but with no less enthusiasm.  So gospel music became really important.  There's a, there's a church, the Reverend Milton Brunson and the Thompson Community Singers, they were on Central Avenue [Christ Tabernacle Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois], we would go there every third Sunday for the Tommy's musical.  That was a good time.
Story_ID: 624072
Speaker 1: So when you, take us back to the church.  Do you remember some of the wailing that, can you sort of recreate those sounds right now for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so what was the first in the, after Sunday school before church, there was consecration.  Consecration was when all of the members of the church, more the adults, but almost everyone would come to the back of the church and they would sing.  They were Dr. Watts hymns [Isaac Watts], and it was like that moment felt like some kind of secret society, some kind of sacred order that was really about remembering.  And it was--usually oh maybe Sister Dyson [ph.], the church matriarch who would grumble (singing), "Oh, I love Lord, He heard my cry" ['I Love the Lord, He Heard My Cry'].  And then (singing), "I, I, I, I love the Lord.  He heard my cry."  And it was like so low, it was like so--(singing), "Pity my every groan."  And like I remember just as a very young person just kind of being caught up in this like from one voice to this like orchestra of harmonies and wails, and then as the, as the Dr. Watts would go on, it would turn to a hum (hums) and then someone would wail out (singing), "At the name of Jesus, we have victory" ['In the Name of Jesus'].  And then folk would go for it again (singing), "At the name of Jesus, oh, we have victory."  And I was always kind of curious about like who, who would, who would wail first or like was there a permission that needed to be granted or whatever.  And I can remember being around twelve or thirteen and feeling like I needed to lead a call that, that we had gotten to this point and I had this feeling in my stomach and it was like just sing it, and I didn't do it.  And then the next Sunday came and I, I just wanted to sing that song.  And then like a few Sundays later, I, it just happened and then I, I opened my mouth.  You know, I said you know, I, I don't remember which phrase it was, maybe it was (singing), "I was glad this morning to see the rising sun, sun."  And I can remember like, like all these people, like just kind of like with wails and smiles and like more loud then I'd ever heard kind of responding to me saying this and I was glad this morning.  And that kind of affirmation, you know, different from a, "You did a good job today kid," or it was something about this kind of deep vocal, spiritual affirmation.  That was the beginning of forging my interest in music and, and my in kind of a long term engagement with the power of sound, the power of gospel music, the power within one's body to, to change the nature of the day or to change the hearts of man to, you know, it was like there was a power that was much more complicated than the song itself or, or, or the influence that one person could have on another by saying something.
Story_ID: 624073
Speaker 1: So let me ask you, 'cause Theaster [HistoryMaker Theaster Gates] a lot of that, I mean you're raised in a very, you know, a tradition of the church that a truly Baptist, this is Baptist church, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, Missionary Baptist (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Missionary Baptist church, of course.  So what was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: New Cedar Grove Missionary Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: And how large of church was it Theaster?  How many members you think?
Speaker 2: Maybe seventy-five.
Speaker 1: So this is a really small, 'cause we have lots of churches?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, this was, this was, it was storefront, but not on a commercial street.  It was like in a residential neighborhood but it was the commercial floor, the first floor of a multiunit building.  And yeah, it was just a little storefront.
Speaker 1: And who, so how active were your, your, your family in that church?  How many people from your chu- your family were going?
Speaker 2: My mom [Lorine Allen Gates] and all my siblings went through the church up until their adulthood.  It was our, it was our home church and it was four blocks away from the house.  And maybe fifteen to twenty members of my family were there for a congregation of seventy-five to 100, not all coming at the same time.
Speaker 1: Now what about your, your father [Theaster Gates, Sr.], did, was he attending church?
Speaker 2: Not, not when I was young.  My dad was, my mom was the believer and my dad watched Westerns on Sunday.  And he would, my dad was really very practical and, and for him the failures of religion were very evident and he was quick to point them out.  And, and the failures of man were evident.  And so it was like this great balance of like my mom who is a total believer and she was on the, the maybe the pas- she was pas- she was president of the pastor's aid, and there's my dad who was like, "Why y'all give that man all your money?"  You know, and he's kind of like this kind of other black logic voice, you know.  Now he's a deacon at, at his church.  But I think that it took seventy years in order for him to imagine that he needed a, a regular religious experience to complement what was always a deeply humanistic, deeply rooted human values kind of guy that it, that while he wasn't en- he wasn't, he wasn't a nonbeliever, he, I wouldn't call him quite a believer but I think these days God plays a, the church and religious duty plays a bigger role for him then it did when I was young.
Story_ID: 624074
Speaker 1: So your progress for the ch- choir, you had said you eventually became--
Speaker 2: Minister of music by the time, sure.
Speaker 1: So what, what, what ages are these, I'm just trying to establish the chronology?
Speaker 2: Maybe I joined the choir when I was eleven, twelve, became--
Speaker 1: So it would be like 1982, '83 [1983], right?
Speaker 2: When I got to high school, which was '87 [1987] to '91 [1991], I was choir director [at New Cedar Grove Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] and was also president of the choir at Lane Tech [Lane Technical College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois] where I went to high school, and choir director there.  Those years were really important years for gospel music and contemporary gospel music was extremely potent and there was a lot of innovation around what that sound sounded like.  There's, you know, the great stuff coming out of Detroit [Michigan] and you had Commissioned and The Winans, and you had these kind of like this emergence of a kind of black gospel sound that was also crossing over into popular music.  That stuff was really interesting and important.  So through high school I was choir director and then when I got to college, did my undergrad at Iowa State [Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa].  I was kind of lead choir director, for a time minister of music.
Speaker 1: At, at your church or in Iowa (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Iowa.
Story_ID: 624075
Speaker 1: So the, the thing that I, I want to understand about the belief system that is coming out of the church, what are you learning, what, yeah, what belief system is coming out of the church?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, to, to be, to be frank, I found that I liked Sunday school more than I liked church.  I liked Sunday school because there was a guy there named Brother Frank Holten.  Frank Holten, I didn't know this until I was an adult, but Frank worked for the Chicago Transit Authority, he was like a logistics guy.  And he was a deacon at my church, but he also was just an astute Bible teacher.  And it was Brother Holten who just showed me, he kind of illuminated Old Testament.  He was an Old Testament scholar and just really smart, and I kind of found myself wanting, wanting to know more about Bible stories because of the way he taught.  Then I found myself being really keenly interested in studying Bible.  Church service was an emotional service.  It was, it was a cathartic service that was more focused on the stories of doing right and kind of anecdotal qualities of Christ more than it was about rigorous examination of biblical text.  And that, by the time I got to high- maybe even earlier than high school [Lane Technical College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois], seventh, eighth grade, I had lots of questions about creation, about trans- all of the trans- transfixation [sic. transfiguration], the, the, the, the kind of miracle stories.  What the Pauline letters (background noise).  It's my art studio.
Speaker 1: Right, okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: People make noise sometimes.  Would you give me one second?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISSCUSSION)
Speaker 2: So growing up, Frank Holten was kind of like a big mentor of mine.  And he, he had a way of taking very complicated questions about the truth of the Old Testament or the truth of the miracles of Christ and making them stories that could help me suspend the importance of whether or not Christ walked on water to get to this kind of real value based in this allegorical narrative, this beautiful narrative.  And in that way, I started to read the Bible differently, both, both believing fully in the possibility of the miracle, but also kind of knowing how miracle was really just one's capacity to believe long enough that a thing could happen that without belief, the thing would never happen.  Or that, that if Lazarus was dead and one didn't attempt because they said, "Oh Lazarus is dead," then the action could never happen, but if one might tarry long enough with Lazarus then at least the possibility of his life could happen because I tried.  And that, that, when I would think about my future faith, what I'm finding is that so much of the work that I do in neighborhoods has to do with my belief that a miracle is inevitable, and that something grand and great could happen if I work hard enough at it.
Story_ID: 624076
Speaker 1: What is the young Theaster [HistoryMaker Theaster Gates], and I'm talking about let's say seven, eight years old.  What is the young Theaster like, and what is he thinking--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in many ways?
Speaker 2: You know, if we were to kind of take a different route than faith, the school that I went to on the West Side was a school called Richard Wright Elementary [Richard Wright Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  At third grade, I had good reading and comprehension scores.  I scored fifth grade scores.  Fourth grade, seventh grade scores.  By fifth grade, I was being offered invitations to go to other magnet schools around the city.  It's when the city's busing programming was really strong.  I was invited to go to Reilly Elementary [Frank W. Reilly Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] at fifth grade and I, I had a feeling that if I went to this white school up north that things, I would have a better education and then I would have access to a better high school then or high school which was my local high school or Westinghouse [Westinghouse Area Vocational High School, Chicago, Illinois] or Marshall [John Marshall Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois].  And I had an appetite for learning, you know, I was, I was good in reading and math.  I was better at reading and, and, and I wanted to be challenged.  So I think that, that my mom [Lorine Allen Gates] made sure that there were books around and I read them.  And I had like a stock of Encyclopedia Britannica.  But it was really this moment when I had to make a decision to, to stay at my local elementary school or to get bused.  That the idea of being bused was actually like exciting at the time, it was like I get to go to a different place every day, a different neighborhood.  I get to interact with these different people.  It was a bit of a privilege to be asked and that only a few number of people in my neighborhood would be on that bus with me and we'd all take that ride together.  What I found over time was that in addition to me getting a better education, that the busing system actually merited these schools that we would go to more money because we were like the smarter kids.  And that those schools also got money for our attendance every day.  That, that our leaving the local school actually meant those schools lost, not only lost money, they lost multiple kinds of money, and that these other schools, the good white schools up north which were really just normal neighborhood schools ended up benefiting from like the top 10 percent of the black community.  And so while we had opportunities like the Negro Leagues, it also meant that eventually Richard Wright failed, eventually Westinghouse failed because the, the folk who excelled were constantly exiting and, and I think that it was, it was in that moment of kind of early academic curiosity that I was questioning not only systems of school or where did crack [crack cocaine] come from, but I was also asking how do miracles work.  And you know, what are these narratives and what do they mean.  And I was asking pretty hard questions pretty early on.
Story_ID: 624077
Speaker 1: So what is Reilly [Frank W. Reilly Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] like when you arrive?
Speaker 2: It's a, it's eighty- 1984, Care Free Curl just came out with the rejuvenator and the booster, right, so I could take my curls and you know, get this booster and make them pop again.  When I would play basketball, I could throw my curls and I had a body wave, comb it, slick it back and then in the back it would shake.  They were different times.  My Care Free curl was an anomaly at Reilly and Dennis Miller [ph.], the first white bully that I met was quick to point out my monkeyness and also my grease monkeyness maybe that first day I had to deal with Dennis Miller.  My lips have been the same size since I was twelve, so they were very big on my little face and Dennis had a lot to say about that.  But I remember there being one kind of experience where it was like a kind of slow acculturizing that I remember spending time thinking should I cut my hair, should I not have this Care Free Curl, should I dress like them, should I talk like them.  Should I try to tighten my lips so they weren't as big so that they could be thin like them?  There was all of that stuff that happens for varying minority communities when they feel like they've confronted a majority community.  But the beauty of Reilly was that I was able to confront that stuff pretty early on in age and kind of like work through it.  And what it meant was that I just had, you know, Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] talks about it in different ways.  Baldwin [James Baldwin] talks about this kind of double consciousness.  You know, this capacity to move comfortably in the world no matter what the world is.  So I think those first few years were difficult on the social side and they were amazing on the kind of academic and, and spiritual sides that at the same time that this stuff was happening while I was trying to decide whether or not I should keep my Care Free curl I was also becoming part of a pretty strong network of creative musicians in the gospel scene, that house music was becoming a thing that I was quick to follow trends and try to create trends.  And, and so fashion had this interesting way of being in my life.  At Reilly and then at Lane Tech [Lane Technical College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois] I would meet people and we'd go away for the summer and come back, and they'd ask where did I go and I'd say I went to Mississippi, and they had gone to Paris [France] or they had seen family in England or they had been to Disney World [Walt Disney World Resort, Orlando, Florida] or there were like all these other things that were happening.  And I was like, I wanna do some of that stuff.  You know, and, and at that point I realized that I was also rubbing up against like class and class values, and like say the family vacation that we took was a very different kind of family vacation that, then my white peers took.  But it was like all this kind of grand opening of possibility, and I wanted to understand it all, you know.  So that by the time I got to Lane Tech, I felt comfortable moving in a lot of different worlds, interacting with a lot of different people, but also I felt like my, my values and my vision for what the world could look like was much broader than my house or my block or the city.
Story_ID: 624078
Speaker 1: So let me as- at Reilly [Frank W. Reilly Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], where's Reilly located?
Speaker 2: It's on, it's just off Belmont [Avenue] and Lawndale [Avenue]--
Speaker 1: Was it--
Speaker 2: --Northwest (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) okay, Belmont and Lawndale. Okay.
Speaker 2: So I'd take the Pulaski bus from Chicago [Avenue] to Addison [Street] or Belmont, then go west five or six blocks to Lawndale.
Speaker 1: Was it a magnet school?
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: It was a magnet school, okay, 'cause now, I mean that's really before the big advent of the charter schools that happened?
Speaker 2: In fact, they may not even called themselves a magnet school, even though they were acting as a magnet.  They were a community school that had, that, that, that was busing, you know.
Speaker 1: So how many kids were bused with you, Theaster [HistoryMaker Theaster Gates]? Do you or how many black kids were in the--?
Speaker 2: Fro- we would all meet at Richard Wright [Richard Wright Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] in the morning.  There were maybe seventy-five kids on five different buses going to five different schools.  And we really did represent the best, the best of East Garfield Park [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: So were the kids, were they all aspirational like you?  Did, do you know how many?
Speaker 2: Some were much more aspirational.  I mean there were kids who were, you know, still like a little bit thuggish, but were like great at math.  You know like Mark Rogers [ph.], this dude was a whiz, he just got caught up.  You know, so by the time, by eighth grade our lives looked really different.  And then, you know, at eighth grade we had to decide do we go to the local high school or do we wanna continue to aspire.  So that was an interesting moment where like say out of the seventy-five of us who were bused, maybe thirty to thirty-five of us decided to go to Schurz [Carl Schurz High School, Chicago, Illinois], Madonna [Madonna High School, Chicago, Illinois], Lane Tech [Lane Technical College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois], Simeon [Simeon High School; Simeon Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois], like North Side schools where at the time think Gordon, Gordon Tech [Gordon Technical High School; DePaul College Prep, Chicago, Illinois] things were a little bit better.  But yeah, you know, when I reflect on it, it was a, it was a substantial number of high achievers.  And the only way that you would get the letter is that you were performing at least two years above, if not three years above your grade average.
Story_ID: 624079
Speaker 1: And Lane Tech [Lane Technical College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois], so the, these schools you also have to test into, right?
Speaker 2: You, you, your Iowa scores dictated your standing, and so the comps from your scores would, would determine.  It was usually a letter of invitation and note back saying I'm interested.  They would test us once we got in just to see our aptitude and, and whether or not we would go into honors programs and so.
Speaker 1: So what was the school, what was Lane Tech like back then, you know, because these are technical schools that I don't even know the history of them, but they were established.  And it's always, we have a lot of interviews, you know, it's hard for people, you know, to get in, but how, what is the racial composition at the time that you come into?
Speaker 2: By, by '87 [1987] well Lane Tech had been an all-boys school and I think that in the, in the earlier '80s [1980s] it became mixed.  By '87 [1987], it was probably still 45 percent white and then or maybe, maybe even 45 to 60 percent white, then 10 percent Hispanic, 10 percent Asian, 10 percent black, and then other, right.  That, that it felt like a rich mix of people partly because like there was a Mexican table, then there was a Puerto Rican table, and there was a black table, and you know, you could see all and then kind of whiteness just would like disappear into like the background of things, you know.  But you know it was also a place where, you know, for a time I was interested in sports and, and you, it, it was the moment when more complicated racial mixing could happen.  So we had friends, you know, I had my first real solid white friends that are still, in some cases, friends to this day because, because there was a mix and because we were mixing.  You know, we were hanging out together, you know, spending time up north, you know, going to Century mall [Century Shopping Centre, Chicago, Illinois] watching movies.  I don't know whatever high school kids did, it was great, you know.
Story_ID: 624080
Speaker 1: You talk about the things that were influencing you, so I wanna go to some of the things you mentioned.  You mentioned house music, so who's influencing you, who are you looking up to in the house music scene because?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, so at the same time that, that this gospel thing is growing, this house thing is growing.  And what I'm finding is that there's a large queer community in, in the gospel scene.  They're, they're queer, but they're like closet queer, bisexual, homosexual, right, in a hell and fire and brimstone environment, right.  And then house music becomes this kind of like quiet escape where these highly creative, highly deeply in tuned, hugely effeminate men, men and women, can kind of escape into the other world where, where there's permission to, to be their private selves.  At the advent of house music, I was still a young guy, I was like twelve, thirteen, but it had a fashion consequence, like Bugle Boys [Bugle Boy Company; Bugle Boy Industries Inc.] and Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company] sweatshirts, and British Knight [British Knights] shoes, and you know, like all these things.  But it was this kind of interesting moment where I would see the transgression of these, these men who were in the church, but had, but they had fashion rules as if they lived in the house world.  They had these huge flowy pants.  They had these particular kinds of hairstyles that even though I wasn't old enough yet to go to the Bismarck Hotel [Kimpton Hotel Allegro, Chicago, Illinois] or go to the Congress Hotel [Congress Plaza Hotel, Chicago, Illinois], or go to the Power Plant [Chicago, Illinois] or the Warehouse [Chicago, Illinois], that I was aware of Jamie Principle, [HistoryMaker] Frankie Knuckles, Ron Trent, Ron Hardy, Farley "Jackmaster" Funk [Farley Keith].  And that there were these things happening on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] in the Masonic halls that were like these huge house parties.  And I grew up watching the West Siders around me and some of these, these choir directors and lead soloists of these churches watching them in this kind of complicated, it, it feels like the kind of a new jack of a Ray Charles that's like, like I know gospel as a form, I'm gonna flip that form towards something that talks about these other things that are on my mind, you know.  And I, and I saw house music do, do that and provide that escape.  By the time I was fifteen or sixteen, I was a little bigger, I had facial hair earlier and I could like slide into the Bismarck Hotel and I, and I was kind of maybe second or third wave of a generations of young creatives that would be influenced by this music and, and by the style that grew out of, out of this black phenomenon.
Story_ID: 624081
Speaker 1: I want to explore this the, the juxtaposition of, of the church life and can we, 'cause we've, we've, the church life that is gay, queer, you call queer, that life and what's happening there and with the music because who are the people coming into the gospel scene at this point?  You, you just talked about people coming in and it seems to becoming more secular, but who are the people you're following, what is the music that you are looking at?
Speaker 2: Right, so maybe some of these names will fail me, but I'm thinking about the first time that I went to Cosmopolitan House of Prayer [Cosmopolitan Church of Prayer, Chicago, Illinois].  And Daryl Coley was in concert, important gospel soloist come, Minister Bishop [ph.].  That there's something about Daryl Coley's presence, his sound, his voice that, you know, that one made him legend, but also seemed to attract just, it created a wave of style, a way of singing.  And I remember being in Cosmopolitan and Cosmopolitan had a reputation for, yeah I'm thinking so much about the Pentecostal church and it's almost difficult to talk about.  But there was, but there was like such fiercely feminine male presence.  Wasn't always necessarily gay, it was, it was, you know, it's, it was a generation of men raised by women.  It was a religion that didn't offer a way out while God was offering ways of understanding.  It was like completely unforgiving and forgiving.  And the, the way that you could see the sincerity of this, to me, feminine evocation of God was through the shout, through the wailing.  Through, through the presence of the Holy Ghost these men would lose it.  And when they would lose it, all gender normative values would be given up.  And it was actually really for, for a young guy who, I mean I wouldn't have known that I was heterosexual, but for a young guy who's heterosexual, I mean I didn't, you know, maybe I didn't think about gender much at ten, eleven, twelve; fifteen, sixteen I was thinking about gender and why I was feminine and how having sisters impacted, just how I acted, not what I thought.  That it was, it was in this place where I saw not only the complexities of God, I saw the complexities of people, kind of behavioral complexity and maybe even behavioral acceptance.  And so it was really like in this period of fourteen to seventeen that gender construction, how, how a man acts, who a man is, how, how a man acts in relationship to who he is, that those things were like they were just wonderfully complicated to, to try to sort through and I think in the same way that I talk about the complexities of race and double consciousness.  There was a moment where my understanding of gender, I felt, was much more complicated than my peers who acted male, acted manly, but so much so that they actually never kind of dealt with gender normative things, they just kind of accepted gender- gender norms.  Yeah, so, so it was interesting to see the flamboyance presence among black men like, the you know, the dress, the style that it, that it was reminiscent of a earlier time, you know, the black dignity '20s [1920s], teens [1910s], when, when there were stakes around how you look and what you say and how you talk and stuff.  And so I feel like I, I got a little bit of that, got a little bit of that generosity of gender and some clarity around what it means to be a per- a person in the world, a man in the world, and what that can look like and how, how those values which are maybe my mom's [Lorine Allen Gates] values.  How feminine values move through a male body.  How feminism, how politics might, might force us to imagine manliness differently than the way my dad [Theaster Gates, Sr.] was a man or the way my grandfather was a man.
Story_ID: 624082
Speaker 1: But you're also very influenced by women growing up, you know both in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Completely.
Speaker 1: Totally.
Speaker 2: I mean that's what I'm saying, that there's a way in which--
Speaker 1: But how did you negotiate it?  That's what I'm trying to understand, how are you working through these issues.  You know, you're, you're saying you're, you're affected by house music.  A lot of the people leading church choirs are maybe, you know, they could be homosexual, they could be what, I'm not su- you know, they're, so how are you deciding who Theaster [HistoryMaker Theaster Gates] is becoming in some respect (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was really exciting to, to kind of think through.  Like say I remember there was a fashion show at Lane Tech [Lane Technical College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois] and Miss Schubert [ph.] who was a seamstress and she made all of the, all of the pants for the house guys on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois].  Her son was a part of this group called the Acid Heads [ph.] and Miss Schubert, I mean she was great.  She made these big pants.  I went to her and I said, "Hey Miss Schubert, I found this lime green rayon gauze and I wanna make some bellbottoms out of this, out of this rayon gauze."  And she said, "Okay," and, "I want, I want a two inch cuff," and there was a place, there was a place on Wabash [Avenue] called Mystel's Warehouse [ph.], Mystel's Warehouse.  And Mystel sold high end men's clothes at, for discount prices, right.  It was like before T.J. Maxx [TJX Companies, Inc.].  And Mystel's had this cashmere orange Bill Robinson sweater.  I didn't know what cashmere was at the time, but I thought this orange cashmere with my lime green bellbottoms and my Peter Pan Kenneth Cole shoes would be the most amazing outfit for this fashion fair happening at Lane Tech.  When I put the combination on, yeah I was running track I was kind of more fit version of myself.  Things hugged just so.  There was a gold zipper that was an exposed zipper, and that I, that when I put it on I felt good, I felt manly, but I was looking in the mirror realizing that, that what I was looking at was maybe also mimicking my sisters or, or, or creating a kind of hybrid dress that is somewhere between costume and flamboyance and femininity in my heterosexual body, heterosexual brain that I thought that I was wearing it for women, but maybe even wearing it like a woman, right.  And that those things, they just seemed kind of natural.  Now there were moments where a brother on the track team would look at the lime green bellbottoms and think, Theaster, you really gonna wear that dog? You know.  And then I'd be confronted with West Side, like 'cause I'm a we- I mean I could kind of, West Side, there's a way, there were codes around these things.  And I was ready to defend the lime green decision, right.  And I think that just kind of carried through, that there was a way in which I was so impressed with how my sisters reared me and who they were that I was willing to carry their presence in my body.  Now there would be times where my brother-in-law would call it my, my wrists seemed broken or like I stood like my sisters or I put my hand on my hip, but those were just mannerisms, but my brother-in-laws were quick to point it out.  But I didn't really feel like I had to give that up to be, to be a certain kind of man and feel like I had to give up, and that, that I started to understand pretty early on that, that sexual preference and gender were different things, you know.  And that it, like I said, it meant that I had to deal with it maybe sooner than others did.  But by digging all the way and then you know, over the years people just asking, "Like what's your sexual persuasion? What's your sexual interests? What's your," you know.  Just being confronted with that, you realize like oh you start to forge a way of thinking and then after a while it, it just becomes part of the rich complexity of, of being that, yeah for any guy being raised by eight, eight sisters, or any guy being raised by two very dominant sisters, you know, that, that there's a way in which the question of gender is something that you have to deal with and it was like, it was really a great pleasure 'cause I feel like now the way that I'm a man is wholly informed by that stuff and it, and it feels right and good.
