Story_ID: 50097
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Excuse me, my name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer, Scott Stearns is the videographer, and I'd like you to start out your name and spelling it for us, including middle, middle name.
Speaker 2: Excuse me, excuse me, I just realized I had all that ice cream, that's gonna cause, can I, can we stop and I can get some water?
Speaker 1: You want, can we get--
Speaker 2: Hold on, don't, don't--
Speaker 1: You're wired now.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: But, but, you know it's a different game.
Speaker 2: Now I want you to start out by stating your full name and spelling it for us.
Speaker 1: It's Frank Greene, and that's F-R-A-N-K, G-R-E-E-N-E.
Speaker 2: So you have a middle name?
Speaker 1: S as in Sullivan, my middle name is Sullivan, and I'm a junior.
Speaker 2: And I'd like to have your date of birth.
Speaker 1: October 19th, 1938.
Speaker 2: And today's date?
Speaker 1: March 31st, 2002.
Speaker 2: And our location?
Speaker 1: We're in Palo Alto, California.
Speaker 2: And the address?
Speaker 1: 542 Emerson street.
Speaker 2: And, I'd like to have your profession.
Speaker 1: Venture capital.
Story_ID: 50098
Speaker 1: And, I always ask five questions of people that are sort of--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --"People Magazine"-ish, they're short answers.  I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: That's a good question, I just like food in general, mostly.
Speaker 1: Is that true, food in general?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I just like, it's funny I'm just having a mental block on it, but when I think, cause when I think, there's no, I think fish is probably, fish is probably good.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring time.
Speaker 1: Favorite, vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Any place where I can ski.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: It's upon, based upon, what Confucius said, "To give a man a fish, is to feed him for a day, to teach a man to fish, is to feed him for a lifetime."
Speaker 1: You know we have all kinds of different sayings, I think we could like have a book of sayings (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: By the time we're finished, seriously.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), you're right.
Speaker 1: I haven't heard a repeat yet.
Speaker 2: Okay--
Story_ID: 50099
Speaker 1: Anyway, I'd like to start out by asking you about your father.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And, you're a junior, and I want you tell us about his background--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And his growing up.
Speaker 2: Well, my father was born in Augusta, Georgia in 1909, he went through high school there, and left there in the '30's [1930s], to go to Washington, D.C.  And by the way my grandfather who I never met and my father used to tell me about him, was probably the first entrepreneur in the family.  He had his own blacksmith business, and, had his own wagon and would go from farm to farm, shoeing horses and, doing other kinds of blacksmith work.  And, maybe that's where I got this, bug to become an entrepreneur, but at any rate, the rest of the story about my father is that he went to Washington D.C. in the '30's [1930s], went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  Was able to graduate from Howard in the '30's [1930s] at the time when not a lot of people had money.  He started working part time at the Federal Government, one of his jobs was with the Bureau of Printing and Engraving, and, then off then later and got a Master's at Howard in the late '30's [1930s].  'Cause he always told the story of Ralph Bunche, as one, one of his instructors which is just, really one of his heroes, back in those days.  He and my mother [Olivia Swygert Greene] god married, in the, about, you know it was also kind of, kind of about mid to late '30's [1930s], and we were all living in Washington, D.C. at the time, then later, she, she also was working when World War Two started, for the Federal Government, he moved from the Bureau of Printing and Engraving to the Army Corps' of Engineers, and in the mid '40's [1940s], his job was transferred to Saint Louis, Missouri, or near Saint Louis, where he would have started working for the Army of Materiel Command.  And, he did that, he did that for the Federal Government for about forty years, in his, kind of the last ten years, he was a logistics analyst, and his major job at that time was, making sure they had adequate spare parts for the helicopters over in the Vietnam War, before he retired.  And then he retired and he live about 20 years after that, he died in his mid-80's.  And at that time, we were all, he was still in Saint Louis, which is where I had grown up a good part of my life.
Speaker 1: In Saint Louis?
Speaker 2: In Saint Louis.
Story_ID: 50100
Speaker 1: Now, can you tell me about your mother [Olivia Swygert Greene] and her background?
Speaker 2: My mother, had gone to teachers college, she never finished, we had, when she, you know, when she stared having a family, she stayed home for the first couple years. And then when the war started she got a job, as secretary in administrative assisting.  And I think it was also for the Army, yeah it was, it was also for part of the Army at that time.  But, most of the time she, she worked through my younger childhood, and then when we moved to Saint Louis [Missouri] in the mid '40's [1940s], she stopped working.
Speaker 1: Do you, know how she got to Washington D.C.?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm sorry, my mother was born in, in Columbia, South Carolina, and she was, well both my mother and father were in large families, my mother had six sisters and two brothers, and her whole family, her father had passed away, and her whole family moved to Washington D.C., and, also in the '30's [1930s].  And, but you know I never met my mother's, my grandmother or grandfather, on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: But on your...
Speaker 2: On my father's side
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--(simultaneous) you knew your grandfather (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I didn't know my grandfather, but I knew my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: She was still alive when, 'cause he had died, I think by the time I was born.  But I knew my grandmother, I actually knew my grandmother pretty well.
Speaker 1: What, in, within the birth order your siblings?
Speaker 2: Let's see, I have a dau--I have a sister, who is passed away.  And I think that you have some of that information on that.  Her name was Carol, Carolyn, and a brother who is a Radiologist in, he lives in Morristown, just outside of, outside of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Story_ID: 50101
Speaker 1: Now, tell me what your earliest memory is of growing up.
Speaker 2: Well growing up in Washington, D.C., which, I mean, it was, I have a couple kinds of memories.  I was born in 1938, World War Two started in 1941, but on the other hand, in a lot of ways it started before that, because of the threat of German U-boat attacks, and what have you.  And being in Washington, D.C., we tended to have blackouts, and the thing I remember about that period is that we'd have these blackouts, and you'd have rationings, and, you never, I mean, it was a certain amount of fear, because you never knew whether the city was really going to get attacked, even though it never, nothing, you know, nothing really ever happened, but the thought of that kind of got, caused a lot of nervousness, to say the least.  It was a very, very segregated place, to live, I remember that, on the other hand, being part of a very active family, there was plenty of social life, and so, we never felt the problems of that kind of segregation.  Both my mother and my father were able to, able to, do pretty well in their careers, and so, I mean, we always felt like we had enough money to live, so you know we, we felt pretty secure, about, you know, the economic situation that we were in.
Story_ID: 50102
Speaker 1: Now, describe family life.
Speaker 2: Family life, back in those early days--
Speaker 1: No, in your family.
Speaker 2: You mean in the early days?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean in the early days, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well we were living, we had a house on Kenilworth Ave, which was in Northeastern Washington [D.C.].  I can remember my sister and I playing out, outback sometimes, we were near a little creek, and we'd go out and we'd pick blackberries.  Often, there was a lot of visits, among our, all my aunt and uncles, matter of fact my cousin, who is, who is about my age, a little bit younger, she probably not like, not like it if I talked about her age so much, a little bit younger, still lives in Washington [D.C.], and we used to see, see them them, a couple of my cousins, darn near every day.  As we were staying over at their house part of the time after school.  So we had a very, and then also just a lot of family get-togethers so it was a very active kind of family. The whole time that I can remember living in Washington, until I was--I think we left there in 1947.
Speaker 1: You say active, are you saying that like there were a lot of people coming and going, or that you were active as a family doing things?
Speaker 2: Both.  Well I mean it was get-togethers, I mean we tended to do things together, my mother was always organizing things for us to do as a family.  Well, I mean other than the fact that we might have been in school, and a few other little details like that, you know.
Story_ID: 50103
Speaker 1: Now, I want you to take yourself back to your early days, and I want to ask you, what sights, you know, what smells, or sounds remind you of your childhood.
Speaker 2: Well, I kind of remember, and that's why I said I kind of remember the blackberries, that we used to pick, behind, the house, that we had that was on this creek.  We used to have great family dinners, it was a lot of good cooks in our family, and so, as a matter of fact, even in those later years, my mother would try to feed me more than I wanted to eat, so, I mean I just remember a lot of good food.  A lot of 'gettin together and doing things.
Story_ID: 50104
Speaker 1: Now, are you the oldest--
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: That's what I thought, okay. So, you, your father's [Frank Greene] namesake, and I'm just wondering was there always a sense you know that you, you know were the oldest and was it instilled in you, or was it was a certain type of responsibility?
Speaker 2: I mean, probably. I mean no one ever came up and said, you know, you're the oldest and therefore you are the most responsible.  I mean, not, not in those young days, but as, as things started to happen, I mean, you know, as people start to pass away and you begin to realize, what it really means to be the oldest.
Speaker 1: Now, what was, what was the young Frank Greene like; were you shy, were you, you know, were you inquisitive, were you, I mean were you rambunctious, were you talkative, I mean what were you like?
Speaker 2: Actually I was like all those things, I mean I  was shy on one hand, I mean my sister would say, she'd say, if she were still alive, she would have said I terrorized her, um, my cousin will tell you that, I used terrorize both of them, doing different things to them.  I think I was in inquisitive about things, I enjoyed finding out about things, I liked to build things with erector sets and that kind of stuff. I usually--I did pretty well in school, so I, you know, enjoyed school.
Story_ID: 50105
Speaker 1: Now school, what was your elementary school?
Speaker 2: I went to elementary school in Washington, D.C., actually, it was called Smothers School at the time, and then when we went to St. Louis [Missouri], I went to an elementary school called Cole School.
Speaker 1: Now what were your, how old were you when you moved to, St. Louis.?
Speaker 2: I was nine.
Speaker 1: Nine, okay. So, do you remember anything about Smothers School?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do. I mean it was a, a, it was a, back, I'm just trying to think how to, that neighborhood, you know even though it, was an all-black neighborhood, we probably would have called it a middle class neighborhood today. And so, I mean, and I'm saying that because there was really, you know, it always felt, and probably would even say that today, is that, it was just good core teaching values, I mean, it was important to you know, you learn, and you, if you, you start to act out, I remember one teacher in particular who had this long stick that was flexible, and she could reach it darn near across the room, and one time I know she caught me and another friend of mine, doing something, and she came, she walked out of the room and came back, and we just got a, a you know, a spanking, you know right there on the spot, and I began to appreciate the value of corporal punishment, which I think we are missing in our schools today.
Speaker 1: Now, was there anything, you started school at what, at age five, or age six, or--
Speaker 2: Probably, I don't know, five I guess.
Story_ID: 50106
Speaker 1: And, so when you moved to Saint Louis do you remember how you felt about that whole thing, 'cause it does, the reason why I'm asking this is cause you said in Washington [D.C.], very active life, people coming and going--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Lot's of family around--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum.
Speaker 1: And, and now you, you know, you are you know up and up lifted and moved to a totally new and totally different city.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean there was a lot of turmoil in the family, I mean my father's [Frank Greene] job was getting transferred, it was almost like if he didn't take that transfer, he was either going to have to get a demotion, or maybe, I don't know if he would have gotten fired, or it would have been a demotion.  My mother [Olivia Swygert Greene] was not anxious to move at all, and she made that pretty clear.  On the other hand, to me it was kind of adventure, it was kind of like doing something different, and so, you know, so given all that context, it's like, you know, I don't know why thought it would be something like neat to do, but I mean personally it was just, kind of like, you know, doing something different, and I kind of enjoyed that part of it.
Story_ID: 50107
Speaker 1: So what, what was the St. Louis [Missouri] part that you found, what was it like?
Speaker 2: Well, St. Louis was a, it was, I mean St. Louis was, and actually moving from Washington, because we had the family who you know kind of insulated us, a lot of the, the segregation aspects of the city, moving to Saint Louis became much more apparent that we were in a segregated city.  We lived in all black neighborhoods, went to all black schools, but on the other hand, we found, you now, I had some friends that I still have, even today.  I started to make friends, in St. Louis, and so I felt, I mean to me, it was a pretty hospitable place, it wasn't a hostile place, and, luckily my mother [Olivia Swygert Greene] was working at the time, so we found a lady who was, who used to take care of us during the day after school, and I think she made a, and her name was Ms. Robinson, and I know she made, you know, I think a big difference.
Speaker 1: In, in what way?
Speaker 2: I mean it was kind of a nurturing, kind of a caring environment, that we'd come to, and you know it kind of felt like we weren't just being abandoned as kids, sort of like, kind of like, those so called latchkey kids today, you now, I don't think that we ever felt that way.
Speaker 1: So, she was cooking, she had food waiting (unclear)--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: She cooking, yeah, right and, just kind of like, a caring, kind of a person, nurturing kind of a person.
Story_ID: 50108
Speaker 1: And, what school were you going to then?
Speaker 2: This was called Cole School [St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 1: And did it differ dramatically from Smothers [Smothers School, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Yea, it was in a sense more like what you'd call inner city school, I mean, we had gangs, I remember the second day of the first week I was there, I was, I didn't know anybody yet, and, and one of the school bullies, was thumping me in the, I was sitting in the back of the cafeteria with my back to the line, it went right past me, and this, this school bully, was--I think he was pretty well known to be one of the tough guys, and he started thumping me on the back of the head.  And I just jumped up, I got so mad, I just jumped up and hit him, I guess I must have bloodied his nose, but at any rate, something happened, and I guess I surprised, I actually surprised myself, but he never, but he never bothered me anymore, but you know, I later became a member of the, one of the lunch time gangs.
Speaker 1: You did?
Speaker 2: I mean it's like, by the way, being in a gang back in those days is not like being in a gang today, it  was like we'd go around, you know we'd hit each other on the arm and the shoulder and so, I can remember Sam Sheppard (ph.) was the leader of this particular gang.  But I mean, no, nobody I mean got violently hurt or anything like that.
Speaker 1: But it, was it--
Speaker 2: But, it's kind of part of your, I mean, it was part of your social outlet, I mean you become one, I mean you had to become part of one group or the other.
Speaker 1: Now, what other things were forming you around this time, was it, you know, as a younger person?  You know, age nine and up, what, what are the things influencing you--
Speaker 2: Well, I mean at that time, you know, I'm, pursuing, you know, I've always been inquisitive about things, you know, that's something I probably learned from my father [Frank Greene], I mean he always stressed academics, and you know, finding out about stuff, and learning about things, and finding out about things, and learning about life.  And so, in doing well in school, and it was kind of taken for granted, you know, that we were all going to go to college, and so, you know, you have to, you know, make sure you're staying on that course.
Story_ID: 50109
Speaker 1: And did, did you feel at any early age that you had, what was, what did you gravitate to?  Did you gravitate to math and science, did you gravitate to English, I mean, what--
Speaker 2: Well, I tended to gravitate toward math and science from a very early age, those tended to be things of interest to me, well it was also subjects that I did pretty well without having to do a lot of work in.
Speaker 1: And why were they of interest to you?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a good question, you know, I mean it's just, I just, I just seem to always be that way, I just never thought about, about why.
Speaker 1: And, so were there teachers that influenced you in, now did you from Cole School, was that an elementary--
Speaker 2: That was an elementary school, right.
Speaker 1: And, then did elementary go up to, did you have a middle school, or did it go up to eighth grade, or--
Speaker 2: It went to, it was, it went up to eighth grade and then in high school, when I went to high school, they had split the high school into two parts, they had a, kind of a first year school, but it wasn't, but it wasn't, typically a junior high because, you know, you'd already start the last year of elementary school.  And so, I've gone to this first year high school, and then, the next three years I went to, I went to the kind of regular high school.  Which in St. Louis [Missouri] is pretty well known, it's called the Sumner High School.
Speaker 1: And why is it pretty well known?
Speaker 2: Because a lot of graduates, Grace Bumbry, a graduate there, Dick Gregory was a, graduate from Saint Louis, I mean from Sumner High School.  Actually, it had some outstanding teachers which I, which I, came to find out in later years, for example, we had a, we actually had a, tennis team, back in, now this was back in the '50's [1950s].  It was probably the only black high school in that time that had a tennis team, and the coach at that time, later coached, oh come on what's the, the tennis--
Speaker 1: Oh, Arthur Ashe?
Speaker 2: Ash, Arthur Ashe went to that high school, for a couple years doing, during that, during that, you know, it was, you know those, those years, to be, to be coached by the same person.
Story_ID: 50110
Speaker 1: And, were there, that's what I'm, were there any teachers that you know, either in the math or science area that you know were influencing you?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. You know I can remember, I mean there were teachers like, a fellow by the name Buckner (ph.), he was, he was an algebra teacher. I mean we had, we had chemistry, I'm trying to think of the chemistry teacher's name.  I mean they were, they were, really demanding teachers, and, especially Buckner, yeah, I don't know why I can't think of the chemistry teacher's name, we had physics, we had a number of teachers who had PhDs, and they were just generally, and then, fortunately for me, we had a,  part of a the, I was part of a, they didn't formally call it a tracking system, but they did have a tracking system, so, I was able to get into the whatever the, the academic oriented track was, so, you know, I got into classes where mostly kids were college bound.
Story_ID: 50111
Speaker 1: And, do you have a sense at that point that you wanted to go into engineering?
Speaker 2: Not until my last year.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you think, what were you sort of dreaming about?
Speaker 2: Well you know, I wasn't sort of dreaming about, I was just trying to get through high school [Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] (laughs), you know, I mean, and, in terms of, what I wanted to do as a career.  And so it was about the last year when you heard people saying well okay, you know, lets figure out where you, what do you want to major in, because it's kind of assumed you'll go to college, I said well I think I'll be, I think I'll, I'm thinking, 'cause actually engineering sounds kind of interesting.
Speaker 1: And what sounded interesting about that?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I think it must have had been about the way the word sounded because I didn't know a soul who was an electrical engineer, there was nobody in my family that was an electrical engineer, and I probably read about it someplace, but I did like, I mean I did liked physics, and math, and that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 50112
Speaker 1: Now, you ended up going to Washington University [St. Louis, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, how was that choice made?
Speaker 2: Partially 'cause I 'got a, I had tuition scholarship, and so, it was probably going to be that or maybe Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], because my father had gone there.  But, having gotten the scholarship, that was a big factor.
Speaker 1: Now, were you, you stayed on campus?
Speaker 2: No, I lived at home.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you lived at home.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: For, and for four years?
Speaker 2: Well, I lived at home for two and a half years, and then I got married, and then, then set up an apartment after that.
Speaker 1: And so, for those, what was that experience like, I mean, not the getting married part, we'll get into that, but, just you know attending university, sort of trying to find your way, what was the ethnic makeup?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, what is the answer to the ethnic makeup, when, right after Brown V. Board of Education decision, Washington U. [Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri], decided that they were going to immigrate there, down to graduate school, and I was in the second class of the black student, of the black student undergraduates that went to Washington U., at the time, which meant that we had a total of about six or eight, black students that when I first started out of about 3000.  And, you know it was kind of a friendly, hospitable, kind of environment.  We used to, we used to have a table, that what students call today the student union, back in those days it was, and it still may be called the (unclear). We would all get around, I mean, we'd, we'd have a you know kind of a black students meeting  which kind of would be all of us around this one table eating lunch together, but as you can imagine, I mean you know we felt, we felt some pretty strong bonds, probably one of first, one of the people that I'd recommend for your, for your project, was also a student at Washington U., his name is Ollie Wilson. He's a full, he and I had been in a band together at Sumner High School so we'd known each other, he was a year ahead of me, he's now a full professor at, U.C. Berkeley [University of California-Berkeley], the music department.  Has written a number of symphonies and he's, he's kind of, he's recognized around the world, for his symphonies, at any rate.  You know, so I mean luckily, a couple good things happened, one is, there was a significant screening process, so that, you know, the folks that got into Washington U., usually were ones that were pretty high up in the their classes.  Two or three of my very closest friends, at least in my class, were all, we all went to Washington U. together, so we had a support system, in place, so it kind of made a big difference, and then being in engineering school, you don't have time to do anything besides work,
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Which is what we did.
Story_ID: 50113
Speaker 1: What were the professors like?
Speaker 2: It was a mixture.  Some professors, they were, just, kind of indifferent to the whole, I mean, in terms of the racial, in terms of the racial situations, they were just out to do their job.  I had one professor, who, I was in a drawing class, walked by, and saw some of the work I was doing, and he says, you know "I didn't know black people could do this kind of work" but you know, he made that, I never heard anything else from him, other than the fact, I think, you know I did manage to graduate in the top third in my class, there, but, there was also a real turning point occurred to me when I was, was there, because when I started to need a, need a part time job, I met a physics professor, who would hire part, I mean would hire undergraduate students to do, teaching, in some of his classes, and I got a job doing some teaching as a--first as a student assistant, and later as a, I taught a night school physics class, for him, and you know the reason why I say it's a turning point is 'cause I began to really like teaching, and it was partially just from being around him, and seeing the way he did it, and how effective he was.
Story_ID: 50114
Speaker 1: So now you, you get to, Washington University [St. Louis, Missouri] and I'd just like you to comment about the, you know, about the different, because you went from an all-black, institution, to a majority white.
Speaker 2: Um-hum. Well the difference is, all of sudden there is six of us out of 3000, 'tryin to figure out how to, how to operate and survive.  And you know, along the way, one of my friends, I'm glad you asked that question, 'cause, one of my friends got involved with a human relations organization, and he got me involved in that organization.  And back in those days, we were still going on sit ins, and you know, you talk about life lessons that you learn, I remember we, were you know, 'tryin to open up restaurants, and do certain, so we're going to these sit ins, and we went to one place, and they threatened to put us in jail if we didn't leave, and so we left, and we, went to another place, and this particular night, we go into this pizza parlor, and you know, we're expecting to go sit in, and they hand us menus, and they put water on the table, and napkins, and said you know, what would you like, you know, what would you like to eat? And to our shock, we didn't have any money.  And so the lesson learned from that is that you gotta be prepared for success, because you know (laughs), you might succeed and you're not ready.
Speaker 1: That's a good lesson (laughter), that's a good lesson.
Speaker 2: Right. Isn't that correct
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--expecting to be turned away.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  What know what, it's like, yeah right.
Story_ID: 50115
Speaker 1: So, and that's the group that you, were you part, was part of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] or were you --
Speaker 2: No, it was a human relations group at Washington U. [Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri].  And to me, the good news is that you, know everybody is not racist, or sexist, or out to just abuse people.  And this, this was a place where a lot of people came together to say okay, we need to develop some better relations among ourselves and you know, let's try and figure out ways to do that.  And, I've been involved in various human relations programs ever since.
Speaker 1: Aren't you active with the National Conference of--(simultaneous) you're on the board, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, right, right.  Yeah, I mean here at least the San Jose [California], and I mean and that's partially, I mean it's partially that, as a result of that.
Speaker 1: Now, so this is, but this is still actually early Civil, I mean it's the early stages of Civil Rights, it's not the '60's [1960s], but it's when, a lot of the activity was happening.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean this, this was happening, I mean, back when, I mean 'cause it really started in the mid '50's [1950s], it's just--
Speaker 1: And, I mean who were the people you were sort of following in their activity during the '50's [1950s]?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, as far as, you know, I mean Rosa Parks had already been, you know, kicked off the bus, and, Martin Luther King [Jr.] was getting started, Jesse Jackson [Rev. Jesse Jackson, HM] was around back in those days, Julian Bond was around.
Speaker 1: Was there any one that you particularly admire, amongst those names?
Speaker 2: Well, probably Martin Luther King, more than anything, because I mean partially, 'cause he was a lot more, I think maybe, a lot more visible than anybody else.  Also, my father [Frank Greene] happened to know, his family, 'cause they both had, at various, at the one time or another had lived in Georgia.  And so even though my father was from Augusta [Georgia], he had, you know, I think on occasion, you know had gone to Atlanta [Georgia].  So, he would talk about it.
Story_ID: 50116
Speaker 1: Now, so you're taking, at Washington U. [Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri], you're taking all kinds of, science and engineering courses, and do you declare your major pretty early on?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I went on to be an Electrical Engineer, I mean, I just stuck with that.
Speaker 1: And so, when you got into it, were there things you found surprising about the study of it, were there, and were you happy with your choice?
Speaker 2: Yeah I mean, it's not, I've never had any second thoughts about that, I mean, it's just a lot of work.
Speaker 1: And, can you talk about the field?  For someone, who doesn't know, you know, about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, what does, what does an electrical engineer do?  Well, back in, back in those days, we were, we still were, we still had things called vacuum tubes.  I mean, today we have transistors and integrated circuits, so, or for a person, of a younger generation probably wouldn't have a, probably wouldn't have an idea what an old vacuum tube looks like, unless they see some old equipment, but the job of electrical engineer is, to pretty much design, today is mostly designing computers, but it's a lot of, anything that's electronic.  Now, so it could be from stereo equipment, to airborne electronics, or, or, in some cases, you have, power engineering, which is kind of a special branch of engineering, so, to design these big car plants, and these nuclear power plants, and that kind of thing, falls within electrical engineering, as well.
Speaker 1: And, what are you thinking you're gonna, so you, okay, so then, in the meantime then you get married?
Speaker 2: And then in the meantime I get married.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your wife's name, where do you meet her?
Speaker 2: I met her, actually I had met her in high school [Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri], but we, we didn't start dating until, a couple years after that.
Speaker 1: And, so you're handling the responsibilities--you go from your mother's house, I mean your parent's house, sorry.  Into, you know, a marriage, and so you're also finishing up school, I'm just wondering do you find that whole process a little challenging?
Speaker 2: Yeah it's, its more work.  Yeah, right, also I mean, beside engineering school, I'm also in R.O.T.C. [Reserve Officer Training Corps] in the advanced core guard of T.C. [Training Corps], and I've got a, I'm an officer by that time, so I've got some responsibility there.  Plus, I'm teaching, part time.
Speaker 1: And you taught part time to really help supplement your--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: Well, I found that, that became a passion, so I mean it's one of these things, that I enjoy doing, so, I didn't feel like it was really work.
Story_ID: 50117
Speaker 1: And, are you, what are you thinking that you want to do after graduation?
Speaker 2: Well, I was, because I was in the R.O.T.C [Reserve Officer Training Corps] I knew I was going to, I knew I was going to get commissioned and go into their regular Air Force.  And, but I was a plane, I hoped to fly, but my eyes got too bad,  and so I was going as an Electronics Officer, but my first duty assignment was to go to go to Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana] to get a Masters, and also (unclear), which I did in '61 [1961], '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: And, with, well okay, so you, you decide, you know, upon graduation, that you, were going to go to Purdue?
Speaker 2: No, actually the Air Force decided.
Speaker 1: Oh, the Air Force decided, oh,
Speaker 2: Because the Air Force, said okay, I had gone through a special program called the Distinguished Military Cadet program, which meant that, that you're first duty assignment could be to go, to go to, you know, to get a graduate degree.  And so when I went on active duty, I had full pay allowances, and the Air Force had selected the, they said okay, we, we think we want you to go to Purdue, do you agree?  And I said well, "what do I know, yeah."  So, and so I had full pay allowances when I was a student at Purdue.
Speaker 1: And now, did Purdue differ from Washington University [St. Louis,Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Oh, quite a bit.  I mean, Washington U. [Washington University] is a small school, private school, Purdue is a very large school, public school, and you know, it's where a, where a class might be 30 or 40, at Washington U., you meet consistently at, at least two or three times that number, and Purdue being one of the, I think we were talking about earlier, was one of the largest engineering schools in the country.  Probably today, second or third largest engineering school, maybe first, I don't know.
Story_ID: 50118
Speaker 1: And, what are you thinking that, even though I mean the R--well let me ask you back on the R.O.T.C. [Reserve Officer Training Corps], how did you, what did you, why did you decide to join the R.O.T.C. [Reserve Officer Training Corps]?
Speaker 2: Good question, you know, that was back in the days of the Vietnam War, so, if you wanted to have, some sense of control of your destiny, I felt it would be better to go into the service as an officer, rather than as, a, an enlisted man.  And this was a way to do that, and also by going to the Air Force, and I couldn't fly, I felt like okay, I'll be an electronics officer some place, not like I'd be carrying a rifle.  Running around a rice paddy, in Vietnam.
Speaker 1: And, were you happy about the R.O.T.C. [Reserve Officer Training Corps], were you happy about the involvement and what it gave back?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, you know it was kind of, you know Colin Powell [General Colin Powell, HM] talks about leadership, and how he learned leadership, in the military.  It's absolutely true, I mean I, I've felt like I learned a lot more about leadership, not so much about management, but about, really about leadership.  As a result of that, as a result of that experience.
Story_ID: 50119
Speaker 1: And what do you think makes a good leader?
Speaker 2: Well, what makes a good leader, its good followers, (laughs).
Speaker 1: Cultivating good followers, or good followers?
Speaker 2: Just good followers, you know, just good followers, I mean, my best example is if you can imagine the lead goose when he flies, you know, you, if you're the lead goose, with this flock, you know, you could be going who knows where, but if the flock's not going with you, you're not, you know, being a great, you're not being a very good leader, (laughs).
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (laughter)--
Speaker 2: It does help to know how to be a good follower, and I think part of, and well you know, I think part of it, is, to be a good leader, I think you have to learn about being a good follower, and what it really means to be, a good follower.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I think the military teaches you that, and I mean, and you know you have some respect for the difficulty of, what it really means to do something under pressure, you know, maybe under fire, or maybe adverse conditions.  And so, I think, you know, I mean we, we see it.  George Bush [President George W. Bush] has emerged as a good leader, but under very adverse conditions.  And so, the military helps you understand  how to operate under these kind of adverse conditions that could nearly, they could create so many adverse conditions, that you know, you really feel filters out people's ability  to decide whether do I really want to do this or not.
Story_ID: 50120
Speaker 1: Now, did, was, back to your electrical engineering, what are you thinking that you want to do, are you thinking because your parents [Frank and Olivia Sywgert Greene] have worked with the government, that, that's going to be the place for you to look for a job or--
Speaker 2: Well, when I went to a, when I went into the Air force full time, and went through Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana], I, a couple things, you know, I've had these, I've had these great life experiences, that, as I look back at them, I mean automatically, I mean yeah, automatically realize in retrospect what they were. I met a professor at Purdue by the name of Fritz Freelander, who I'm still in touch with today as a matter of fact, as a matter of fact I'll see him in about two weeks, about a, about when I'm back there.  I got interested in a, in a subject he was teaching, magnetic devices, magnetic materials, and I took a couple of his classes, partially because he was also the professor who wrote the graduating exam, so if you wanted to get your Master's degree, you'd, you know, hopefully, would figure out how to answer his questions.   But then I just discovered, so I took a couple of his classes, but I, I enjoyed it, and so, I did pretty well.  And what I've found over the years is that some of the students that, did pretty well in his classes, you know over, about a 40 year period, he stayed in touch with us.  So, it was about a dozen students, you know about, half of them are, are right out here, right in, in Northern California.  And they, they finally had to force them to retire a couple of years ago, but he's still, he's still living at Purdue, whenever I go back there, I see him, but, and that just created a bond for me, and it got me started in an area, which, you know, I had a, I had a lot of personal activity, in this whole area of magnetic devices, memory systems, as a result of getting started there with, with, him.  And not a, I also found out while I was there that I had an interest in solid state physics and, in fields, and partially because a lot of that is it really applied math, and in some ways wonder whether or not I should have been a mathematician, instead of an engineer, 'cause I like, I tend to like that part of engineering, where there's a lot of mathematics required.
Story_ID: 50121
Speaker 1: And, what are you thinking you're gonna, I mean (unclear)--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: You mean what was I, where was I going?
Speaker 1: No, that's fine, I just want--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, that was a long winded answer, to not answer your question, what happened?  After, when I finished Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana], I got, I, you know the Air Force has this bad habit of saying, okay, here's some orders, and you just go someplace.  They don't ask for permission, and so I get these orders to go to Fort Meade, Maryland.  To a place called National Security Agency, that, back in those days, the name was darn near classified.  Today, it's a little more well known, because it shows up in the paper all the time now-a-days.  But I'm an engineer, working at National Security Agency.
Speaker 1: And, do you like it?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it's a great place to work.
Speaker 1: And what did you learn?
Speaker 2: All about big, fast, computers.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, but you're talking about Fairchild [Semiconductor], right?
Speaker 2: No, this was at the National Security Agency.
Speaker 1: So, National Security, that's, but see that's what I'm confused about here, this was, from 1961 to, U.S. Air Force?
Speaker 2: I was in the Air force.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my duty, my assignment was for, to work at National Security [Agency].
Speaker 1: (Off-Camera) All right all right, now hold on.
Speaker 2: There's a lot of activity there.
Speaker 1: Now, oh, okay, I thought that was off.  Now, when you, you're um, you're there, and what are the things you're working on and learning about and things that are happening, in terms of--
Speaker 2: Other than big, fast computers, that's all I can tell you.
Speaker 1: Oh, I got you, (laughter).  You can't even talk about it today?
Speaker 2: I just told you, big, fast computers.
Speaker 1: I know, so I'm just saying, you sign things for life?  Okay, so, well, let me ask you this, was it, was it an experience, do you think that it was a big positive that you had, you know, been part of, you know, part of the R.O.T.C. [Reserve Officer Training Corps], and joined, the service, and you know, major in electrical engineering, and that you got this assignment.  It seems like a very plum assignment--
Speaker 2: It was--
Speaker 1: For, someone starting, out--
Speaker 2: It was.
Story_ID: 50122
Speaker 1: So, I mean, can you talk about, can you kind of just talk sort of not, specifics, that--
Speaker 2: Well, you know I'll tell you the reason, things in life are plum assignments, because, a lot of times it's the people you associate with.  I mean you've got some very smart people, working there, I mean I had a chance to see companies all over this country, that I would of, probably not seen otherwise.
Speaker 1: And this is the same area, of the, of the, you said you achieved rank of Captain in the regular Air Force?
Speaker 2: Right, during the time I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was there about three years.  The other thing I was doing excuse me, which, is because of my interest in teaching, I mean I was teaching part time, at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], I taught the first magnetic fields course at Howard University, back in the, well I was at N.S.A. [National Security Agency].
Speaker 1: But what was, okay, let me ask you, what does this office, what does it do.  Can you talk about that at all?
Speaker 2: What, N.S.A. [National Security Agency]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, N.S.A. [National Security Agency].
Speaker 2: Yeah, so it's been written up in the papers all the time.
Speaker 1: I know, but-- (laughter).
Speaker 2: I mean I can't officially, I mean all I can say is--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Is, is you know, it gets written up at the C.I.A. [Central Intelligence Agency], and N.S.A. [National Security Agency], and all these other
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  We'll go-
Speaker 2: Scott [Stearns, videographer], Scott can tell you (unclear)--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay, well, but that's not the thing, we'll go on from there, so you leave there, that was a good experience?
Speaker 2: That was a great experience.
Speaker 1: Right, great, experience, but how many blacks were, were there any, any--
Speaker 2: Oh, there were a number of black folks there.
Speaker 1: And, so--
Speaker 2: I mean keep in mind, this was only about 30 miles north of Washington, D.C., so it was a pretty good population of black, I mean, and then it's 30 miles south of Baltimore [Maryland], so what are you know, it's right there in between, so.
Story_ID: 50123
Speaker 1: But now, so, you, you, you finish there, and what are your thoughts then?
Speaker 2: Well, the Air force at that time, and this was '65 [1965] now, decided they had more officers than they needed, and so they offered, what's called an early-out program, and I said okay, I think I'll take advantage of it, 'cause I was either, either, if I'd have stayed in, I had been like a civilian, working with the engineering group at, N.S.A. [National Security Agency], if I would have stayed in, I probably would have been reassigned to an Air Force Base someplace, and, you know, and I had really gotten, spoiled, at N.S.A. [National Security Agency], so I had to start looking for a job.  Now, luckily for me, I had met, let's see, people at various companies building computers, and high speed, memory devices, or electronics, or integrated circuits, that kind of thing, around the country, so I sent out about five or six resumes, and got three or four offers, and the one that I liked the most was out here, excuse me, at Fairchild's [Fairchild Semicounductor] research and development labs, and as we were talking earlier, it's where, we're a leading edge research organization, in developing integrated circuits and transistors, and those kinds of things. I came out here to join a group, initially though, to do magnetic core memories, and then after about a year, I moved into the R & D [Research and Development] labs, and started working on, you know, large scale computers, and then the chips for those computers, and memories for those computers, that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 50124
Speaker 1: And were you, were you involved with this, were there things that were happening at that time, that were sort of cutting edge?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I mean the, from a technology point of view, I mean you had cutting edge people here, I mean these are the people who later, when I got there in '65 [1965], three years later, a core group of people, left and started Intel.  And these were, and that core group were the founders of Fairchild [Semiconductor], and so I was, I was fortunate, I was part of, you know, I'm walking around, you know bumping, into people in the hallways, that it were, really, truly, not only cutting edge technology, but they were cutting edge entrepreneurship, where people would be leaving every three to six months, starting companies, Fairchild, has probably spawned more start-up companies, than any other single company in Silicon Valley.  And if you look at the family tree, you know, it's, it's multi generations deep.  With people who have worked in, at Fairchild.
Story_ID: 50125
Speaker 1: And, you were saying earlier, that, when you said you were leaving, and, I'm wondering if your wife is feeling this way, if your family, you said that they were, they thought you were crazy, sort of, that you would pick up and move half across the country.
Speaker 2: Yeah well, and you know, the story, because I had been, really been living in Fort Meade, which was not too far from my family, at least the part that was still in Washington, D.C., we'd see, we'd see them on, on occasion, not on a, because I mean, we were all pretty busy, but, when, when they found out I was moving all the way from the East Coast to California, they thought I had lost my mind.  That we were just crazy, that it was just going to be very dangerous, because they had all, they had government jobs, and I was going out in a quote, "private industry," it's just not something, that you know, we as a family had much experience about.
Speaker 1: And, what was your wife thinking at the time?
Speaker 2: Well, she always thought I was kind of crazy, she, well she was concerned, because her family was in Saint Louis [Missouri], I mean she had multiple generations of family in Saint Louis.  And so part of the tradeoff was that she could be able to go home at least once a year, which we did, but, it was a challenge for her.
Speaker 1: And, do you have any children at this point (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have, a son and a daughter.
Story_ID: 50126
Speaker 1: Now, when you come out here, this is all, this is a totally different environment, than the one you've had, you know, any place before.  Except, it was, it was Fairchild [Semiconductor], and, so, I'm just wondering, were, did it take you some time to, 'cause this, how did this differ, let's just put it this way, how did it differ from N.S.A. [National Security Agency]?
Speaker 2: Oh, well it's moving from a Government job, to a, purely commercial environment, to a research lab, which is truly a research lab, where you have a lot of creative people just try out all kinds of things.  To a living environment, that on the surface, you know, well I was in the military environment, which was pretty structured, from a living point of view, whereas, I'm coming out here, as, theoretically, fairly wide open, it was a little bit of prejudice, in the housing, here and that, we had trouble getting an apartment when we first moved here, but we were able to lease a house, without any trouble, and so, you know it was mixed, and, and, where the, and the other big difference is that there was a lot of, even back in those days, as I look back at it, a fairly diverse, group of people, living here which has got even more diverse today.  And, people are saying, well you know, show me what you can do, and you know, if you can kind of, you know, hang in there with the folks on a technical basis, you know, you can do okay.  And so, it was more on the, on your ability to, to be able to function successfully.
Story_ID: 50127
Speaker 1: And so, what were the things that you were able to work on and learn about, and, that was, you know, productive for you at Fairchild [Semiconductor]?
Speaker 2: Mainly, circuits, chip designs for fast memory systems, building memory, building memory systems, I got a paten along the way, on what was at the time, the fastest, largest memory chip that Fairchild had on the market, back in those days.  The other thing I learned is that, I'm not necessarily the most creative person, with coming up for ideas, from scratch, but if I can hang around really creative people, I can kind of understand what they do, and try to say, okay, let's, let's do this, and see if we can make something out of it.  You know, I learned I had a skill with that.  And, one of the things as a result of that, we now have this, patent on this chip, but we built a computer system, we had built, a little production line, right in the middle, in the R & D [Research and Development] labs, and I was the project manager for this memory system, it was for the world's fastest computer, called the Illiac IV, which was designed right in the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign, Illinois], and when it built in the late '90's [1990s]--the late '60's [1960s], it was ultimately put into one of the NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] centers over here, nearby, because it was too dangerous to put it back on a college campus.  And that system was later used for a number of kind of earthshaking, I mean not earthshaking, but you know, really important designs, like part of the space shuttle, was designed on that computer system, a number of airplanes, were designed, you know today, airplanes are designed using numerical models to describe how the air flows over wings and that kind of thing.  But, even back in those days, that, that computer was being used to design airplanes.
Story_ID: 50128
Speaker 1: And, so you leave there in 1971?  Do you have all positive experiences from Fairchild [Semiconductor], or was there some?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Well I mean, if, well there's a good bad and ugly, there are, there are all kinds of things in life, but, I mean it, primarily was positive experience, I was one of two black members of the technical staff at that time, out of, I don't know, maybe 200 people or something like that.  I didn't get some of the promotion opportunities, like I said, like I thought I should have gotten, and, especially toward the end, because they were partially cutting back on the, not partially, they were making large cut backs, in their, in their budgets far and deep, because back in those, back in those days, that was a period by the way, in the early '70's [1970s], you might recall, we were right in the middle of a recession?  It was tremendously austere in the [Silicon] Valley, the markets, a lot of markets had collapsed, and so, I mean I could understand why, I didn't', why I didn't necessarily get, some of the opportunities.  And so, that's what, that's what really motivated me to say, well maybe I ought to think about doing something different.  And one of the differences was, to start a software company.
Speaker 1: Now, and so let's talk about that.  Because that's sort of a bold move at that time, right?
Speaker 2: Well, it is and it isn't.  I mean, when you're around people starting companies, who've got to look like you do, and think like you do, they maybe a different color, but, they gotta think, well I mean, say well I understand, what you know, how they think and if they can do it, maybe I can do it too.  And you know, what happens if I don't try, well I'll go get a job some place.  You know, I mean, I had, maybe, you know, falsely so, but I just had absolute confidence, that I would go and get a job some place.  And I wasn't gonna spend, I wasn't gonna, you know, drive us into the poor house, trying to get this company started.
Speaker 1: Now, who, what's, who is the team that you assembled?
Speaker 2: It was a good couple of friends, who had, we had decided, you know, we had some common ideas about where we might be able to use some of our experiences at Fairchild [Semiconductor], and, and so, we were able to, we were able to go out and start getting some government contracts, to run some various projects.  Mainly, well in the early days, mainly it was NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], right here, and that, that became kind of the core, income, that we used to get the business started.
Speaker 1: And, the team that you assembled?
Speaker 2: The team, well one fellow was a, actually a professor, by the way along the way, I had gotten a PhD at Santa Clara [University, Santa Clara, California], while I was at Fairchild.
Story_ID: 50129
Speaker 1: Okay, well can you can you talk about that just now, and then start again talking about it.
Speaker 2: Okay, sure, we were talking about the early '70's [1970s], and the fact that Richard Nixon [President Richard Nixon], when he was president, made a real push on what was called, Black Capitalism, where there was the expansion of, contracting with the federal government, under a minority business program.  And a number of companies, black companies around the country, really were able to start getting contracts, and start taking advantage of that.  And then, we have, I mean some of our early contracts, came through that, came through that program.
Story_ID: 50130
Speaker 1: And you had also said that, in between, you know, before actually going, or starting TDC [Technology Development Corporation], maybe around the time of Fairchild [Semiconductor], but you got your PhD, and I'm wondering if you could talk about why you felt the need to go back.
Speaker 2: Well, when I first went to Fairchild, I really just wanted to be a research engineer, a design engineer, as I said, I like teaching, I was thinking about doing some part time teaching.  And then, along the way I just, not sure exactly why, just, I decided, well I think I want to go out and get a PhD, because I was thinking, in the long run I might even want to be a full time professor some place.  Because, I mean I did enjoy the teaching aspects of all that, and so, you know, I went to, Santa Clara University, they had a part time program, so I went there for about three or four years, to get my PhD there.
Speaker 1: And did you like it?
Speaker 2: Mmhmm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so in the, that was actually in the, that was actually, when you were at the research--
Speaker 2: I was at Fairchild R & D lab [Research and Development].
Speaker 1: Fairchild--
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 50131
Speaker 1: That's right, now, okay, so you start, did it go by TDC [Technology Development Corporation], no?
Speaker 2: Mmhmm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you start TDC, and you bring together your brain trust.  Okay, now, how, do you, fund it?
Speaker 2: Well, because, because, of our knowledge of, of, of, various contracts and project opportunities within NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].  We were able to go and market those directly, personally ourselves.  And when we started getting some of those contracts, that was, and we had funded it all from the income from those contracts.
Speaker 1: And, what did you learn in that process, because this TDC ended up having tremendous success.  And I'd like you to just talk about, the process of, because, the, it was 14 years, you know the process of starting from, some type of idea, identifying opportunities, you know, building the organization, so it can handle, the, the request.  So, I'm just wondering if you can address--
Speaker 2: Well, what did I learn?  I learned, probably two or three key tings.  One is, it helps if you're going to start a company to have some general management experience, which I didn't have.  It helps to have an MBA [Master's in Business Administration], which I didn't have.  And, so, how do you make up for, when you don't have these things, how do you make up for them?  Well one of the things I did, I think the first year or so is I took one of these special, executive development programs over at Stanford [University, Stanford, California].  At least where I learned some basic concepts about finance, and, marketing, and selling, and, budgeting, and some of these other things, and kind of what is general, and organizational development.  Not that I learned, necessarily a lot of skills, but I think the other thing that, and maybe I've always been this way, is that, maybe it comes from the Air Force, just as much as anything.  Is that if you, if you, there are certain skills required to do any kind of a job, and if you don't have them, you ought to go find somebody who has them, to either help you, or you need to get, you need to go to school, somehow and learn.  And so, I used to say all the time that I think my first ten years was my MBA program on the job.  Because I wasn't kidding myself, I didn't have any, I had been a project manager, that was, the highest level of management that I ever had, so, on the other hand soon after we started one fella who joined us who happened to be a neighbor and we just started talking one night, and, we needed somebody to run one of our major projects, he had been a CEO [Chief Executive Officer] of a software company before.  And he kind of got interested in what we were doing, and he ran one of our projects, but I really, he ultimately ended up becoming a partner so, he filled in a lot of the gaps, knowledge gaps, that, that I didn't have.  And then I, put most of my focused most of my time and attention on marketing, and selling, actually more selling than real marketing, because we didn't do any real marketing.  But it was real, and I, but I had a management coach, and he taught me how to sell, and we actually wrote a book that we used to teach other people in the company how to sell.  And I even used that, some of those techniques today to teach young entrepreneurs, here's, here's how you sell.  Because selling is so critical, to a startup company, and if you can't get customers, you don't have a business so--
Speaker 1: So what, why, what would you attribute to, to, sales, you know, 'cause you--
Speaker 2: Being a teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, knowing how to present an idea, and kind of listen to, the other part, the other thing I had, I mean it's one thing to present an idea, and you know, even if you can do that very well, the other part is, to learn how to listen, to what a person is, what a, what a potential customer says that they really need.  And that's where this coach, made a tremendous difference for me.
Story_ID: 50132
Speaker 1: So, you, how, but how, I understand that, but how do, what's the story of you growing to annual revenues of over $30 million? What is that story?
Speaker 2: What's that story all about? Well, you know maybe I can say that it's all about my selling skills [laughter].  But actually no, excuse me, it's, it's really about building an organization of people.  Who can go out and do some cutting edge kind of work, and then, as some of those projects expand, we get more business opportunity.  The other part of it is, that I was very active, back in those days, with a group called the National Association of Black Manufacturers.  Which was a group of, oh I don't know, fifteen or twenty, black owned companies around the country.  And we would sometimes have meetings, with very high level people, and D.O.D [Department of Defense] and what have you, because most of our business was government, was you know, government related business, and like that picture I showed you, that, that picture is actually taken in the Pentagon.  But I found out about that project in the Pentagon maybe a year before that, through, through this association.
Story_ID: 50133
Speaker 1: And, you had talked earlier about even the types of software, and you know technical services you provided.
Speaker 2: Mmhmm.
Speaker 1: You know, what were, what were the--
Speaker 2: One, there was there two general categories, one that was software for very, large, high speed computer applications.  Mostly scientific kind of applications, like we were talking earlier about using computers to design airplanes.  Today, we all know about using computers to design, and understand the gene structure. Well, even back in those days, there was work like that going on.  Computers were used to understand where you're going to look for oil,  and so, we weren't doing that kind of work, but I mean we were doing, I'll give you an idea of what, you know how computers were being used.  The military has always used computers in a lot of different ways, to design airplanes, to test the equipment, the, especially the electronic equipment in airplanes, so we had, we had scientific computing applications, and then we had military electronics testing, that we did.  We actually wrote software for the, the B-1 bomber, we wrote some of the software, at least some of our folks did, for the engines, for the computers that control the main engines on the, on the space shuttle.  Which is how it happened, because we, we had, we had a contract with Rockwell [Automation].  I happened to go see that first night landing of the space shuttle.
Story_ID: 50134
Speaker 1: You, you make it seem so easy in your, this is not, I mean this was a lot of money for a black man in America to be--
Speaker 2: It's not easy, (laughter).
Speaker 1: I didn't mean, (laughter).
Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know how to talk about it, and work up a sweat, you know?
Speaker 1: No, no, but I mean, I'm just saying, I'm trying to put it in context.
Speaker 2: No, I'm with you.
Speaker 1: You know, so--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, I mean the fact that, this is, you know, '71 [1971], '72 [1972], I don't know when you had gone off to, to 30 you know.
Speaker 2: Well, by about '85 [1985] we got to 30.
Speaker 1: Okay, but, what I'm saying, is this is significant, even 30 million is significant today, you know.  I'm just saying back then, this is, even though, you know you, you were saying that the Nixon Administration had played a part in creating a nurturing environment, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, it created an opportunity, I mean, it's, it's, I'll tell you, that's why I said, it's hard to, to, to under estimate the, the, you know, a little life lesson you learn.  Like when, when we went to that place and they served us, and we didn't have any money, you know I said, "I don't think I'm going to let that happen again."  And so, it's like being prepared, and when you find out about those opportunities, you just have to keep going for them.
Speaker 1: Now, how much do you grow the company, you grow up to 30 million.
Speaker 2: We grow up to 30 million, we actually have two different divisions by that time.  We split the company, this is in the mid '80's [1980s], we split the company into two parts, one part we take public, and this was a part that was in the military electronics marketplace.  The other part was still more in the scientific computing side, we sold that part to Sterling Software.
Story_ID: 50135
Speaker 1: And, why do you decide to take the company public, what does it, where does that come from?
Speaker 2: Well, that idea came from a couple of my board members, at the time.  One fella who was one of the, senior attorneys here in Silicon Valley [California], fell by the name of Mario Rosati, who is with the law firm of Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati, which just happens to be one of the largest technology law firms in the country.  And the other person was, George Bongair (ph.) who runs a, a boutique M and A [mergers and acquisitions] firm from here.  And, they were looking at the operation, and saying you know, and we could have used, and we needed some money to grow, and, even though we hadn't used any outside money which, so we raised, so we did an IPO [Initial Public Offering], and used that to finance some additional growth in the company.
Speaker 1: Now, how was that experience, was it something, 'cause there is a lot of paper work with an IPO.  Some people have said oh forget about it.  But what was that experience for?
Speaker 2: Well, it's like, I mean, we had, we had excellent legal help, and then we got a good banker, I mean it was a reasonable banker right there in Dallas [Texas], at the time it was called Rauscher Pierce, I think they may have changed their names, I'm sure they've changed their name since then.  But I mean it all depends on getting, you know, good legal help and a good, and a good investment banker.
Speaker 1: Now, when you, decide to, I mean, okay, so that went, it went, it was successful (unclear), you split off...let me see.
Story_ID: 50136
Speaker 1: You are--
Speaker 2: But, but by that time I--
Speaker 1: Wait a minute, where does Zero-One Systems come in?
Speaker 2: That was the company when we split the company into two parts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The second, the second company we created was Zero-One, and by that time I'm chairman of TDC [Technology Development Corporation], and then I stay as the operating president at Zero-One.
Speaker 1: And Zero-One, what, I, I think I've heard, that's another software company right?
Speaker 2: Yeah. That was a part that did all the scientific, computing applications.
Speaker 1: That wasn't warehouse distribution.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay, and, I see, okay. So, so once again your focus is on the government though.
Speaker 2: Mmhmm.
Speaker 1: Large government contracts.
Speaker 2: Mmhmm.
Speaker 1: But you have a track record, and was this the right, Zero-One, was it the right one to spin off, you know, that was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean it was, yeah, it was the right one because it was in a different market.  And the one that we took public, was in a much, it was a much more stable, Zero-One is a much more stable market.  The military electronics part was really growing very rapidly, which made it a much better candidate to do a public, to, to take public; because I mean you're always looking for rapid growth.
Story_ID: 50137
Speaker 1: And, you decide to sell though, or do--how does that work, did someone come, come around to you, or did you--
Speaker 2: Well, we decided to sell because we needed to raise some capital, and one reason was, either try to raise some more capital, or to sell.  Because we were, we were in a fairly captive market place within Zero-One, and so as we looked at our options it made a lot more sense to, sell, and we talked to a couple of other companies and, we were able to get a deal cut, with, with Sterling.
Speaker 1: And, so that deal goes, and do you then take time to rest or relax or--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm starting to do some Angel Investing, by then.  And um, but that wasn't full time, until one of the investments I made in a company called Network Picture Systems, became full time, and I, ultimately went in and ran that company for about a year and a half, because it was losing a lot of money and, I had turned it around and got it profitable.
Story_ID: 50138
Speaker 1: So, you're saying when you took over Network Picture Systems it wasn't profitable?
Speaker 2: Mmhmm.
Speaker 1: and you became, you became--
Speaker 2: I took it over and became CEO of the company.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and what were you able to do in that 18 month turn around that, that added to its success?
Speaker 2: Well, help, generate more business, control the cost, raise some more money to help finance it.
Speaker 1: And, you are enjoying that period or not or you know--
Speaker 2: Well, enjoying, I mean it was a scramble.  So, it was one of these things, I had a pretty good investment, at least for me in there, that, and then some of the other board members were saying you know please, come in and let's see, let's see if you can help get the, get the company back, back on its course.
Speaker 1: And, and, so are you enjoying, this is, this is really starting to get a very long way from, electrical, electrical engineering.
Speaker 2: Oh, I stopped doing electrical engineering work in the early '70's [1970s].
Speaker 1: I know but (laughter), I know but, but I was saying, you know that whole experience, you, you understand you've gotten your MBA [Master's in Business Administration], by the streets.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I mean you know, not the school of hard knocks, but you, you know, you've learned--
Speaker 2: My on the job training.
Speaker 1: On the job training, right (laughter).
Story_ID: 50139
Speaker 1: And, so what happened, you know, what, what are you eager to do at this point, or what do you want to do?
Speaker 2: Actually, I was just going to do some private investing for a while, and then John Douglas just calls me up one day and he says have you ever thought about starting a venture capital fund?  And so, people like that have an, an, an amazing ability to influence my lives, or my life rather; maybe it is lives.
Speaker 1: And, did you say to him, well why, or, why do you say that?
Speaker 2: No, no, he said, he said he had another friend who was thinking about starting one, and he thought about me, and he says well, why don't you all come over, let's have lunch and we'll talk about it.
Speaker 1: And, what did you find intriguing about it, was it that because you had already been doing this angel investing, and--
Speaker 2: Well yeah, that wasn't, that was a part, except, and it kind of felt when I had a lot of operating experience for you running, you know starting a company from scratch, and learning how to finance it, and how to build organizations, and that kind of thing.  I had a lot of experience working on different boards, by then, so--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: You know, it's kind of like using all that experience in one place.
Speaker 1: But all the roads really, lead, leading you to what you're doing today.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so how does, so you, you, have this meeting, of John Douglas, convenes.
Speaker 2: Mmhmm.
Speaker 1: And are you, obviously you are intrigued by this; I just want you to tell the story.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, if I, I don't know it doesn't take sometimes, a lot to you know get me intrigued about something, if it just looks like it makes, kind of a natural fit.  So, that meeting lead to thinking about where we go raise money, what kind of, you know, what kind of a strategy we have.  Neither one of us had any venture fund experience, but that didn't stop us, I mean, we were like, we were, like these internet entrepreneurs, I mean we were fearless, (laughter) in our quest for this whole thing.  Which, in the process it took, it took, about four years to get the first money raised.  And I think the big life lesson I learned, is I found more ways for people to tell me no, then I'd ever, that I'd ever known possible, before that.  And, and that's helped because, as people that come to help, you know look for money from us. You know, I've known, I know more ways to tell people no, (laughter) and, I'm kidding.  But the, I think the point was that if you try to raise a venture capital fund when you've got any serious amount of money, that you're going to be managing, I, I think it does help to have some knowledge about the skills required to do that kind of work.  And so, one of the things that took a while, is, and I kept asking my friends for advice, and both John, and Mario Rosati, the same week, says you ought to go talk to a fella by the name of Roger Barry.  Who had worked at a fund for about nine years, and has a successful track record, it was running his own, small fund, but that wasn't a full time job for him.  And so I, so I went over and talked to him, and we just hit it off, and you know, he said you know, he would help me out, and, he became a partner into, into, into Vista-One.  As a matter of fact, we still have some investments that we are still working on together, and that, and that made all the difference in the world, as far as, as far as being able to raise, any, any money for new Vista-One.
Story_ID: 50140
Speaker 1: And, so with, with New Vista-One, (unclear), okay, with  New Vista-One, you, you say you took, it took four years, right?
Speaker 2: Mmhmm.
Speaker 1: Did it take four years to get where at the level you could operate, as a, you know, were you able, did you have to wait that all four years before you could make like one?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was before we had, I mean, that, when I say four years, that's before we got any money committed, to, to our fund.
Speaker 1: And did you find that this was typical, in, in the world of venture capital, you know, and the setting up?
Speaker 2: Well, the range, goes all the way from, very quick, to infinity.  There's 99 percent of the funds which now I've come to find out don't get off the ground.  And so, and then other funds, depending on kind of your relationships with sources of capital, can get off the ground very quickly.  So I mean, and I don't know, I don't know, how to even describe an average or median or anything like that, I mean it just, it is all over the place.
Speaker 1: Okay, and in that four year period, did you finely, more finely hone what you were going to look at, what you were going to invest in, and what you, were going to, you know, do, what not to do, you know, that type of thing.  It would seem to me that--
Speaker 2: Yeah I did that, I mean for me it wasn't very complicated, because I wanted to invest in kinds of companies that, and businesses and markets that are understood, or at least I thought I understood.  Which is mostly software, and mostly before, you know, what we, what we call enterprise kind of applications.
Speaker 1: And, with that, just what I would like to do Mister Greene, is just have you, tell, you know how this, what the, you know the whole process was.
Speaker 2: Well, what was the process, of raising a venture, venture capital fund?  Well there are some mechanical parts to it, one is you put together, typically what's called a prospectus, an offering document.  And we did all that, and we, we, as you, you know as you were asking about earlier, we really honed our investment strategy and our criteria and all that.  Then, once, but then I also had to get a partner, who you know had some experience about running a, a fund.  And then, the, the part that really is the most difficult part, is to convince some funding sources, to let you manage some money.  Where it, you know we can show, make some kind of a reasonable case, that you'd be able to return, you know, give them nice, appropriate returns, with the amount of risk that is going to be taken, with the money that's been invested.  Now, in the case of New Vista-One, which we raised about 21 million, we got in during the boom days, kind of kinda the internet explosion.  And we were lucky in this sense that one of our earlier days the investments went public, and that we'd returned all of the capital back, to our investors, and more, plus another 20 percent more.  And we think we have one more company going, going public, and that was this company that was in the newspaper article, Epicentric, which could return, at least, at least one, or one hundred percent more, capital back, and maybe more, maybe as much as two hundred percent back.
Story_ID: 50141
Speaker 1: And, what, what did you learn about the whole process of identifying, you know potential, businesses, and you know sourcing, you know deciding what you do and what you don't, what your criteria for an investment is--
Speaker 2: Mmhmm.
Speaker 1: What our investment is, you know, what, what you're looking for, you know, you're sitting right here, in the center, of Silicon Valley [California], you know an interesting time, so I'm just wondering, you know, even how, even the name, for, that you chose, why was that name chosen?
Speaker 2: Well, we tried several different names, we wanted a name that, conotated people looking for, doing, looking to do something different, trying to achieve new heights. So, so that's the reason that, that particular name was chosen.  On the other hand, because we were right by, as you said, right in the heart of Silicon Valley, which is one of the hot beds of entrepreneurship in the world, you know, it doesn't almost matter what name you choose because its already happening here.  And, and that's just the nature of the way of a lot of people think and live, as a result of being here, or maybe it's because they come here.  So, if you, I think you were asking about how does that whole process of selection go.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: The, the thing that we did is, I mean we, we, we always have been very active in various networks, so when people knew that we had money available, we've always had, a very steady stream of business plans, that we could look at, and people come and want to talk to us about their various ideas.  What we tend to look for, in order to be a good venture capital investment, a company needs to be at very high growth, at least have a, a very high growth opportunity.  Which means usually in large markets, where they, they can get established, and get people to do something different, you know where they, where the customers in those markets are, kind of ready to do something different in a different way.  And then the challenge is, even if you have good products and large markets, the biggest challenge is the management, and--
Speaker 1: Managing your portfolio?
Speaker 2: No, managing the, making an investment, I mean the investment is ultimately made in running those companies.  And so what we look for is the ability of the management, to be able to do what they think they can do, and kind of what track records and history of success they've had in the past.
Story_ID: 50142
Speaker 1: And what do you, what do you find, or think of a critical factor when for when you're looking at that management, you know besides the part of experience.  What are you, you know, what are, what are the things that say this, this management is good, and then these are warning signs that we should stay away?
Speaker 2: Because we do technology investing.  And most cases, good technologists, are probably not, had been like I was starting out.  They may, they may not have had very much real business management experience, and so, what we've learned, is that very few founders who are good technical people, are able to see companies through, to being full blown IPO kinds of companies.  And so what we tend to do is, talk to the management early, about, you know when, when the company gets to a stage, if there's really a tremendous opportunity, we think we probably want to bring a CEO [Chief Executive Officer] in, maybe a different CFO [Chief Financial Officer] in, and try to get those kind of agreements.  And when we've been successful at that, that's usually open the door to, to much more rapid growth, and major business opportunities.
Story_ID: 50143
Speaker 1: Let's see, so you want more stories.  So, one story is about how this article that's in the San Jose Mercury about, about, one of our investments, and, and, and, and, and the roll I played in that investment, how that article came to be.  I met Marshall, who is the, who is a reporter at the San Jose Mercury which is one of the major newspapers here in, in Northern California.  He called about three months ago, said he wanted to do an article on, diversity and venture capital; what he really meant was the lack of diversity in venture capital.  I said well Matt, I don't want to do that kind of article, you know, I'm not your guy for that kind of article.  And I said by the way if you want to do something, do something on a real success story where you had a real diverse management team.  Now, in the case of this particular company, Epicentric, the, technology founder is, Hispanic, his father is Columbian, his mother is Puerto Rican, the marketing founder is half Nigerian and half Polish, the VP [vice President] of sales was a woman.  This company started out with a total amount of about $850,000 on their first round of financing.  They were able to get their first product finished, and, about a dozen beta customers, before they went to the next round, after the next round they recruited a CEO [Chief Executive Officer], who is not part of the traditional Stanford MBA [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Masters in Business Administration Program, Stanford University], Berkeley MBA [Haas School of Business, Masters in Business Administration Program, University of California-Berkely], but he's a very solid manager, really smart guy.  And, now they are likely to go public later on this year, this CEO has raised about 80 million dollars since he's joined the company.  And I said, you know Matt, you know, if you want to talk about diversity, talk about, you know, the miracle that has occurred with this diverse management team.  And they just started this company back in, in mid to late '98' [1998].
Speaker 2: But you were one of the early stage investors--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, us and a couple of other funds.
Speaker 2: But, what, what impressed you about them?
Speaker 1: Well, they had, I mean they had the, the technology; well they are all really smart people.  The marketing, the fellow's a marketing and co-founders are probably the best marketing guys I've seen, the technologists is one of the best I've seen.  They were in this area, where it was the use of the internet, for web applications inside of, enterprises, he had some good ideas, and you know, just, this whole thing was looking to gel.  He also recognized the, the founding CEO also recognized that he couldn't be the CEO of the company really.  He was going to, you know, he had a chance to really take off, and you know, that we would be bringing in another CEO.  I mean, not that it was easy for him to step down, because it wasn't easy, I mean it took about, probably about six months to make that transition.  But, once, you know, once he saw, you know, the kind of person you can bring in, he pretty readily accepted.  And they've been able to form, you know even today, the founders and the new CEO, are a very effective management team, taking that company forward.
Speaker 2: Is that typical though, that, you know the founders and the, the new management team are able to get along?  I mean that doesn't--
Speaker 1: It's, it can work different ways, I mean but part of our goal in the recruiting a new CEO was to make sure we had somebody at least we thought that would be able to work with the management team, the purpose, because, the founders were too critical to the business.  So, it wasn't as if, you could just come in and, you know, replace the old founders, and create, create a whole new, I mean, I don't think that would work.
Speaker 2: And who was the new CEO, what, what skill set did he bring to the table?
Speaker 1: He had been a CEO, at a couple companies, he had very strong sales experience, sales management experience.
Story_ID: 50144
Speaker 1: Now, are there other stories about companies in your portfolio that are, you know, that, that are like Epicenter?
Speaker 2: Not as spectacular as that, I mean we used, we have all kinds of stories, as you can imagine.  I mean we've had everything from companies that have gone, you know, within six months of, after our first investment that have gone out of business on us; to companies that are not as far along and Epicentric, but look like they have tremendous upside potential, but they're probably a couple years behind.  I mean, another company where the two founders are Asian-Indian, has very strong upside potential.  They just, and they're just starting to get their product into the market place, in a significant way, but their winning million dollar plus kinds of orders, based on the strength of their technology.  And this, this technology is used for, what you almost might think of as dynamic event reporting, in highly variable situations;  power trading, or energy trading.  Or in, monitoring certain events within the stock market, for example.  Where traders need to keep track of, not only the events per say, but what is the impact, what is, what is the decision that you might need to make as a result, of a certain set of events.  And, this is some of the best technology around, for doing that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 50145
Speaker 1: Now, what's your, your niche, here?  New Vista's niche? What do you see as your niche, in the whole venture capital community?
Speaker 2: Well, the niche is like a lot of early, I mean we do truly early stage start up investing.  Mainly with software companies, mainly with, enterprise or large company applications; because, the large enterprises are used to, I mean they have in place the infrastructure to buy software that's new.  Most small businesses, even though the small business market is theoretically very large, they're not used to really buying brand new things; they don't have the buying infrastructure to do that.  And I think that a lot of people misunderstand that too by the way, they think you know, there's 20 some million businesses, and wow what a big number that is, if I could only just sell one or two percent, you know I'd be, home free.  Well, it's very difficult to do that, enterprises are used to spending millions of dollars a year, collectively billions of dollars a year, on software.  And they have the people in place to know how to make those buying decisions.  So, that's really the core part of our market, another thing, because we do start up investing, the partners, I mean there are three of us now, that are, actually four of us with, with New Vista-One.  And we've had a lot of management experience, funding experience over the years, so we know how to invest into companies where the product's not finished yet.  You can't do a forecast very liably, well, you can say, if this product works, here's what the sales might be, but that's really hypothetical.  But we know how to, we think we know how to make those kind of judgments.  Often the management team is not complete, so you know, you have an incomplete product, very few customers if any customers, and an incomplete management team.  And you say what kind of chaotic crazy situations does that make.  I mean why do people want to do that?  Well we think that that's where we can start using the knowledge and experience that we can bring to bear and create some value.  And, we get the advantage of getting in early in these companies where the evaluations are still, pretty, pretty low.  I mean so, I mean we got into Epicentric for example, that evaluation was for example maybe two or three million dollars. I mean today, that company is work 200 plus million dollars.  Now, they all don't work that way, and the other part of this business is that you have to, be able to cut your losses.  Because everything doesn't work, sometimes you can't solve the problem of getting a CEO [Chief Executive Officer] in, or maybe you can't get the product complete, or maybe you can only get a few customers but not very many.  So, you have to know how to cut your losses, because you'll get a few big winners, a lot, a lot that kind of break even, and then you know, you'll get some horrendous losses.  I mean, you've got to work on those winners, as much as you can, to really make up for everything else.  But in a sense, in the, in the world of startup companies, it's probably the most satisfying work to do, because we're helping people do things that they might not have otherwise able to do.
Speaker 1: Plus, that's the hardest type of money to get, is really, the, the early stage financing.
Story_ID: 50146
Speaker 1: Now, how hands on are you with any of your companies, because it sounds like you, you can tend to be very hands on.
Speaker 2: I am, I mean all of us are.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Now wait, hands on, let me quantify what hands on means, in the sense that we don't take over the operating management of companies, I mean we, we constantly refuse to do that.  Now, we will get involved in helping the operating management, make decisions, give them advice, sometimes they don't always want to hear our advice.  We go to board meetings, we go to management meetings, we review business plans, sometimes we may even help in a customer presentation or investor presentation.  But we don't, we absolutely do not go in run companies.
Speaker 1: What do you want to accomplish here with New Vista, I mean with you know, how many companies do you have in your portfolio.
Speaker 2: Well, we have two venture funds now, we have about 25 companies all together, we've invested in, we have about eighteen or nineteen that are still active within the portfolio. And this business it's very simple, I mean, you know we, it's like being Robin Hood, we go to the rich and you know, you give to the poor, but, then the poor have to give a lot back to the rich (laughs).  So, to be really successful, you know, if you can give, if we can, if we can give a return back to our investors three times the amount of the money they've invested in us, we'll look like heroes.
Story_ID: 50147
Speaker 1: And, do you think that, that, what you've, I want to go back and ask a few more questions, just based on, you, when you look at the continuum of your career, what were very important things that you learned, or that were put in place to make you successful now?  And I'm saying that because I read here that you know, you were gone, one you've already said that you were very sales focused, you know and even when you were talking about this company, you're saying, you know, we've got in someone who could do sales.  So, it seems to me that has been a constant theme, that you can't have a business unless you have sales.
Speaker 2: Mmhmm.
Speaker 1: But, the other thing is that, you also, you know, are doing something, you know, you represent, I can't even say a generation, but you, but you represent a person, who is a minority who is operating very well, you know within a mainstream, type of industry.  And I'm wondering, what would you point to at helping you in your success in that?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think there is any one thing, I think, I think I've learned a couple of things along the way.  You know, I went to an all-black high school [Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri], to, a darn near an all-white university [Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri].  And discovered you know, if I can develop relationships with people, who are, I don't know, if you want to call them right thinking people, or just reasonable solid human beings.  Who happen to be smart in trying to do things themselves, you know, I can operate with those kind of folks, and you know, that's why I said, along the way, I was, you know I look back at it now and I think it was important I got involved with human relations kind of activities.  Because I began to appreciate, you know, most people in the world, they just, want to figure out how to have a successful life, they're not out to get anybody.  Which is often, not the way, you know, we as black folks are raised.  We're thinking, almost like the world is out to get us, and we always got to be, it's not that we don't have our sets of problems, I'm not kidding myself about that, but I think you have to be able to look at the other side of that coin.  And I discovered that, you know, if I could associate with, with people, and they could, you know, that had, that had, and that's just decent human beings, at one level, that could open up a lot of opportunities.  I mean, if they got treated the same way, I mean I saw that when I was able to make it through the, the advanced, the Distinguished Military Cadet program, in R.O.T.C. [Reserve Officers Training Corps], I mean I go to a summer camp in Greenville, Mississippi, just, not many, out of 200 cadets, there's only two or three of us that were, that were, you know, black, and I had to operate with all kind of folks from Southern towns, and all kinds of things, and I'm glad I was able to do that.  And I just carried that idea, and I think I learned that more from my mother [Olivia Sywger Greene] than my father [Frank Greene], because she was very able to do that, when, in her career. But, then, you know I always, I always carry, I always somehow connected with people who, you know, who, for one reason or another, would try, were able to come together and do things. I mean whether it's my major professor at Purdue [Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana], or, you know, folks when I was at, at the National Security Agency, or you know, the fella I have a patented with, at Fairchild.  At one time, at the during the days of TDC [Technology Development Corporation], we had a four star Air Force, a four star retired Air Force General on our board.  He was a white fighter pilot out of, out of Vietnam, and World War two, grew up in Mississippi.  As a matter of fact I had another fella on our board who later became Assistant Secretary of the Army.  You know, part of, part of what I'm saying is that, you know, I've always asked for help, and I try to get, you know, try to get help from the best people I can find.  And that, and it doesn't matter what color or what sex, and I found that really good people will tend to be very helpful.
Story_ID: 50148
Speaker 1: Now, you also said, that you, that relations--, that relationships were very important, and I want you to point out where relationships have been sort of critical.
Speaker 2: Well, I think I mentioned John Douglas, for example.  Harry Breman, who's of my friends, one of my closest friends, introduced me to the law firm that we've used now for, a little over 30 years.  He introduced me to Mike Fields, he's somebody I can go to and, you know, get some advice from, when I'm thinking about something.  But I think the other thing is, that, you know, I try to work very, very hard on nurturing, and maintaining relationships, not, not doing things in a way when, you know, it's easy to get angry and pissed off about things, but you now in the meantime, you can blow up relationships, and boy, you may never recover, those blow ups, and so, I try to work very hard at, I don't care how pissed off and angry I get about something.  And it doesn't matter whether it's, I mean, some of my best relationships, oh, you want a story?  I mentioned earlier I played squash, I don't know if it's on tape, but I play about two to three days a week.
Speaker 1: (Off-Camera Discussion)
Speaker 2: Okay. I was going to say one of my best relationships is with one of my squash partners, who happens to be about 81 years old.  Who is Jewish, was living in Germany, back during the, actually the pre-World War II days, his mother was trapped in Germany and almost didn't get out, he barely , he and his father barely got out, and went to England.  At any rate, he still plays about two or three days a week, and sometime, we usually play about once a week, but you know, we are at such opposite ends of the political spectrum, after we play squash, we may sit around and argue with each other, about our different political views.  But when, you know, if I'm not feeling bad, he, he's always the one who is sending me an e-mail, like alright when are you going to get back out here on the court?  Or in one case, I was in the hospital for a while, I mean he came by and visited me a couple times, and we've had this tremendous relationship, for well over ten years now.
Story_ID: 50149
Speaker 1: And what do you think attributed to your ability to get around in different circles, and, and handle that with ease?  Because sir, on the outside appearance, well I, let's answer that question for me, and then--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think I've learned something, and a lot of it came from my mother [Olivia Swygert Greene], I just watched the way, you know, as I was growing up, and so I guess you learn certain things by just, you know, observing.  And then, teaching helped me in a way, because you know, I'm actually a fairly sharp person in a lot of ways.
Speaker 1: That's why-
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Even with sales, you know I'm thinking you are the A typical sales person.
Speaker 2: But, you know, when I, when I, need to get ready to go give a presentation, I, I kind of, treat, treat it like, getting prepared to, go teach a class.  And, I found that, and so you know, I'm comfortable with that.
Speaker 1: Well, that's one part of the equation, but usually with sales you've got to close the deal, and teachers don't necessarily have to close the deal.
Speaker 2: And, that's why, that's why I said I've learned from this consultant, there's two different sides, I mean there's one that's giving a pitch, and the other part of it is, you know, shutting up and listen, and then try to figure, trying to understand, not just what it takes to close a deal, but, but see, I think, you know, I've talked a lot about selling, but to me the real issue is buying. And, and what I mean by that is getting a person to a point where they are ready to buy, is really a lot more about understanding what they need to get accomplished.  And then, and then understanding that maybe you can help them get accomplished, with what they really want to do, you know and you have a way to help accomplish what they really want to do.  And so, then you get them to be a buyer, and that's, that's what I learned from this consultant.
Speaker 1: And, how would you say he could do that though?
Speaker 2: Well, it's like, you know, we talk about things like values, you know in the world we have these things called, value propositions, or what was a compelling reason to, a person, that is doing, I mean is, you know, wants to buy something.  Then he taught me about expectation and reality, we all have in our lives a, you know, gaps between what we hope that's going to be happening, versus what's going to be really happening, and if you can show someone how you can close that gap, they'll become a buyer.
Speaker 1: Right, you have to know enough though about what their needs are
Speaker 2: All you do is, just ask them about, ask them a batch of questions.  And listen, try to listen, to the answer, and say, if this, what I heard is true than maybe this will help close that gap.  But people will tell you, in most selling situations, relatively few people listen, they just talk.  And so, what I learned was how to listen, and listen, I mean not just listen, but active listening, and translate that into say, oh ok, this is your expectation here, but your reality is here, how about if we do this, does that close the gap?  And, they'll say yeah you know, son of a gun that does.
Story_ID: 50150
Speaker 1: Now, that the other thing it says, is that when you had, TDC [Technology Development Corporation], that you often, you know, you had, went out on sales calls, and you had, your white partner with you.
Speaker 2: Mmhmm.
Speaker 1: And people would assume, well not partner, but you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was basically a partner, yeah right.
Speaker 1: And people assumed that you worked for him, and you said that was not, you did not take offense to it, you know, you really didn't care.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean I cared, but what are you 'gonna do, get mad at gravity (laughter)?  I mean there's a lot of things outside your control, so what are you going to do, I mean you'll become insane, in trying to, and you know, there's a lot of insanity in the world, because I mean, how many people get angry at stuff that's outside of their control.  And so, I guess, that's another thing, and maybe that's philosophical, in an aspect of why I can, you know there's a lot of things, that you know, not necessarily, way we would like it in the world, but that's just the way life is.
Story_ID: 50151
Speaker 1: Now, the other thing, I'd like to ask, I mean there's now a big push, for you know, now the feeling was that, in the pre-Civil War, even before the Civil Rights Movement, the push was, well labor, education, and, politics, and you know, those were the frontiers that, in fact spot on it.  And now, the belief now is that economics is, or business, you know is the place.  And I'm wondering what your, you know what you see in that continuum, more importantly what you think is going to really be necessary.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, this, this so called business continuum has been here for a long time.  But, I think you have to stand back and take a look at, excuse me, only maybe about ten percent of the population, actually goes out and starts companies.  And you know, and it's been that way, and maybe it's eight, or nine, or 11, but it's been around that number, for probably generations.  So, it's not as if some magic that's going to change that, I don't think there's some magic that's going to change that.  And so, this so called push for, you know, entrepreneurship, I mean we've had economic development, I mean, you know, black folks have been getting educated more and more, they've been getting into higher level positions, they've been taking over leadership positions in companies, and that's been going on for, any number of years now.  And I don't think that, I mean I think that that's probably going to accelerate because you know, folks are getting more opportunity, they're moving their way up through the ranks.  There is a set of skills required to be, a, a, a, CEO [Chief Executive Officer] of a company, but that, that just hasn't started recently, and whether it's going to be a big number is doubtful.  I think if people think that all of a sudden, because now I woke up one day and I say I want to be in business because I want to make this happen.  I mean if we get that idea, it takes a long time, to learn how to do this kind of stuff successfully, and it doesn't matter what color or sex you are.  I mean a few people can do it fast, but most of the time people, you know, even Microsoft took a long time to develop that company; HP [Hewlett Packard] has taken a long time.  And so, I think, you know, and we've been getting educated as black folks for a long time, I mean it's not like this is the first generation,
Speaker 1: But do you think that there's more involvement by now, but I know that there have been people doing things and--
Speaker 2: Well, I think, I think the big difference is the awareness of the opportunity.  I mean, that to me is one of the great things about what you're doing, is that you know, hopefully it will increase the awareness for a lot more people.  So that maybe they'll wake up one day and have the same kind of ah ha, you know, I think I want to do this, you know, I wanted to be an electrical engineer, I don't, but somehow I became aware of it, and it sounded interesting, but it wasn't because I could stay in my family.
Story_ID: 50152
Speaker 1: But, why do you think it's important for more minorities to get involved in things like you're doing, and, and, you know to participate.  Because you know it's one thing, you know, with the government contracts, this is on a whole different level.  And I'm just saying why do you see that as important?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it's, I think it's important that, as a rule, that, you know black folks or anybody living in this land of opportunity, kind of open their eyes, to the opportunity that's around them and decide, okay, if this opportunity is around, maybe I'll, maybe there's a piece of it that I can go after.  And the thing that really concerns me more than anything else, is that, it's amazing, and, and maybe, you know, maybe this is the best story for you.  Well, you know I go back to New York [New York City, New York] quite a bit, and I'm sitting on the subway, and my son has a condominium right on the subway train that goes right into Harlem [New York City, New York].  And he's right at the northwest corner of Central Park.  And so, I see these black kids, you know they've got their colors on, and they've got these baggy pants, and they're going downtown, to New York.  And I'm thinking to myself, they are so unaware of the opportunity that's all around them here, they're just absolutely unaware.  I mean, they could be the smartest kids in the world, but they're just, and they've got no connection, no relationships, I mean it's the, you know it's the financial center of the world.  And their sitting here, and they're riding that train and they, and they, they've got their ear phones on, and they're just absolutely disconnected from the power and the and the that land of opportunity that's right there around them, it's sad.  And, but you know, they've been doing that for generations, but now the opportunity is real because I go down to Wall Street, or I go down to one of the investment banks and there are other black folks in those banks, there's not many, but it could be three four times more.  You could just look at the number of folks in that, in that, environment, you know it's the same thing in Chicago [Illinois], you know, you, you, you take the, you take the "El" in Chicago, you see the same thing.  And so, and that's not racist, so how do you get people to start paying attention, you know, it's just, really basic.
Story_ID: 50153
Speaker 1: And so the focus is on building businesses--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --generating customers, making money, generating profits--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --creating economic value,--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and then learning, and then learning the skills, required to make that process all happen successfully.
Speaker 2: But then, what, how, is the, the lot of the, the economic look, lot of the black economy improve?  I--the, the only reason I point to the church 'cause they seem to be the place where there is some money falling.
Speaker 1: There's a lot of, I mean are we talking about a six or seven trillion dollar economy?  I mean the, I mean the amount of economics through the black community alone is, I don't know eight, nine, hundred billion dollars.  There's a lot of money.  It's not, money is not the problem.  It's people knowing how to manage--if they really do wanna be in economic development either managing money through their own personal assets, or managing money through the assets of a company.  But there's skills required to learn that.
Speaker 2: So, how do you see, do you see the fact that skill convergence can happen?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: Okay, and how is that?
Speaker 1: Like I said the kid on the subway decides, you know, if I learn how to do this, this, and this, I could be like one of the guys down on Wall Street or one of those guys on LaSalle Street in Chicago [Illinois].  But I'm not gonna ever do it if I just can't open my mind, I may walk by that opportunity the rest of my life. But the opportunity is there, it's absolutely there.  I mean that's why, you know they should go meet Derek Collins, you know, or, you know, or you've met, you know Stokely Carmichael.
Speaker 2: The other Stokely.
Speaker 1: Scholars.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I've think I've got, carry-over from--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I've got carry over, from--you're right--
Speaker 2: I can't (unclear), (laughter) (unclear)--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Right, yeah,
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  He's like Stokeley Carmichael.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you're right, yeah, Scholar. Yeah, and, and you know some of the folks who are saying that they learned those skills, here's, here's what you do.  And, you know, and they can be role models, and they can be right there next to a kid, or maybe even an adult.  You know I get people all the time saying I just wanna come over and talk about, you know, I got this idea or that idea.  And as much as I can, I try, I try to do that.  But they've already made up their, their own minds, that they wanna do something different.
Speaker 2: So you see this really starting with the individual.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, I mean everything starts with an individual.
Story_ID: 50154
Speaker 1: Now, are there people that you have, you know, in the course of your life really admired, and, if so why?
Speaker 2: Well I think I've told you about a whole range of those people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then, the other question I have is, what, what haven't you done in your life that you still would like to do?
Speaker 1: Well, you know I've always had this dream, about going to the four major tennis tournaments: The French Open, the Australian Open, Wimbledon, U.S Open, and I haven't done it yet.
Speaker 2: (Laughs).
Speaker 1: So, that's about it.
Speaker 2: So you have a, you have a love, okay that was the other thing, you have, I know you have a love of skiing--
Speaker 1: Um, hum.
Speaker 2: But do you have a love of tennis as well--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I don't play tennis like I used to.  But you know, I, I like watching tennis, and I just like hanging out and those kind of--now the other thing that I do, is something, my son is a, I think I mentioned is a professional musician.  Now sometimes, and I was just talking to him last night, night before last, last night.  I'll go with him when he's traveling, and last year I went to Singapore, to the Jazz Festival.  He was playing there with Woody Herman's band, we, we went to Hong Kong, and then went over to Macau, spent a couple days.  He's on his way to Sweden in about a week, and I was saying you know, I said you know, I said Frankie, I haven't been anywhere with you, he said, "You wanna come to Sweden?" I said, "Boy, I sure--I'd go in a heartbeat, I just don't have the time right now."  But we'll, we'll figure out something to do, but I, you know, it, probably in one of my other lives, I think I'd be a groupie or something, or, or maybe I might even be a tennis bum or a squash bum, or a ski bum.  I don't know, but I just enjoy doing those, those kind of things.
Speaker 2: And, Mr. Greene, what, what do you get a kick out of in life?  I mean what really gives you a sense of like--
Speaker 1: I just told you (laughs).
Speaker 2: I know--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I just told you--
Speaker 2: I know but (unclear)--
Speaker 1: I'm absolutely serious about that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right.  Yeah, I, I'm absolutely, I do get a kick out of it.  Me and--my daughter and I, we went to the Montreal Jazz Festival a couple a years ago.
Speaker 2: Now, the other thing, you come from a strong family structure.  It also appears you have a strong family.  And I was just wondering if you would comment on the importance of family.
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, family is, I mean I don't know how to say it, say it strong enough.  I mean family's always been very important in our society.  And I mean it's, I mean it's kind of the bedrock that you can build on, 'cause I mean none of this stuff happens, by I mean, it's like, I don't think anybody does anything really by themselves.  I mean they build on something, and, you know, and family can be that bedrock.
Story_ID: 50155
Speaker 1: With Silicon Valley [California], you've spent many years here, and I'm wondering why this area really became the hot bed that it did.  What, what convergence affected--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There's always, there has been a lot of discussion about that question for many, many a years.  It's certainly not the only hot bed of technology in the world.  Why it became such a strong, strong one, I mean you can look at a few factors going back to the fact that you have Stanford University [Stanford, California] here.  A lot of credit goes to one of the former deans of the engineering school, a fella by the name Fred Turman, who encouraged students to, you know, try business opportunities, and business ideas.  I mean he was, he was one of the mentors of Hewlett and Packard, for example.  Some people, I mean you've got U-C Berkeley [University of California-Berkeley, Berkeley, California] you've got other schools like Santa Clara [University, Santa Clara, California] San Jose State [University, San Jose, California], so it's a very strong educational infrastructure here.  I mean you've got a great climate for one thing, so a lot of people just like to come here because of the climate.  It's on a coast, so that we get that kind of naturally, people from many different parts of the world, and, and California in some ways kind of represents a new frontier.  And so what does that mean?  People who go out to new frontiers are risk takers, by their, by their nature.  You know, maybe sometimes crazies, by their nature, which means that they're not afraid to try new ideas 'cause it's like, you know, it's not like I have a lot vested interest in some old idea that I've gotta keep supporting.  And so I, you know I just think when you just put all that together, this, you know, this becomes, as well, as much as any place, kind of an ideal kind of a, kind of a place, and also, then you've got, you know, over the years, there's emerged a, infrastructure of law firms.  I mean, you know, you can start a company and not get charged, for the legal work.  You know, law firms around here on a very routine basis will do the legal work for free, maybe they'll, maybe they'll want a chance to invest in the company, or maybe they'll just say, "You know pay me when you get some money raised."  I mean that's what happened to me when I started out, and then you're part of a, climate of other crazies, which says, you, you didn't try that yet?  What's the matter with you?  And it's almost like a badge of honor, that you know, so what, well if it didn't work, well you know, pick yourself up and go try it again.  It's, so it doesn't have that kind of overly cautious structure that says, oh, that was a crazy thing to do you know, why'd you ever try that crazy idea see what an idiot you are?  I mean so, it's a, it's a different kind of thinking environment.  And a lot of places around the world come here, or people from places have come here trying to figure out, you know, what is this magic that's here that they can take back home and import to create that kind of environment, but I think ultimately it's the people here.
Story_ID: 50156
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back to yourself as a young person, and you see where you've come, what would your comment be on that, because, you know, you've had a, you know, you as you said you were very good with math and science but that didn't mean that you would be owning your own venture capital firm.
Speaker 2: Hum--
Speaker 1: And I'm just wondering, if you can take yourself back and look at what you've--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: you know, where you've come and comment on it.
Speaker 2: I've probably gone ten times farther than I ever would.  I mean I had no idea, I mean I think the only--that's why I say awareness is so important.  Because growing up, I mean black folks in my family didn't ski, we didn't have any electrical engineers in my family.  We had good solid government employees, and that's what I saw.  We didn't hardly travel, I mean we traveled but it was, you know, maybe up to New York [New York City, New York], or, or maybe it was down someplace else but we didn't travel all over the world.  So, but, you know, as I grew up, you know I became aware of more and more opportunities and I was kind of inquisitive about things, and, and so, I mean, you know, from where I started to where I am today, I mean, I would, I mean if I go back 40 years, I didn't have a clue about what I'm doing today, not-a-clue.
Story_ID: 50157
Speaker 1: And what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well, he did the best he could while he was here.
Speaker 1: And, what do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: He did the best he could while he was here, (laughs) so--
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you'd like to say?
Speaker 2: No, I'd just like to compliment you on what you're doing, and I hope you're really successful at it
Speaker 1: Thank you, sir, I appreciate that.
Story_ID: 50158
Speaker 1: Taken at the, in the Pentagon at the Defense Department on the signing of a major Air Force contract.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And, do you remember what the year was?
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy seven [1977].
Speaker 2: Okay Scott, we don't have much time.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):    Well.
Speaker 2: I know, but he's got to go.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Well do you want to have these pictures in focus and then published, or, you know I mean at some point--
Speaker 2: I know, but he's got to go, that's why I'm just saying.
Speaker 1: Okay. If, if you want to we can take the picture out of that jacket, if you want them--
Speaker 2: No, we don't need it out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This was a picture, will you hang on just a second, that's not what I thought, let me see if this is, 1964.  Okay, this is it.  This was a picture when I was in the Air Force at Kelly Air Force Base in 1964, and that's me right there in the center.  I think I was a, First Lieutenant, by then.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next photo.
Speaker 1: This was a picture when I was commissioned in the Air Force as a Second Lieutenant in June of 1962.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And next photo?
Speaker 1: Which one am I--
Speaker 2: That's the ones that I point to, this one and this one.
Speaker 1: Well, the--can you go back up to the, one on the top left for a second?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 1: This was a picture of the space shuttle at Edwards Air Force Base in September of 1983, and if you could go down to the left picture.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  One second, okay, and you said lower left?
Speaker 1: And, this was a picture with, the first black pilot of a space shuttle flight.  His name was Gregory.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This happens to be a picture of my son, who is a professional trumpet player on Broadway, but this was taken in Orlando, Florida. When he had a job at Epcot Center as a student in the summer of 1983.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next please, upper--
Speaker 1: Upper right.  This was a picture taken in, around Christmastime in 1988.  It shows my father on the right and my daughter, and my first grandson.
Speaker 2: What's your grandson's name?
Speaker 1: Henry Joe, Gauge (ph).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next photo, please?
Speaker 1: That one.
Speaker 2: This is a picture taken at Sun Valley, Idaho in 1983 and I was learning to ski at the time and this was taken when we were having dinner at my--and this is my first wife who passed away from cancer in 1984.
Speaker 1: Her name?
Speaker 2: Phyllis.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This was a picture taken at R.O.T summer--R.O.T.C [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] summer camp, in Greenville, Mississippi in July of--
Speaker 1: Which photo did you want me to--
Speaker 2: I don't know which, any particular one you wanted?
Speaker 1: Is that you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or is that--
Speaker 2: Both of those.
Speaker 1: What about this one?
Speaker 2: Okay, those were, those were two, yeah, this was at R.O.T.C Summer camp.  These were two other Cadets that I went down to the summer camp with.  We were all, students at Washington University [St. Louis, Missouri] at the time.  That was July, 1959.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, this was another picture taken at Sun Valley, Idaho where I was learning to ski in 1983, I think it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, this one?
Speaker 2: This is, this is basically the same, this is just a repeat.
Speaker 1: Okay. I have a question about (unclear).  Is this, isn't that--
Speaker 2: That's my father [Frank Greene] and the, and my son-in-law's grandmother.  That's my sister's husband's grandmother.
Speaker 1: Her name?
Speaker 2: I don't know at the moment, shoot, I don't remember, brain has gone dead.  Now, this is Christmas.  She's since passed away.  Actually, they're both passed away.  Shoot, I can't remember.  This is a fella who was a, who was in business around here, but I can't remember his name.
