Story_ID: 18075
Speaker 1: This HistoryMakers interview is being conducted by Robert C. Hayden and the videographer is Mr. Scott Stearns.  The interview is taking place at Harvard Law School, Griswold Hall, Cambridge, Massachusetts.  The date is December 2, 2004.  Our interviewee has significant achievements in the legal profession--scholar, teacher, and civil rights attorney, and she's the first African American woman to receive a tenured position at Harvard Law School.  Madam Professor, would you give us your full name and spell your name for us?
Speaker 2: My name is Carol Lani Guinier, C-A-R-O-L, L-A-N-I, G-U-I-N-I-E-R.
Speaker 1: And professor, your date of birth and location of birth? Where were you born? Where were you born?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I understood the question, but then I thought, you know, I don't want to give you too much information because you'll perhaps ask for my Social Security number and then (laughs) people would be trying to steal my identity.  I was born in New York City, April 19th, 1950.
Story_ID: 18076
Speaker 1: What is your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year?  Probably summer.
Speaker 1: And your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Can I use more than one color?  I like lots of colors.
Speaker 1: Sure, that's a good answer.  Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I love Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts], but I have to admit it's not much of a vacation, because I think I know too many people there.  (laughs).
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite saying or phrase that you use on a daily basis or now and then with family and friends?
Speaker 2: --No. You'd have to ask them.  They would know better than I.  (laughs).  I think my son would say something like, "That's what I was trying to say", or "That's what I meant" because I say that all the time when he clarifies or improves upon what it is that I was saying.
Story_ID: 18077
Speaker 1: Give me your mother's name and tell me something about your mother, where she born and where we grew up and what you know about her early background as a child and adult years.
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you her first name, which is Jeanie.  I'm not giving you her last name, because I really am afraid of identity theft (laughs) and you may say I'm a little paranoid, but I have had people do this to me.  She grew up in the Bronx and in Queens [New York].  She was the daughter, or she is, the daughter of two immigrants, one from Poland and one from Russia, who settled in the Bronx and opened up a delicatessen.  They lived--she just told me the street--I don't remember the street, but they lived near the Grand Concourse, and ran this delicatessen.  She was two years older than her brother and always complained that her parents were never both home for dinner, so for her it was really important when we were growing up, to have family meals, not just dinner, but breakfast and lunch because her parents were always working, or when they moved to Queens they started a restaurant and catering business and they were always in the restaurant.
Speaker 1: What was life like for her growing up in the Bronx?  Did she tell you stories, or has she told you about childhood episodes or incidents growing up, what life was like for her?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So, she was often responsible for her brother, and she's told a story about being maybe five years old, and waking up at night and neither of her parents were home and her instructions were to bang on the dumbwaiter and the neighbor from downstairs would come up to see what was the problem, and she banged on the dumbwaiter and nobody came and so she just got herself dressed and went outside and walked down the street and ended up having to cross this very large boulevard--I think it may have been the Grand Concourse, but it was a really large boulevard and I don't recall if she actually crossed the boulevard, or if she just stood on the other side across from the delicatessen where her parents were working and got her mother's attention, and her mother rushed out and swept her up and took her back to the apartment and told her, "Don't tell your father."  But the sense of both being very independent but also very responsible, because she was in charge of her three year old brother, even though she was only five.
Speaker 1: Did you know her parents or grandparents?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Your grandmother came from Poland, or which one?
Speaker 2: She was from Poland.
Speaker 1: Did she talk about her coming to New York City [New York], and what it was like when she arrived here.  Did you--?  Did she ever share any of that with you, her early years?
Speaker 2: I don't recall speaking with her about it.  I have memories of speaking maybe to my father or my mother about what they think happened, but not to her.
Speaker 1: Could you share that with us, what his perceptions were and what was happening?
Speaker 2: My sense is that she came on a boat from Poland, and she was about eight and she was either by herself or she was with distant relatives, but she didn't come with her parents, and when she came I don't believe she went to school because she either finished the third or the fourth grade, and I assume that she did that in Poland.
Speaker 1: And what were your father's perceptions of his first coming here?  Did he share those with you?
Speaker 2: My father?
Speaker 1: I'm sorry--your grandfather--your mother's father.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: No, I don't know anything about his journey.
Speaker 1: How do you remember your mother as you were growing up and how would you describe your mother today--her personality and her ambience.  What is she like as a person?
Speaker 2: Well, she went to Hunter College [New York, New York], and then she went to University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] where she got a master's in Radio Performance, or some form of radio theatre.  She had majored in French in college and she ended up as a high school English teacher, so one of the most important things about my mother is that she was always correcting the way we spoke--she was also a speech therapist.  She often would read some of my essays.  I remember in junior high school I wrote an essay about we are a nation of sheep, and my teacher had discounted it, or had made comments about the fact that I had--the teacher felt that I didn't use full sentences or there was some problem with the essay, so I showed it to my mother, who felt that I was taking poetic license but it was quite appropriate, and so she gave me ammunition to then go back and talk to the teacher about my grade.  However, my mother was very disinterested in grades.  When she and her brother were growing up, her father was very competitive, and he was always comparing her grades to her brother's grades and she didn't want to do that to her children, so when I came home with excellent report cards, her reaction would always be, "That's very nice, but who are your friends?"  She was much more interested in interpersonal relationships and making sure that we knew how to get along with other people, not simply to excel for ourselves.
Story_ID: 18078
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father.  What was his name, where was he born, when was he born?
Speaker 2: His name was Ewart Gladstone Guinier, although he dropped the Gladstone at some point in his life.  I'm not sure why he liked the Ewart and not the Gladstone, but that's--
Speaker 1: Would you spell Ewart for us?
Speaker 2: E-W-A-R-T.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: He was born in Panama in the Panama Canal Zone, and he was born to Jamaican parents.  When he was six, his father died, and it's a family dispute as to whether his father died in London [England] or in transit from London.  His father was timekeeper on the Canal, and then went to London to study to become a barrister.  And the story that I had always heard from my father, was that his father died of tuberculosis in London, but my aunt who was the family historian, did not think that he was in London, but was in transit between Jamaica and Panama on a boat or a ship when he died.  But in any event, my father was six.  His mother then remarried and left him and several of his siblings in Jamaica with relatives, so he was raised by his Aunt Sarah while his mother with her second husband moved to Boston [Massachusetts].  So he didn't see his mother probably for seven or eight years.  He came to the United States when he was fifteen.
Speaker 1: His mother's name--your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Marie Beresford Guinier French.
Speaker 1: And her second husband was--?
Speaker 2: Her first husband, my grandfather, was Howard Guinier, and her second husband was Mr. French.  He was dead by the time I was born, so I didn't know either of my grandfathers.
Speaker 1: Did your father ever share with you stories and episodes about his growing up in Jamaica?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us something that you remember.
Speaker 2: Well, he went to a school where the headmaster was Teacher King, and Teacher King was very strict, and he would ride around on a mule, and my father and his classmates would climb up the orange trees and hide from Teacher King.  My father never went back to Jamaica after he came in, I guess, 1925 until I took him in 1980.  That was the first time he had gone back.  He said he wouldn't go back because he would be the only person wearing shoes.  When he was in Jamaica he was very poor, but one thing we did go, is back to Linstead which is where he spent most of his childhood and we looked to find not only his house, but where Teacher King lived and the school that my father went to, so I have a vivid memory of that school.  I don't recall the orange trees where my father and his friends would be hiding, but he told us great stories about growing up.  At some point he was sent to boarding school in Jamaica.  He hated that, but most of the stories were of little boys doing devilish things, taking the johnny cakes out of the frying pan under the--distracting the aunt who was cooking them, and sneaking to the back to eat them while they were nice and warm.
Story_ID: 18079
Speaker 1: He came to Boston [Massachusetts] in what year, again?  How old was he when he came to Boston?
Speaker 2: He came in 1925.
Speaker 1: And his mother was here?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What did he tell you about his arrival in Boston and where he lived and what happened when he first got here?
Speaker 2: Well, he lived in Roxbury [Massachusetts], and he went to Boston English High School [Boston, Massachusetts].  He had a good experience at Boston English.  In fact I had just been going through some of his papers and found his certificate of character and rectitude.  He won lots of prizes there.  He was a top student.  He was the editor of the yearbook.  He had a very good experience, and from there he applied to college, and his guidance counselor had urged him to apply to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and he applied, in addition to Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire], because they had a good football team, and he was admitted to both schools, but his guidance counselor told him he should go to Harvard.  So, he turned down the offer from Dartmouth and showed up at Harvard that September and wanted to live in the dorms because that's where all of the Harvard students lived.  Very few students commuted, but over the summer he had gotten a letter informing him that his request to live off campus had been granted--a request he had never made.  And, then when he arrived on campus, he needed some financial assistance in order to be able to pay for his textbooks as well as the tuition, and they told him he wasn't eligible for financial aid because he hadn't submitted a picture with his application, so he was denied financial aid and he couldn't live in the dorms and he said no one would talk to him, including the people that he knew from Boston English High School, who had been friendly when he was friendly when he was in high school.  So, one of the young men who had received this coveted Comstock Prize for, I think, manliness, character and rectitude the year before my father, was at the library and my father went to try to retrieve a book and saw this gentleman and said hello, and introduced himself and was trying to be very friendly, and the young man looked right over his shoulder to the next person in line, and without looking at my father, he said, "What book do you want", and gave him the book and made no acknowledgement that he knew him or had ever seen him before.  So, the first person to talk to my father voluntarily while he was at Harvard, was Ralph Bunche, who I think my father met in the bookstore, the Coop  bookstore.  And, it was Ralph Bunche and some of the other black graduate students who introduced my father to a little community of black college students throughout Boston, and the community met in the kitchen of the Finals Clubs, where the bright, affluent students would come to take their meals.  They didn't eat in the dormitory, they ate in their clubs, and that was the one place where blacks found some fraternity--was working as either waiters or cooks in those finals clubs, and my father used to play cards, and actually pretty good, actually.
Speaker 1: I want to come back to his educational pursuits and journeys.  What do you know about his home life, his neighborhood life in Roxbury.  Did he talk to you about growing up in Roxbury, outside of the school?
Speaker 2: I don't really recall any of the details of--I know, for example, that we drove past several of the houses that he had lived in, and I believe at least one of them--no, the Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity has a place on Massachusetts Avenue, and he pointed that out obviously much later on.  But, I never saw the house where he lived while he was going to Harvard or before when he was at Boston English High School.  In fact, I believe that he finally got a job as a--not a handyman--but someone who assisted an elderly woman, ran errands for her and bought her groceries, and he may have rented a room from her at some point, but I don't recall who she was or where she lived.
Speaker 1: Let's come back to Harvard.  I understand he was here for about two years and he left.  Is that right?
Speaker 2: Yes, he left in 1931 because he ran out of money.  He worked the summers on the boats.  I'm not sure exactly what--and made a pretty good amount of money and gave it to his mother for safekeeping, and somehow his stepfather got access to this money and used some of it, so he didn't have the money for his tuition, and Harvard still would not give him any financial aid.
Speaker 1: So, then what did he do when he had to leave here?
Speaker 2: He left, it was during the Depression, and he went to New York City, and he enrolled at City College [of New York, New York, New York] and got his degree from City College, and then got a Master's I believe in Economics, from Columbia [University, New York, New York].  During that period, I remember him telling stories about having not a room, but a bed, and not even the unlimited use of the bed.  You paid for the use of the bed for eight hours of a twenty-four hour day, so basically he was sharing this bed with two other people--three people, each of whom had access to the bed long enough to get some sleep.
Speaker 1: Did he obtain a law degree?
Speaker 2: Yes, he got his law degree in 1959, so he was commuting at that point from where he lived in Queens [New York], and he went to NYU [New York University] Law School [New York, New York].
Story_ID: 18080
Speaker 1: The time from getting his degrees in New York City, and before he came to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] as the first Director of the DuBois Institute and head of the Afro-American Studies Program, what did he do during the years before he came back here?  What was his career?
Speaker 2: He was a labor organizer for the United Public Workers.  He served in World War II as a warrant officer in the segregated army.  He was an insurance salesman.  He sold real estate.  He worked in the Bed-Stuy [Bedford Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York] Restoration Corporation.  He worked at Columbia [University, New York, New York] in their Urban Institute.  He was very active with something called the Jamaica Coordinating Council in New York City, the Urban League, I think I--
Speaker 1: While he was involved in all these activities, did he ever take you to any of the meetings or places.  Were you involved with him as a youngster, going to any of these things?
Speaker 2: I forgot one thing.  He ran for the borough presidency of Manhattan [New York, New York] in 1949.  He was the first black to run for the Manhattan Borough presidency, and he got, I think 38 percent of the vote on the American Labor Party ticket.  After he ran, and it was clear that a black person could in fact get support, the next time the Democrats actually ran a black.  I think it was Hulan Jack, for Manhattan Borough presidency, and he won.  And then for a period of maybe fifteen years, that was the black seat on the Board of Estimate.  He certainly didn't take me anywhere that he was running for office, because I wasn't born.  I don't recall him taking me to his--I don't recall him taking me to any of his offices except for when he was selling real estate, so I went to his real estate office.  When we lived in Queens [New York], it would be really annoying because if we were going somewhere, we had to expect that it would take twice as long as it should because he would take routes down residential streets looking to see which houses were for sale, and getting a sense of what activity was going on in the neighborhood, so in that sense I guess you could say we were working--or, we were working as he was working.  And, of course he did a lot of insurance, and he also did people's income taxes, and he did a lot of that at home.  So, people would come and he would work around our dining room table.
Story_ID: 18081
Speaker 1: Do you have any siblings, and how many, and who are they?
Speaker 2: I have two sisters, and a half sister.  The half sister was somebody I didn't know when I was growing up because her mother had told her that my father had died during World World II--he actually paid support, but she didn't have any contact with him.  And then I have two younger sisters.
Speaker 1: And your younger sisters' names?
Speaker 2: Marie and Sarah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where is Marie today?
Speaker 2: They're both in New York.
Speaker 1: In New York.
Story_ID: 18082
Speaker 1: How do you remember your father?  What was he like as a person--as a father?
Speaker 2: Well, for me in many ways, my father was my hero and also an inspiration, because I admired his intelligence and his sense of commitment to principle, but in some ways it was the ways in which he had been treated--the fact that he had been treated without respect and inconsistent with what I thought was his intelligence and his commitment, gave me a source of tremendous drive that I had to right those wrongs that had been done to my father, and so I had to right those wrongs on two levels.  One, he went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and he didn't finish, so I had to go to Harvard and graduate, so on a personal level in some ways, I was duplicating or at least living out, opportunities that had been denied to him.  And then, in a professional or public sense, I realize that so many of my ideas and so many of the things that I do now as a scholar can be traced back to conversations that I had with him sitting around the dining room table in St. Albans [Queens, New York, New York] because I was--he was a great story teller, and he not only told stories about growing up in Jamaica and the West Indies, but also about many things.  So, if you raised any subject, he would say, "Well, let me tell you something about that," and would begin a very long story, very lengthy, but filled with details.  I can remember when he was telling me the story about the Depression and living in a room in which he simply had access to a bed for eight hours.  He could tell you the telephone number of the room, or the telephone number of some of the people that he knew then.  So, the stories were rich with detail and I was fascinated, so I would just sit there at the dining room table.  I would be sitting right here and he would be sitting at the head of the table, and we would--well, he would talk and I would listen.  Unfortunately, I didn't take notes.  He was also an avid reader of the 'New York Times' which is a habit that I have picked up.  He had a somewhat ambitious sense of humor.  He was not above doing--I can remember when one of my friends came to visit me in high school, and he had her come and sit in the living room and told her that there was a dog behind the couch and she should watch out that the dog doesn't bite her or something, and we didn't even have a dog--but that kind of playfulness.
Story_ID: 18083
Speaker 1: Why don't you continue sharing some more things about him.
Speaker 2: About my father?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Could you give me a little direction--
Speaker 1: Well, you were telling me about his union organizing.
Speaker 2: One of his students at a memorial service that my family had after my father died, came and talked about how Ewart Guinier always was a union organizer at heart, because he had his literature with him and whatever he was thinking about or reading, he would have copies of it, and he would distribute it to all the people that he met and would find a way of talking to them about this material.  I think the student was Wes Poppett (ph.) and he (unclear) was taking it out his jacket pocket and having something just on point to hand to his audience.
Speaker 1: You said he liked to read, he liked to read the New York Times.  Did he like to write, and did he write?
Speaker 2: He wrote a number of things.  I know he wrote something about Boris Bittker's 'The Case for Black Reparations'.  He wrote a review of that.  He wrote a set of short pieces that--he was much more of an orator than he was a writer.
Story_ID: 18084
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up back in New York City?  How far back can you remember in your childhood?
Speaker 2: I can remember walking up the steps of the New York City [New York] Public Library, the main building, which has lots of steps, and I think my mother was pregnant with my younger sister, so I was probably about three.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what happened that day at all?
Speaker 2: Just walking up those steps to the library.  I used to love to go to the library.  That was a big treat, and even when we moved from Manhattan [New York] to Queens [New York], I can recall visiting several libraries.  First we went to the St. Albans Public Library, then we would go to the Queens Village Public Library, and each time I think I was allowed to take home ten books.  That was so exciting the first night that I had these ten books in my room, and I would stack them up in the order in which I would get to read them, and just looking at these books that I was about to read, that was thrilling.
Speaker 1: Any other memories like that in your early years, even pre-school?  Any other memories?
Speaker 2: I remember a little boy that I had a crush on (laughs).
Speaker 1: What else?
Speaker 2: I remember having to memorize an introduction for a program.  I was taking ballet lessons and the ballet teacher said I was the only one who could possibly memorize this introduction, so I think I was five years old, and I had to memorize an introduction and then give her some flowers.  So, I remember practicing the introduction, and I remember walking to the recital holding, I think I was holding the flowers, but certainly all dressed up, ready for the performance and walking around the grates that are on the sidewalks in New York City that, you know, you open the grate and it lets you down into the basement--so I remember that evening--I don't remember the recital very well.
Speaker 1: How many years did you live in Manhattan?
Speaker 2: 'Til I was six.
Speaker 1: Do you remember, what street did you live on, do you remember?
Speaker 2: 113th.
Speaker 1: Do you remember anything about that neighborhood or the street?
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: What do you remember.  What were your perceptions that you remember?
Speaker 2: We used to go down, my mother would take us to the park on Riverside Drive, and there was a playground and we would go there probably everyday.  I had a little bicycle, which was stolen, and I was very humiliated because I had to ride my sister's tricycle, and I was five and I was too big to be riding a tricycle, but I got to ride it around and around on the corner. I don't recall which corner, but this was off Broadway, right in front of a bank, and there was a relatively large space between the building and the end of the sidewalk.  I remember that.  In fact, I think my bicycle was stolen twice.
Story_ID: 18085
Speaker 1: Did you start school in Manhattan [New York] or in Queens [New York]?  Where did you begin?
Speaker 2: I went to nursery school and kindergarten in Manhattan. I went to a nursery school at Wadley High School where they had a program for pre-school, and I think the students at Wadley High School were training to be either elementary school teachers or working with young children, and then I went to kindergarten--I can't--I don't recall the number, I think it may have been P.S. 124 or 123, and I can remember in kindergarten I had a teacher that I just really, really liked.  I think one of the reasons I liked her was because she would wait for me while my mother would be late coming to pick me up from school, and one time my mother was really late and she said we would play hide and go seek outside of the school while we were waiting.  And, she hid by joining a group of people who were just walking down the street (laughs) and she just became part of this group, and then I really didn't know what had happened to her.  So, I just thought that was so clever.
Speaker 1: Was your mother teaching at this point.  Was she working in the school?
Speaker 2: She was working as a speech therapist, but I don't know if she--I know she worked at Alexander Hamilton Vocational High School [Brooklyn, New York] before I was born, but I don't think she was working at a particular school--I know she was working as a speech therapist, but I don't know where.
Speaker 1: So, you went to grade 1 or 2 then in Queens, you've moved over to Queens at that point?
Speaker 2: I skipped third grade.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that elementary school and skipping third grade.  How did that happen?
Speaker 2: I actually have a picture back in my office of my sister's fifth grade class, the teacher just sent it to me like last week.  So, I went to PS 136 and it was maybe four blocks from my house and, so I started in first grade, and in the middle of first grade the teacher said, "Is there anybody who wants to go a new class that we're starting", like this is 1A or 1B, and we're going to have 1C.  I don't remember which letter my class was, and I didn't raise my hand, I was perfectly happy doing whatever I was doing, and somehow I got moved to another class, but rather than going to the 1C class which was opening up, she put me in the 1A class which I take it was the more advanced class.  Then when I went to second grade, the school took one other girl whose name was Rhonda Seligman (ph.) and me, out of class for math lessons and then sometime in March or April they announced that we were going to skip the rest of second grade and just go right into third grade.  So, I went and I had a friend who lived across the street from me who was in third grade, and I went to school with her and she asked the teacher, "Aren't you going to get Lani a hook in the coat closet so she can hang up her coat?", and the teacher said, "Oh, well, we'll see."  And then she sent me back to second grade (laughs).  And it turned out that they hadn't gotten the paperwork signed by the superintendent or someone else in the bureaucracy, and I was so humiliated going back to second grade after my class had given me a going away party-- and I remember coming back to second grade and the class was going to a movie in the auditorium, and the teacher, who got married in the middle of the year, and her name was either Ms. Levine, and then she became Mrs. Schlay (ph.), or her name was Ms. Schlay and she became Mrs. Levine.  But, she came up to me and she noticed that I was crying, and she said, "Lani, don't worry, it will all work out."  And I said, "Oh, if you think I'm crying because I'm back in second grade, you're wrong.  Movies always make me cry."  Then I like, went home for lunch, except it wasn't for lunch because second grade was only, I think, half a day.  Maybe it was for lunch.  But anyway, my mother was home and she opened the door, and she said, "How's my little third grader?"  And I said, "You don't have a third grader.  You have a second grader."  So, she went back up to the school, and within two or three days I was back in third grade.  But, I was only in third grade for a month or two, and then I got to fourth grade and I didn't know how to write a cursive, because I had skipped third grade when they had learned this, and the teacher whose name was Mrs. Buckston, announced that she had understood that there were students in the class who did not yet know how to write a cursive and for those students, they would have a week or two weeks to learn, so I remember practicing with my mother so I could write a cursive, and we had a spelling test, and because I had just learned to write a cursive, I was very slow, and the word was 'arithmetic' and I can remember I was on 'h' in arithmetic, and she was already on the next word.  And after that spelling test, I went up to her and I said, "Mrs. Buckston, I'm one of the students who is just learning cursive, and I'm writing very slowly.  Do you think you could read the words more slowly so that I have time to write them.  I know how to spell them, but I can't write them."  And, she didn't say anything, and the next day, she went even faster.  (laughs). I also remember Bergie (ph.) Janjigian, who sat behind me in the fourth grade, and used to dip my braids in the paint.
Speaker 1: Do you know how to spell her last name?
Speaker 2: Who, Buckston?
Speaker 1: No, the student who--
Speaker 2: Oh, Janjigian--J-A-N-J-I-G-I-A-N, I think, something like that.
Speaker 1: It was a he.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I actually saw him when I was working at the Justice Department.  He had married a woman from Korea, and he and she had taken the bus from Washington the state, to Washington the capitol so he could introduce her to me, but then he was Berg Jan. (laughs).
Speaker 1: Going back to dipping your braids, what did you do when he dipped your braids?
Speaker 2: I don't remember doing anything, I don't remember doing anything.  The other thing I remember about that fourth grade class, I guess I remember two things, there was a girl named Maria who sat in the front row who had a crush on another little boy, and one day as we were walking home I had one of these fortune tellers--I don't know if you've seen them--where you fold a piece of paper in complicated ways and then you use your fingers to open it and close it, and open it and close it, and you ask people what number are you, and they say five, and you go one, two, three--so when it finally got to be her fortune, it said "You are beautiful."  And she was so happy.  She kissed me.  (laughs).  And I'm thinking, that was weird.  It's just a (laughs) piece of fortune that I made up. She was very pleased. Mrs. Buckston was the--I remember a lot about her class, for some reason.  We were learning American history and we were talking about George Washington and the founding fathers, and I was just struck by the dissonance between the way in which we worshipped these founders and the fact that they owned slaves, and there was no discussion in the class of the fact that George Washington and Thomas Jefferson had owned slaves.
Speaker 1: And you didn't learn that there?
Speaker 2: I don't think we learned it in school.
Speaker 1: You didn't know it there, but you knew it from--
Speaker 2: I knew it from my family, and my mother in particular was the one who took us to the library, and we had all kinds of books and I raised my hand, and I asked Mrs. Buckston, why is it that we talk about the founders without discussing the fact that they owned slaves, and again she was not very pleased with my impertinence.
Story_ID: 18086
Speaker 1: So, your mother and father provided African American black history cultural materials to you from the beginning?  Is there any one book that you remember regarding a black personality, biography, or black history that your parents gave you or read to you--does anyone stand out in your mind?
Speaker 2: Harriet Tubman.
Speaker 1: Why Harriet Tubman?
Speaker 2: About Harriet Tubman?  It may have been the particular book, but it was such a powerful narrative about a woman who not only walked her way to freedom, but then went back to pick up other people.  The idea that she not only freed herself and those who were brave enough to follow her the first time, but that she went back, that she subjected herself to enormous risks to free others when she was already free, and the story I particularly remember from this book is that she was apparently on a train at some point and she was trying to pass as a free black, but she didn't know how to read, and so she was sitting there with a book upside down because she didn't know how to read, but fortunately the conductor apparently didn't know how to read either, because (laughs) he didn't notice.  But, I just remembered that image of how close she came to being discovered.
Story_ID: 18087
Speaker 1: In the Queens Elementary School [PS 136, New York, New York] , is there one particular teacher that made an impact on you?  Mrs. Buckston-- (simultaneously)
Speaker 2: Well, a black teacher, Mrs. Paris, who was my fifth grade teacher, and I had a teacher, Mr. Worthington, who--one of these teachers who was inspirational intellectually, except Mr. Worthington used to do some very clever exercises.  For example, I remember once he had different students stand outside of the door of the classroom and then he told all of us that we were going to be engaged in an experiment, and the challenge was if the person who was outside could figure out what the experiment was, and he would say the names of three cities and he would ask the person outside to pick a city, and just tell Mr. Worthington, not anybody else.  And then the person would come back in and the class would always guess the city, because he had told us that he would say the name of city after the name of a city or state that had two words.  So, if it was Boston [Massachusetts], the code, if the secret word was Boston, he would say, Atlanta [Georgia], New York, Boston, so you would know what it was.  I just remember he would do things like that which made the day go very fast.
Speaker 1: What was the racial ethnic mix of the student body?
Speaker 2: At PS 136?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, when I was there, until fourth grade, and maybe this is why fourth grade was so significant--until fourth grade it was predominantly white, and then at fourth grade all of a sudden there were many more black kids--I don't know if they changed the attendance lines or it's just that a lot--I mean, like half the class, between third grade and fourth grade--is now black.  And then it was white flight, but not that much.  And then if you look at the picture of my sister in the fifth grade, so she was three years behind, there are only three white kids in a class of 33.  It was interesting to see this picture because, number one, there were 33 kids in the class and that was just normal.  Nobody thought anything of 33, 35, 40 kids in a class, but it was also obvious that most of the kids, by the time she went to 136, were black.  And then, my youngest sister, who was seven years younger than me, when she went to 136 it was all black, and the teachers who had been, for all of their weaknesses, committed to teaching and challenged the students, by the time she was there the teachers had really stopped teaching and so she ended up being bussed to Bayside.
Speaker 1: How many grades did you go through at this school, did you finish?
Speaker 2: At PS 136?
Speaker 1: Yes, when did you--?
Speaker 2: I left in the sixth grade because they had program--each elementary school could send a certain number of students to Junior High School 59 [New York, New York], which was a magnet school for a special program that was either accelerated, you could take seventh and eighth grade in one year, and then the ninth in another, or you could take seventh, eighth and ninth grade over a two year period, but you would learn a language and you would have other enhanced opportunities.  So, I was one of the kids that was chosen to go to Junior High School 59, so I went to Junior High School 59.
Speaker 1: At this young age, and making this grade transition, did you have any notion at that time about what you thought you might want to do as an adult, as you got older?  Did you have any notions, even at that young age?
Speaker 2: Well, I knew in--I'm just trying to think--so probably, while I was sixth grade when Constance Motley accompanied James Meredith as he tried to desegregate the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi].  She was a very dignified black woman, attorney for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund.  I remember seeing her and thinking that this was something that I could do.  Here was a black woman, she was dignified and she was a person obviously of principle, who was committed.  I also know that in junior high school, one of the kids wrote in my yearbook, "To the female Portia of 9SP1" because I was always arguing and there's a sense in which if I didn't want to be a lawyer, my classmates would make me become a lawyer, or at least assumed that's what I was going to do.
Speaker 1: When you learned the cursive writing situation--What kind of a student were you overall.  When you look back, how would you rate yourself?  What kind of a student were you, what did you like most about school?
Speaker 2: Well, I loved school.  I was a good student, and my father would brag about my report cards, and you know, show them to everybody.  My mother, as I said, was less interested in my report cards, and more interested in my fellowship with my classmates.  I was a very serious student.  I did all my homework.  I remember even in elementary school I would come home, I would do my homework, and then I could go outside and play, but I first had to do my homework and sometimes probably in third or fourth grade I remember taking my homework down the street--my mother might have been visiting with a neighbor--and showing her that I had done my homework.
Story_ID: 18088
Speaker 1: Tell me about that Queens [New York] neighborhood.  How do you remember that neighborhood, outside of school?
Speaker 2: Well, when we first moved to the neighborhood, we were the first black family on 24th Street.  It was a neighborhood of Jews and Poles and a number of Catholics who went to the parochial school.  It was working class.  We had one of six detached houses, meaning we actually had a backyard and there was space between our house and the house next to ours, but mostly the houses on the street were attached, and they had two units, one in the basement and then one on the first and second floor.  In some instances there were three people living in those units because it would be somebody living in the basement, somebody living on the first floor and then somebody living on the second floor.  You had to take a bus to get to the subway to get to the city, which is called Manhattan [New York].  We played on the street.  We played punch ball.  We played hot beans and butter.
Speaker 1: What was that?
Speaker 2: Hot beans and butter?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Somebody would hide a stick or a belt and then if you found it, you would go racing down the street after all the kids saying, "Hot beans and butter, come and get your supper."  (laughs).  And you're trying to hit them with the stick.  I can remember once we went away for the summer, or for a month, and we came back and this little kid across the street named Joey saw that we had come back and he was riding his bike up and down the street saying, "Lani and Sarah are back, Lani and Sarah are back."  I mean, it was like a (unclear) after-school program because there were so many kids who lived on the street and who played outside.  That was freedom, was to be able to play outside.  Maybe that's why when you asked me what my favorite season is, I said summer because then you could play outside until it got dark, and it got dark really late.
Story_ID: 18089
Speaker 1: Tell me about your family life in your home.  What special events took place in your home with your family.  What was family life like for you?
Speaker 2: The biggest events were going to visit my grandmother in Brooklyn [New York] because she was a fantastic cook, and we would get all dressed up and it took about 40 to 45 minutes to travel to Brooklyn, but we would be so excited, and I can remember being also very shy in part because it was so exciting and I would hide behind my mother's skirts as she would ring the doorbell.  My grandmother lived with my aunt on Lincoln Place which was called Crown Heights and then became part of Bed-Stuy [Bedford Stuyvesant].  She lived on the Bed-Stuy half of Eastern Parkway.  We went there for Easter, we went there for Christmas, we went there for Thanksgiving.  We would go there for birthday parties, so it was a very warm and comforting and exciting time, because I had lots of cousins.  My grandmother had 17 or 18 grandchildren, and she was just a fantastic cook.
Story_ID: 18090
Speaker 1: What about church life.  Were you involved in the church.  Were you and your family involved in the church?
Speaker 2: My parents took us to a Unitarian church for, I don't know, maybe three or four years, but it was not very integrated and I can remember in Sunday school they would do these games or activities and one of them involved putting your hand into the room with the door almost on your hand so that the only thing that you could see was your hand, and then the other kids would have to guess whose hand it was.  And of course I was the only black kid in the Sunday school class, so they immediately guessed my hand and sometime not too long after that, we stopped going to that church because it just wasn't that comfortable.
Speaker 1: Did you go to another church?  Did they take you to another religious--?
Speaker 2: We didn't--they didn't go to another church after that unless we were visiting my aunt or my grandmother, who were Episcopalian and very involved in St. Mark's Episcopal Church in Brooklyn [New York], but our formal religious experience was limited to the Unitarian church.  My father had been raised in so many different religions because he was raised by his Aunt Sarah and then he was raised and spent time with a number of different relatives, so he was a Seventh Day Adventist at one point, he was a Baptist, he was an Episcopalian and he was a Catholic.
Story_ID: 18091
Speaker 1: Tell me about the move now from the elementary school in Queens [New York] to the junior high school--
Speaker 2: Junior High School 59 [New York, New York]? So, I had to take two buses to get to Junior High 59, whereas I could have walked to PS 136 [New York, New York].  And, the second bus was a school bus.  The first bus was a public bus, and all of the kids taking this bus to Junior High School 59 were black.  And, they became my friends, in part because we rode the bus together, but in part because they were the ones who embraced me wholeheartedly.  When I was in elementary school, I had a lot of friends from my block who were white, and some of those kids also continued to 59, but for some reason they didn't take the bus, and there was a much clearer racial line that was drawn between sixth grade and seventh grade, so by the time I got to seventh grade it was very clear that black people lived on one side of the school and the white people lived on the other, and we could be very friendly while we were in school but we never visited each other.  The black kids didn't go and visit the white kids in Alton [Queens, New York] or Rosedale [Queens, New York] and white kids from Alton or Rosedale didn't come to St. Albans [Queens, New York] or Hollis [Queens, New York].
Speaker 1: Tell me about schooling, I mean (unclear) teachers--
Speaker 2: Well, I remember Mr. Hohouser (ph).  He was my French teacher, and he thought I had a very good accent.  I can remember counting, and he specifically pointed out that I was counting well, and he was very strict and stern, so that was a deal that he thought I had a good accent.  I remember I had a black English teacher who used to say "poetry" (laughs) and I'm not sure if he meant poetry or portrait, because he might be talking about either of them, but he was a great teacher, Mr. Morris.  I had Mr. Buchanan--S. Caleb Buchanan--he was the music teacher, and that was--Do you know him? (laughs) And he got a group of us so interested in chorus, that we all joined the Queens Borough-wide Chorus--The Queens Borough-wide Junior High School Chorus--and I had a terrible voice, so the fact that I somehow made it into this chorus is amazing.  I'm sure it was--they didn't want to hurt my feelings.  But that was such a powerful experience because when we made a sound, it filled the room--this group of people, and we would go every Saturday and we would have to take the Q3A--I took the Q3A, and I'd meet my friends at the train station and then we got to take either the F train, I think to Newton High School [New York, New York], or Newton Center--something.  So, that was a big part of junior high school.  I remember I had a friend who had a Friend of the Month Club in eight grade, because eighth grade girls can be really nasty.
Story_ID: 18092
Speaker 1: And from junior high school basically I went to Andrew Jackson High School [Queens, New York], which was the local public high school.  My mother wanted me to go to Jamaica High School [Jamaica, Queens, New York], which she had heard was the better high school, but my father insisted that I stay right there and go to Andrew Jackson.  He was confident I'd get a good education.  I think he may also have known the principal when he was active with the United Public Workers--Joseph Brennan--so, I don't know if that's why he was confident I'd get a good education.  And, my mother was not simply being elitist in terms of wanting to go to Jamaica High School.  There had been some violent incidents at Andrew Jackson where kids had been stabbed.  There had been a couple of violent incidents at PS 136 [New York, New York] where I had gone to elementary school, where a kid was stabbed in the abdomen.  But I loved high school, and I never saw any of this violence, and what I loved most about high school was the fact that there would be so many different groups that you could be part of because I was the president of the student relations council and the human relations club, and we did plays--my parents knew Ossie Davis, and I wrote him a note and got permission to do 'Purlie Victorious', and I was director--. And then on the other hand, we had a great track team, so I would go with all of the other kids to watch the track team, and when I went to watch the track team, I wasn't the president of anything--I was one of the supporters of the team.  We did something called sing, that may have been a more reasonable--at least considering my talent--(unclear) a more reasonable extension of the junior borough-wide chorus because sophomores, juniors and seniors would compete against each other as a class, and we would get up on the stage--standing on bleachers--and the students would be conducted by a fellow student, singing songs that were popular songs of the day, but the words had been changed around the theme, and when I was a junior, our theme was 'fads' and I can still remember some of the ways in which we changed the songs, and then we had hand motions and we had--David Heard was playing the piano, and Debbie McDuffy was conducting us, and Debbie McDuffy is black, and David Heard is black and yet if you looked at the singing group, it was a very heterogeneous  multi-racial group of kids.  So, to this day I can't tell you what the demographics were of Andrew Jackson precisely because the track team was almost all black, my honors classes were predominantly white but not all white--I mean one-third of the students were black, and there was cross-fertilization, that you weren't stuck with just one group of friends or one group of kids, and to this day I keep running into people who went to Jackson, and in fact--it must be the way people feel if they're a member of a secret society that they know something that other people don't know, and what we know is that public school and the experience of going to a public high school, and this is a large school, like 6,000 students who were on triple session.  There were fifteen hundred and forty-seven students in my graduating class--big school--and yet that was my best educational experience ever.  Better than Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], better than Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut].
Speaker 2: Was this in St. Albans or Hollis.  They're part of Queens, right?
Speaker 1: Yes, when we moved to 204th Street, it was called Hollis, but then as more black people moved, it became part of St. Albans, so Andrew Jackson was three blocks from where I lived, so at one point it was in Cambria Heights, which was again, just an artificial way that the real estate brokers defined communities by race and class.  Cambria Heights, when I was in Queens, was a predominantly white working class neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Did you work part-time while you were going to school, weekends or (unclear).  Did you have any jobs during high school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was a CIT [counselor in training] at a camp.  I was teaching tennis and photography in the summer, and then I worked as a tutor, or a reading assistant, at an elementary school that was on Linden Boulevard.  And, I had two jobs the summer between my senior year and my first year in college.  So, I worked in this elementary school in the morning from 9 [a.m.] to 12 [p.m.] and then I again took a bus, that was the Q4, to the subway, took the F train to New York City and then I worked at the'New York Times in their personnel department filing for the afternoon.  I got the job at the New York Times because I had gotten a national achievement scholarship for outstanding Negro students, which turned out was funded by the 'New York Times'.  They had, I guess, asked for a student who had been on their school newspaper.
Story_ID: 18093
Speaker 1: And my father, when he was in New York during the Depression, and was making only enough money to afford eight hours use of a bed, he had gotten a job at the 'New York Times'.  Now, he had gotten a job because the publisher of the 'Times' had come to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] when my father was still at Harvard, and had arranged a meeting with the editors of all freshmen who had been editors at their high school newspaper, which included my father.  So, at the meeting, the publisher of the 'New York Times' said to all of the young men assembled, "If any of you come to New York, I'll give you a job."  So, my father takes him up on this offer and he couldn't even get on the elevator, because they wouldn't allow any black people on the elevator past a certain floor.  But to this guy's credit, once my father made his case, he wouldn't allow him off of the elevator, but he gave him a job running the elevator.  So, my father worked at the 'New York Times' as the elevator operator for many years, and that's actually where he learned his habit of reading the 'New York Times' from cover to cover, because he'd spend his time--they would issue the supplements, the magazine, the book review, on different days in advance of Sunday, so he had plenty of reading material.  So, he's the one that told me when I got the scholarship that I should call them, tell them my father worked for the 'New York Times', and that I had gotten a scholarship and they'd give me a job, and they did, but only after checking their personnel records to verify that my father had in fact worked there as an elevator operator (laughs).
Speaker 2: Did your father ever talk to you about his knowing William Monroe Trotter--William Monroe Trotter, Editor and Publisher of the 'Boston Guardian', because that paper was supposedly published during the Depression in the early thirties.  Did he ever talk about knowing William Monroe Trotter to you?
Speaker 1: Not that I recall.  I mean he talked about--there were a lot of people he knew, and some of them I may have met with him.. You know, you asked me did he take me with him to his office or to his jobs--no, but I do recall certainly meeting Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee.  Maybe even Lorraine Hansberry.  I know he was involved in producing some Broadway plays and I think he may have been involved in "Raisin in the Sun" when it was first produced, but that, I'm not sure.  I know he was involved in 'Purlie Victorious' which was one of Ossie Davis' plays.  He was very friendly with Paul Robeson and W.E.B. DuBois, but I don't remember William Monroe Trotter.
Speaker 2: Did you ever meet DuBois, at this young age--high school age--did you know DuBois?
Speaker 1: I don't recall ever meeting DuBois, but I do have a book that is inscribed by Langston Hughes and it's, I think, dated April 1950 so it was--I'm sure my father was going around bragging that he just had a daughter.
Story_ID: 18094
Speaker 1: When did your family first start going to Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] and having your home there?
Speaker 2: I guess when I was about fifteen, because I was still in high school, but I didn't go for the whole summer because I think I was either working as a CIT [counselor in training] at a camp or working in other situations.  I'm not sure, I don't remember--
Speaker 1: What do you remember about your first summers at Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts.]  Did they have the home that you have now?
Speaker 2: No, oh no.  They bought that in 1972, so that was after my father came to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.]  They didn't have the money to buy a house before he went to Harvard.  They rented, and they rented a house, a little cottage actually, it was like a two bedroom, I mean teeny cottage in Menemsha [Massachusetts] where we stayed for two weeks and then we came down to Oak Bluffs [Massachusetts] and they rented a house where we stayed for two weeks.  And I remember in Oak Bluffs, my father had to make several runs to the liquor store because that was something--people came off the beach and then they expected to come and socialize, and you had to have liquor running freely.
Speaker 1: So, that was what year they went to Martha's Vineyard, now again?
Speaker 2: '65 [1965].
Story_ID: 18095
Speaker 1: There was a guidance counselor at Andrew Jackson High School [Queens, New York].  His name was Milton Blatt--Milton S. Blatt.
Speaker 2: Could you spell the last name?
Speaker 1: B-L-A-T-T.  And this is--he was the guidance counselor and he was the college counselor and he was the English teacher.  He did the S.A.T. [Stanford Achievement Test] prep to the extent there was any, and he was the track coach.  And this man was really amazing.  Now this is a white guy, who was so committed to being an educator that I can recall he coaxed me into running for student government, because he just felt that the student government should reflect the population of the school, and the student government was all white.  And so, he coaxed Sheryl Sebastian, who was also black, and me, to run for two positions.  I think I ran for corresponding secretary and she ran for treasurer, or something else.  And, we both lost because voting was racially polarized (laughs) even at this high school, but I lost by 13 votes, so it was close.  And, I can remember preparing to give my speech, and I was absolutely petrified--absolutely petrified--having to talk to the seniors, and you can imagine, very large assemblies.  I had no prior experience other than my little preparation when I was five years old giving the bouquet to the ballet teacher.  And, I'm sure I was terrible, but what was fun about it was having all of my classmates come up with ideas for our campaign, so I remember Mildred Paisley (ph.) had some artistic talent, and she drew a typewriter and then we had a piece of paper coming out of the typewriter, and it said "Vote for Lani, she's the type" (laughs) because I was running for corresponding secretary.  But Milton Blatt, he really--he is a hero, because he, I remember he told me that Debbie Trice went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] --this is the first black woman from Andrew Jackson had gone to MIT and was probably one of the first black women to go to MIT.  That was probably in '65 (1965) or '66 (1966).  He was just an amazing person, and there were many amazing teachers like that.
Speaker 2: Here you are in your senior year.  What notions or ideas did you have about where you wanted to go from there, in terms of a career or a profession--not cause, but what were you thinking you wanted to be at that point?
Speaker 1: Well, in the back of my mind I always wanted to be a civil rights lawyer.  When I was a senior in college, I mean a senior in high school, my most important focus was that I had to go to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], because I had to vindicate my father's experience of not being able to finish.
