Story_ID: 7875
Speaker 1: And we start out by slating it, and my name is Julieanna Richardson.  I'm the interviewer, and Scott Stearns is the videographer, and Brenda Dickens is observer.  And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us.
Speaker 2: My name is Jonathan Green, J-O-N-A-T-H-A-N, G-R-E-E-N.
Speaker 1: And your--I'd like to have your date of birth and today's date?
Speaker 2: Date of birth, 8-9-55.  Today's date, 4-16-2002.
Speaker 1: And our location.  We're at the Miami Hilton--.
Speaker 2: In Miami--we're at the Miami Hilton Hotel and Towers at the airport in Miami.
Speaker 1: And it's 5100 Lagune Drive?
Speaker 2: The address is 5100 Lagune Drive.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your profession?
Speaker 2: My profession is artist, painter.
Story_ID: 7876
Speaker 1: I ask five questions of everyone.  They're somewhat "People Magazine"-ish; short answers.  And I 'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is sweet potato.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year, fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is yellow.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination is New York City.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Be happy.
Story_ID: 7877
Speaker 1: Now, we're just gonna have a conversation.  You're one of our early--our younger HistoryMakers.
Speaker 2: Hum (laughs).
Speaker 1: True, truly.  But we do them at all ages.  It's true.  Okay.  I'd like to, I start out off by asking people about their family.  And I'd like you to first talk about your mother and what you know about her--.
Speaker 2: My--.
Speaker 1: --and give her name.
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother's name is Ruth Johnson Green.  And, and my mother was a very easy-going person.  She was the only, for the most part, the youngest child and also the only child to have gone on to higher education in terms of high school.  And she dropped out early, unfortunately, because she married, and, to a man in the military.  And that sort of stopped her life in terms of growth.  But she was a very fine hairstylist, and her interest was in becoming a nurse.  And I think for her in the '50's [1950s], perhaps realizing that her goal of returning to school was just a little bit more than she could handle--[tape interruption and reset].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: She was I think in 1955, the fall of '55 [1955], she was ex--excommunicated out of the church because she became pregnant with me, her second child.  And, and I think that created a tremendous hardship on her, having to be exiled from family and friends in the church.  And she then went to New York City where she lived most of her life for that, that period of time.  And I was raised by my grandmother, Eloise Stewart Johnson.  And my mother became a voice much later after my graduating from college and really supporting her and returning to the church at home, where she became a very active participant in the church.  She later became an ordained minister, and found her true calling in terms of supporting the community and the people in the community.
Speaker 2: Is she in New York now or is she--?
Speaker 1: She's living in Gardens Corner, South Carolina.
Speaker 2: She, so she came all the way back home.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 7878
Speaker 1: Now, your father, can you give his name and what you know about his background?
Speaker 2: My father's name is Melvin Green, unrelated to Ruth Green, not married to Ruth Green.  And he is from the Yaemassee area of South Carolina.  His parents came from Saint Helena Island area.  And he is a blue-collar worker and also a herbologist  and a loner.  And he lives a very isolated life.  He is very much self contained as a person.  And I met my father for the first time at twenty-one years of age, and, because I, myself was so destined to have a father.  Not knowing who he was because he was completely exiled from my family cause my grandfather assumed that he destroyed my mother's life.  It was just a revelation to have met him at twenty-one and, and thus we began our friendship.  And, and we have a great friendship to this day.
Speaker 1: I usually don't skip ahead, but in your meeting with your father, were there things that you found similar to your self or was it more like two adults dealing with each other.
Speaker 2: When I met my father, I--as a child growing up in the community and not knowing who your father is and not being around your father, you--I developed this need to want to have a father.  And so, consequently, I had many a fathers, people that just sort of took me in, male figures.  So when I met my father, it was immediate friendship, and if there were, if there were any blames, it was, I blamed my mother.  And, and, of course, I shouldn't have blamed anyone, but that, she was the closest person to me, and the person that I loved the most so it was easy to blame her.  But he and I have a lot in common.  And it wasn't until I met my father and his relatives that I have a, I had a better idea of myself, who I was in terms of my habits, in terms of my, my behavior, my likes and dislikes.  Knowing the other side of your tree is so important in terms of developing yourself as a person.  And it also answers a lot of questions that no one else could answer.
Speaker 1: What were the similarities?
Speaker 2: We're both basically loners.  We both are self contained people.  We have a very positive outlook on life and self.  We have a tremendous respect for community and family.  And, and we're doers.  We're constantly involved in doing something, even if it's doing for the immediateness of the surrounding our self.
Story_ID: 7879
Speaker 1: Now, I want to talk about your grandmother since she's the one who had the most impact on your growing up.  And I would like you to just talk about her and what you know of her background, and was she one who shared, you know, things about her growing up?
Speaker 2: My grandmother, for me, was the cornerstone of not only my life, but the community as well.  She was raised nearby Gardens Corner in a place called Coals Hill.  She came from a mother who was a wedding gown seamstress for many of the plantations in the area.  Her father was a schoolmaster.  He helped to build one of the first schools in that community.  He is believed to have come from the West, the West Indies.  He actually came from India, via the West Indies to South Carolina.  And he was a very regal gentleman, if you will.  And he and Rosa, who was my great grandmother, were tremendous community supporters.  They were the people that everyone looked up to.  Consequently, my grandmother received a lot of those habits.  Unfortunately for her, both her parents died when she was very young.  She was about twelve years old.  And she had to raise, I think seven of her brothers and sisters, basically by herself.  And she married my grandfather at fifteen, three years later.  And the two of them continued to raise the family.  She did not receive formal learning.  I think she dropped out of school, maybe in the fifth grade.  But she had a tremendous capacity for learning and doing.  She was an incredible business person.  She--they later built their home in Gardens Corner, South Carolina, which is where I'm from, and raised four, six kids.  And she became very active in the church.  She was a missionary in the church.  She was an Eastern Star member in the church.  She owned and operated a night club, and she was one of the first women in that area, one of the first persons in that area to have a liquors license.  And this would be in the '30's [1930s].  And they had, together they had a lot of land.  And my grandmother and grandfather built that part of Gardens Corner.  And they hired people in helping them with the cotton.  My grandmother was always in the night club, taking care of the community from that perspective.  And she also had a lot of tough times.  She was an alcoholic for a fairly long period of her life.  And she cold turkey quit drinking when she was about fifty-five years of age, and took on more active roles in the church, as Eastern Star, choir.  And she taught me everything I knew.  She knew that early in life I was somewhat of a different child, and she believed that, based on the fact that I was born with the membrane, the, the caul--the veil as they call it, over my face, which in African mythology it is, it is a relationship that goes back through cultures, which basically speaks of life and death when a child is born with a veil over their face.  And my grandmother nursed me to life, and she felt that I was a weak child because I came into life under those circumstances, but that I was a very strong child because of my character.  So she taught me everything there was to know about surviving in terms of plants, in terms of the harvest seasons, how to count money, how to create a business and how to survive in a world of both men and women.
Story_ID: 7880
Speaker 1: Now, you know, I was curious about the caul, you know, being born with the veil over your face.  I had heard reference of it, you know, and I've read the, the materials.  But I had heard reference of it before with people who had special powers in terms of being able to see, you know, things.  And I was, am I mistaken about that?
Speaker 2: No, you're not mistaken.  And that part of my life, I try not to explore a lot.  I think as an artist it's very frightening to want to see more than you need to see in life, especially with relationships with people, friends and family members.  I always seem to have the ability to tell people how to run their lives, but that's only because, I base that on great experiences I've had all my life, not only my personal experiences, but experiences I heard about and talked about with people.  And that's due to the relationship with my grandmother.  I was always around older people.  I never spent any time around my peers.  I don't have any peers from that area.  And I learned as much as possible from the older members of the family, from the time of being a child to going through the baptism period, leaving home at fifteen.  When I left home at fifteen, there was really no need to return to Gardens Corner [South Carolina] because my life in Gardens Corner at that point was over.  My grandmother [Eloise Stewart Johnson] had died.  I felt that there was not too many relationships with the exception of the older members of the community, and they were dying out at that period.  And so you live a life of accepting changing, and for me it is easier to change, not being a part, a direct part of my community in Gardens Corner, South Carolina.  I'm a spiritual part of it in that I return, and I support it financially.  And I support it with my knowledge as much as possible.  And I'm a, very much a fixture at the Huspah Baptist Church [Hampton, South Carolina].  I'm still a member of the church and on the usher board.  And I give many contributions to the church every year.
Speaker 1: But do you have those powers?  Do you know that?  I mean do you have that, cause I've had, you know, I have a sister who was supposedly born with a veil.  And I was just curious about that.  Have you had any experiences?
Speaker 2: I have had many experiences.  But I think--I'm a realist also, and I think many of those experiences come from simply listening, giving good eye contact, observing how one behaves, their body language, their facial expressions.  And that's, of course, how older people are able to judge younger people in terms of children, because they're constantly watching children.  Another example would be mothers and fathers, you know.  They know their kids better than anyone because they're constantly looking at them.  So I believe more that, for these people that were born with the caul, they have had special attention and training with the elders because the elders believe that the call has tremendous powers.  And I really do believe it has it, but I also believe that it's, it's, it's about training.  Everyone has the talent, the ability I think to draw or to be able to make something.  But the real artists are the people that continue to study and draw all their lives.
Story_ID: 7881
Speaker 1: Now, it's obvious that your grandmother had a great deal of influence.  What about your grandfather?  What was--did he have as much or not?
Speaker 2: My grandfather's influenced was always on the peripheral.  In the, the community that I grew up in, it is considered the matriarch community.  And the men are always on the peripheral of life.  My grandfather was always out working odd jobs when farming did not bring in the monies necessary.  And grandfathers spent very little time with grandchildren.  The grandchildren were usually with their grandmothers and other women in the community.
Story_ID: 7882
Speaker 1: Take yourself back to your childhood, and I'd like to even hear what your earliest memory is.
Speaker 2: My earliest, earliest memory as a child, I think is always sitting in my grandmother's living room around lots of people, a lot of adults.  My grandmother's house was used as sort of a, one of the stop-off's for African American folks when they were traveling up and down, seventeen, twenty-one [Highways 17 and 21] going to places because in those days we were not allowed to stay at hotels.  So my grandmother's house was on the registry, if you will.  And most people when they traveled during those times, traveled via the churches.  And the churches would find places for them to stay the night.  And so we were constantly working in terms of preparing bed, meals, for whomever would stop by that night.  And as a child, that's most what I did.
Story_ID: 7883
Speaker 1: I want to go over your siblings cause you're the second of seven children, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I'd like to have their names and the order?
Speaker 2: My eldest brother is David Green, followed by Jonathan Green, himself, my sister, Annette Green, a brother, Clyde Green, Kenneth Green, a deceased brother, Michael Green and the youngest, Freeman Green.
Story_ID: 7884
Speaker 1: And share with me some stories of your growing up in the household with your, you know, your grandmother and what life was like?
Speaker 2: My life was constantly around my grandmother and her friends.  I never had much of a relationship with any of my siblings with the exception of my sister.  And that's basically because I was, she was directly under me, and I--for that reason, I spent a little more time with her.  I used to spend a great deal of time creating, making things, working in the garden, going hunting, learning how to do the various craft, chores around the house, like during the fall--and it is why it's my favorite season, banking yams is very much an African tradition and creating the huts, removing the corn from the stalks, and again, stacking it in neat rows and bins in the corn house; slaughtering of the animals around the farm, the hogs, the chickens, and preparing those animals for drying and curing, going hunting with my grandfather and shooting squirrels and raccoons, and preparing those animals for drying; making dishes in the house, in terms of foods.  Canning was a great pleasure.  I enjoyed doing that a lot.  As long as I could do something productive with my hands and my mind, I was a very happy child.  I did not enjoy playing with other kids.  I always considered playing with kids just a waste of my time because it wasn't anything I was learning.  And I was very supportive of my grandmother, going to church and spending time with her, and, in the church, and when I was a kid, because my father wasn't always in a position to take her to church, she would wave a hearse down or just a car.  She'd stand out on the highway with me in her hand, and holding my hand, and she would always--she always had the ability to relate, to touch base with people.  And consequently, I was always sort of in the limelight of people because I was Serhan's (ph.) grandchild that was born with a veil, and people saw me and thought I was odd, curious kid.  And I, I think I kind of enjoyed that.  I remember very vividly the storm of the, I would say early '60's [1960s], I think it was Storm Gracie that came through Gardens Corner and destroyed our two-story church that was built in 1862 and how it just devastated the community, and hearing the commotions about rebuilding the church.  And also that storm took down my grandmother's saloon, and so that created a lot of activities around the house and within the community because people spent--it seemed that people were together more often because they were all involved in rebuilding the community.  So that's a very memorable moment.
Speaker 1: You know, since you are talking about things like that, the activities, like the stacking of the yams and, you know, and the corn, I'm wondering if you could describe different sights--in a different way.  You've talked about the activities, but I'd like you to describe what even sights, smells or sounds, you know, really remind you of your childhood?
Speaker 2: The sounds that remind me of my childhood actually it's where I live now, and listening to birds squawking and squirrels running and making noises, listening to the wind blowing through the trees, listening to water; smell, is always the earth after a fresh rain or the cutting of grass or my favorite smell is the smell of--(airplane sound interruption)--.  I, where I live I create my--I create the smells that remind me of childhood, like baking yams in the oven, putting on a pot of beans or cooking some rice and making cornbread.  And when I do that, it immediately takes me back to my childhood, listening to music, listening to Etta James, listening to Temptations, Four Tops, listening to B.B. King, any of those type people, it--those sounds take me back to my childhood because that's what I heard on the jukebox in the night club, the Dells, any group from the '50's [1950s] and '60's [1960s], listening to Minnie Pearl.  My grandparents were great country western folks, Hank Williams.  And it took me a long time to realize why I enjoyed Etta James and Etta Smith and Hank Williams and Minnie Pearl, and it's simply because I hard those people when I was a child, constantly playing on the juke box.
Story_ID: 7885
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember your first, you know, cause I, I see two worlds sort of here, you know.  I see the church world, and I see the, you know, the night club world.  And I'm wondering, you know, do you remember your first entry into the night club, you know, when you first saw things, and what you actually saw.
Speaker 2: I remember very well.  My job at, in the night club, my first job was the kid on the counter.  And I used to walk the counter--I was about three years old, I guess, and take drinks to people.  That's what my grandmother had me to do.  And I would collect the money, and I would bring it back to my grandmother, and as I got older, I would help with cleaning up the night club.  I would help my grandfather with bringing in moonshine, and whatever else he brought in.  When I was five years old, I can remember walking with him to the still and helping him to carry, very little in my case because I was so young, but knowing that the cracked corn and the sugar was to make liquor and knowing that the liquor was a commodity for my family.  And so I took great pride in watching him and helping him to do that.  I took great pride in appreciating the animals on the farm because I knew those animals were, you know, would become provision for us.  I enjoyed gardening because I knew that at harvest time or at any time, you could walk out into a fresh garden and pick your tomatoes and beans and peppers, whatever have you.  And then I enjoyed putting those vegetables and meats together in the kitchen because I knew that was the final step in, in, you know, in, in creating fuel for life.  And most of my brothers and my sister really had no interest in any of these things.  I also enjoyed watching my grandmother and her friends do quilting and canning, and I particularly, when someone--an older member would pass, would die, and I would go with my grandmother to their homes, and she would meet with her friends.  It was just magical, as if they had some telepathy going on when someone died and their--the chores they did in terms of cleaning the house for the, the widow or the widower, making sure it was spotless before the community and family members would arrive, bathing the dead, putting the dead in bed cloth and also cooking.  So as a kid, I, you know, I'm constantly--I was constantly involved in every aspect of life from birth to death.  I remember my grandmother going with my mother, mother in terms of my birth mother, and that's really the, the midwife, and going with her to certain places and, you know, listening to the sounds of life, you know, from the spanking of the baby, and then watching them burn the sheets because it was considered sacred to burn the sheets, because in burning the sheets you're letting out the spirits, and you're also casting out the demons for this newborn.  And I, I saw all of those things as being very profound, even though I didn't know at the time that I was studying it from a historical point of view.  But I felt that my role in life, just as a person, because I couldn't relate to, very much to kids, to children, where children, the things children did, I always was a sort of a bystander and learning.  And I think during my later years as a child, I took on the position of working and making monies for my family, which included odd-man jobs.  I worked in, at Tomotley (ph.) Plantation, and I worked at the, the large vegetable farms, you know, picking cucumbers and tomatoes.  I worked at the Washington's farm.  It was the only African American farmer, big farmer, in the area and because I was so small, my job was to direct the drivers of the semi to the ice house so that the trucks would be loaded with ice and then returned, so that the vegetables could be packed in ice in these large trailer trucks.  And I remember going to various homes and basically, listening to conversations, listening to people talk about their parents and their grandparents.  And that is in short why I know so much about my history as a child, as much as a hundred years before I was born because I was around those people that were in their seventies and eighties.  And many of those people were born in the 1800s.  They were born as, as early, for me, and late for them, as 1860, and I remember meeting people that were slaves and that had scars on them, and had lived on plantations.  And I remember hearing people talk about their families, and that they were divided, and that they knew they had family members up the road or in another city or another state, and that they would never see it again.  And I remember the loneliness that they experienced, having their families separated from them.  And as a child, that instills a lot of sympathy in you and respect for people and, and I'm certain all of my heart comes out of that.  It comes out of the beauty and the dignity of seeing people in the '50's [1950s] and the'60's [1960s] and how hard they worked, and how much fun they had.  And, and my grandmother's saloon supplied that recreational time, if you will.  It's a time when I saw people at their very best in terms of looking their very best and behaving their very best.  Sometimes I would see people get all fired up because of the booze and, and spill out some hidden agendas about family relationships and friends.  So you had everything going on, for me, as a  child.  I knew what it was like for adults to get into arguments.  I knew what it was like for people, say, cast spells on other people because of whatever purpose.  I knew what it was like to see a community gather together and support someone, someone that may have lost a family member or a child that was born to a mother and the mother wasn't in a position of taking care of it or just having a derelict in the community.  In our community, anyone that had a, may not had a place--have a place to live or might have had some mental illness problems, the community served as, as, you know, as an arena for those people to be protected and to feel safe.  And they never had to worry about getting a meal or being bathed or being shipped away to an institution because everyone had a, a chore, everyone had a position in terms of taking care of someone.  So in terms of coming from a self-contained community, and you never really feel alone or left out.  And I think that's [tape cut off].
Story_ID: 7886
Speaker 1: Say that you always gravitated towards older people.  But you also say in the reverse that you weren't that attracted to kids your own age.  And I'm wondering why, except you said that they bored you.  But why?  Was it--?
Speaker 2: Kids were, for me, kids were cruel.  And they were calculating.  And they were preoccupied in, with trying to find a way or time to hurt you.  And I had many, you know, issues that I could be hurt with.  I didn't know who my father was.  My mother [Ruth Johnson Green] was cast out of the church.  My grandfather was well known in the community.  He was quite a character.  And my grandmother [Eloise Steart Johnson] was a person that lived in the church and lived in her saloon.  So I came from a very unusual, ambiguous family, if you will.  And we always had people coming around, and, and kids would use and recite information from their parents.  And I, I just did not want to be bothered with having to be insulted in school all the time, and so I just spent my entire time looking in a book, reading or drawing or doing work for the teachers of, you know, whatever classes I was in.  And I also had issues with my own self as a person, you know, and with my own feelings about people and, and knowing that my, my sense of feeling didn't fit with the norm.  And I wanted to protect that.  I didn't think there was anything wrong with.  My grandmother certainly did not instill in me that something was wrong with my, with my lifestyle, style or likeness to a particular sex.  And so I just felt that I, I needed to just grow out of this very awkward and difficult period of being a child and an adolescent.
Speaker 1: They're fine if you're normal, but if, you know, if there are any differences to you as a child, kids can be very cruel.
Story_ID: 7887
Speaker 1: I want to know what the young Jonathan was like, though, and what--and obviously, you lived a lot inside yourself.  And so I wanted to, I want to know what was actually happening upstairs?
Speaker 2: Upstairs, I realized that I needed to just fit in as much as possible and to outgrow the experiences of being a child.  And that was simply all that was going on through my head.  I was a member of a book club and so every month, I would receive books, "Big Red", "Black Beauty", all those books, and I would read those books.  And I would spend a great deal of time around the older members of my community and my family.  And I knew that I would probably never have a traditional family.  I knew that as a child.  I knew that I did not look forward to having kids or having a wife or having a picket fence or any of those things.  It just never was a part of my life.  My life was basically--the things that I looked forward to doing and becoming was traveling, meeting different people around the world, living in, in a very isolated place, and focusing on some of my talents.  At that time, of course, I drew a lot as a kid, but I didn't know the meaning of an artist.  I didn't know what, I, I didn't have any supporting groups to direct me in that fashion.  And I certainly had not met any artists, and I had not gone to museums until I went to New York.  I was about twelve years old, ten years old.  And that was the first time I saw art in a gallery or on a museum wall, and at ten, I knew I wanted to do that.  And when I returned home, well, that summer, I realized that the community (a) could not support me any more in that field.  I had won a county fair art competition, and I won the competition simply because--and talent was a part of it, but I drew two Siamese cats playing in the window with rain falling in the background.  Well, of course, in the county fair, no one would have thought an African American would have drawn two Siamese kittens.  And I won the contest, and it was the first time I was introduced to racism, because I was not given the money.  I was not given the award in person.  Instead, it was given the school.  And the school then gave it to me.  So I didn't get any of the accolades that the other winners had received.  And that didn't dismay me.  It just--I just realized that I had another issue to deal with, and that was the issue of black and white.  And I knew though that at that age, that this time too will pass.  And it was just a matter of taking care of myself, maintaining my health and my sanity and growing out of that world, and being able to grow enough to select my own world to live in.
Story_ID: 7888
Speaker 1: So Jonathan, you were fragile in many ways, your existence was somewhat fragile.  Did, when did you know that you were different, and, you know, you talk about, well, I knew I didn't want to have a wife and a picket fence.  When did you realize that you were different in that way?
Speaker 2: I think I've always known, but I was able to put it into words around the age of ten.  I had always known that I was different and that I would not--because my, my mentors were people that were very different.  And, and I didn't know of a, I, I didn't look to a family with, that would consist of husband and wife, children as, as a role model because that was something I had no interest in doing or being a part of.  I looked to people in the community that were loners, people in the community that lived alone or had their own businesses, and they had support within the community, but they were certainly not a quote, unquote "family unit."
Speaker 1: Were there people in your community that you think were gay at the time?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, did any of those mentor you in any way?
Speaker 2: Not really, I think my grandmother mentored me in terms of my own sexuality more than anyone.  The people that were gay at the time were gay in hiding.  And, and they certainly would not take the time to mentor the young person that they would suspect being gay, even though they knew because then they had to deal with, with the community and me and being ostracized in the community perhaps, or being accused of taking advantage of a young person.  So those people were very silent.
Story_ID: 7889
Speaker 1: Now, I want to get a sense--how large was your town?
Speaker 2: Gardens Corner, South Carolina, population of about fifty.
Speaker 1: No, are you serious?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Fifty, five-O.
Speaker 2: Five-O.  And that's pushing it (laughs).
Speaker 1: Not a hundred or--.
Speaker 2: No.  Just, we're all farmers.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so were you, were there large stretches of land between people or--?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Miles, sometimes.  Where we lived, there were three houses, my grandmother's house, her aunt's house and another cousin.  And those homes were there since the turn of the century.  My grandmother and my grandfather built their home probably in the '30's [1930s].  So those were the only three homes in my immediate area and maybe four miles down the road were homes, again, by other long-standing members of the community.  And when I say longstanding, these homes were built in the, you know, turn of the century, and even earlier.  And these were very large Georgian-type structures.  And you had two or three generations that had lived in the homes.  And so that's kind of the environment that I grew up in as a child.  There were no mobile homes.  There were no one-room shacks so to speak.  There were homes built by somewhat prominent members of the community of Gardens Corner, and the--and those people were major contributors and members of the Huspah Baptist Church.  And the Huspah Baptist Church came out of the church that was founded by Robert Smalls, out of Buford, South Carolina, the Tabernacle Church which was probably built around 1780.  And the Huspah Baptist Church came out of that church.
Story_ID: 7890
Speaker 1: Now, the church, was it, was it--it was a traditional Baptist church in that it--a lot of whooping and hollering.  No?
Speaker 2: Not my church.  My church was founded by mulattos, and they, in their behavior, they were more African Methodist in their behavior.  Most of them were educators. And many of these men came, several of them came from the community of Beaufort, and Walterboro and Columbia [South Carolina].  And they came to Gardens Corner because Gardens Corner did not have a church and the Huspah Plantation gave the property to have the Huspah Baptist Church built because they wanted the, the burial grounds to be at the church.  And so that land was awarded to many of the people that were, lived on those plantations for many, many a years.  And many of the men that came into the community, speaking of the mulattos, the mulattoes were mostly men, and they came into the communities and they married many of the very African-looking women in my community.  And also many of the women that had been--or many of the people in the community that had been mixed with Indians, the Yemassee Indians, the Pocatalico Indians, the Catawba Indians, the Afro-Americans and the Indians populated many of those area, Yemassee, Gardens Corner, Pocatalico, Laura Bay (ph.).
Speaker 1: Huspah, I could have you spell all of those names, but Huspah, can we start with that (laughter)?
Speaker 2: H-U-S-P-A-H.
Story_ID: 7891
Speaker 1: This Huspah Plantation, is much known about it?  Do you know much about it yourself, about the family, the Huspah's themselves?
Speaker 2: I know more about the Bull's Plantation and the Tomotley Plantations [Sheldon, South Carolina].  And those two plantations, my great grandmother came from the Tomotley, and my great grandfather worked at the Bull Plantation.  The old Sheldon ruin, which is, which was a church that was probably built in the late 1680s, which is now a monument site, that church was burned by General Sherman.  Many of my relatives came out of that church.  In those days, blacks and whites went to church together.  The whites sat downstairs, of course, and the blacks sat in the roost of the church.  And, and the blacks were, of course, you know, the people that took care of the families and the gardeners and the drivers for the carriages.  And so many of the people that came out of that church after it was destroyed went to the Huspah Baptist Church as well.  Actually, they went to Beaufort, and then from Beaufort they came back after the Huspah Baptist Church was built and, and now became members of the Huspah Baptist Church.  The Huspah Baptist Church was a two-story, wood, frame church, and it's listed and photographed in one of the WPA [Works Progress Administration] books, when the WPA writers and artists came through South Carolina and photographed Saint Helena, they also photographed my church, along with many other churches and communities.
Story_ID: 7892
Speaker 1: Now, the Gullah, which, you know, your work represents and the community that you're from, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How extensive is that community, and what communities does it, you know, cover?
Speaker 2: This is the Gullah community?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: The Gullah community is actually from Jacksonville, Florida to Jacksonville, North Carolina, all of the coastal islands, the inlets and the marshland area.  Those people all are considered, considered the Gullah, those people are the most true to the African culture as any Afro-American here on, on the shores of the United States of America.  Georgetown, Charleston, Savannah, Port Royale, which is near Beaufort, South Carolina, is considered our Ellis Island, and that's where many of the blacks came through port from Africa to the Caribbean to the United States of America.  And many of those blacks worked on the plantations that were built in the area because the land was so fertile.  And one of the earliest crops was the indigo, followed by rice and then much later, cotton and corn.  Also the people in that area were incredible fishermen, potters, the African pottery is, has also become a part of the American pottery system.  And many of the Indians incorporated the African culture in terms of pot making.  The, when the people that were interested in enslaving and bringing, bringing the enslaved Africans over to this country, they selected specific African people from Sierra Leone because they were well skilled in crafts in terms of basket-making, pottery, harvesting of indigo, rice; also, iron work, architecture, in terms of building, cabinetwork.  In the early Charleston and Buford registries, you will find many Afro-Americans that were known potters, known iron smith, known architects, in terms of making buildings.  And it wasn't until the, after civil--after the Civil War that things really became very, very difficult for African Americans.  We had people in the Congress in terms of the 1800s.  And after the uprising of Denmark Vesey, who was going to burn Charleston to the ground, and he won his freedom via a lottery. So again, that tells you of the prominence and the openness of African Americans in terms of the community.  And because he was such a devastating, for us, folk hero, devastating person to the Euro-Americans because he did have the capacity and the power and the support to burn Charleston down, it just really created a very inhumane and hostile environment for blacks in that area of South Carolina.  Denmark Vesey was only able, could have been--he would have done it, and, of course, it was unfortunate that his wife's brother, who was well attached to his owner and as a house person, turned in Denmark Vesey and, of course, he wasn't allowed--he was then hanged with many of his followers.  So South Carolina has a very sort of two worlds going on, constantly at the same time.  We're very, very behind in many ways in education, but in many ways we're very much forward thinkers in terms of education.  In our history, we're the first of many in terms of our political system, in terms of our harvesting culture, in terms of the ability to know and understand medicines based on herbal practices.  Midwifery was a enormous practice in South Carolina, working on plantations as house servants.  Many, many trades.  We had incredible teachers in the seventeen [1700s] and 1800s in South Carolina.  We also had artists in South Carolina at those very early stages.  We had Euro-Americans that sent loved Afro-Americans that worked in the household to Europe for further education be it in cooking or be it in any of the craft areas of building, iron smith work.  These people were constantly going back and forth to Europe for, I guess what you would consider to be a vocational school, if you will.  And they returned, and they were great business people.  So in reading my history and understanding my history, I knew that I came from a very important state, a very important part of the world, and that I was no different from any of these other people.  And my transition to Chicago was a very easy one in terms of becoming a part of Chicago's system in architect and how it moved and operated.  And that allowed me to become the artist that I am today.
Story_ID: 7893
Speaker 1: The other question I have, and just because I've had reference, and I really--a lot of, well, let me ask, the Geechie (ph.), Geechie Gullah, what is the difference--?
Speaker 2: The difference--. INTERVIEWER: --or is it, is there a description of, am I or are they both the same, and I'm describing one person?
Speaker 1: The, the difference is basically, the people from the Georgia area are the Geechies.  The Gullah are from the South Carolina area.
Speaker 2: So what, why are they called different.  Are, do they--are there certain--they're both--do they both do a (unclear) little country--?
Speaker 1: Oh, sure, sure.  The, the Geehcies and the Gullah, I think the Geechies are people that were mainly from Guiana.  The Gullah's are from the area of Angola.  And I think that, the people when they came over, and, of course, they didn't have a language because they were mixed on purpose so that they could not communicate.  And I think they used a term to describe themselves that was most prevalent in terms of a group, a name that was related or connected to Africa.  And I, and I think that's how the names came forth?
Story_ID: 7894
Speaker 1: What is African?  What is considered traditional African about these groups of people?
Speaker 2: Everything about them.  Their appearance, their look, their, their attitudes, their gestures, their body language, their body shapes, their genetic memory, the knowledge of, of basket making, net making, pottery, iron work.  Their knowledge of land cultivation.  Their, their knowledge and their zing for fashion--[tape cut off].
Speaker 1: --something just goes out.  So go on.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And most importantly, patience (laughter), but you know, the Africans that have been coming to the United States in recent years, the past twenty years have realized and have found Saint Helena to be their sister place, the other place.  And they have returned to St. Helena and they have given praise to the gods and to the land for having nurtured and taken care of their brothers and sisters.  So they themselves were able to go to, my hometown and pick people out that they knew were relatives of people from their community.  And the Penn Center organized a trip and took many of those people back to Sierra Leone and Angola, and those people were able to connect with their past relatives.  So the, the African is--not only comes out of our own knowledge of African culture, it really comes out of the African themselves, in terms of saying to the American people, these people are direct descendants from Africa.
Story_ID: 7895
Speaker 1: If I were to ask you to speak like the Gullah's or do people--can you give m some--did you ever speak in that?
Speaker 2: I did.  The, when I was growing up as a child, the--there was this, there was a strong importance in speaking English.  The, the Gullah, it was considered a language that, not that the adults were not proud of, but they knew that in order for their children to have a better life, they had to learn English and speak it well.  So for me, I rarely got to speak the Gullah language.  I do understand it.  And when I go home, I fall into it, and my friends tell me that when--they always know when I've been to South Carolina because I return speaking in the Gullah dialect.  But most people in the South Carolina, North Carolina, and Georgia and Florida area, really speak a, a tone of, of the Gullah language.  One of the most important Gullah phrases in songs is really "Come by here, my Lord"--"Kumbaya, my Lord", which is Gullah.  When you're walking throughout the community today around the schools, many of the Euro-American kids have always spoke Gullah and they still speak it today.  And it's, it's a language that's spoken the present tense, and there is no beginning or end to the language, meaning that because it's a language based on oral tradition.  You have to understand your family and something of your culture in order to be able to speak the language.  So consequently, if you don't know that your, someone's great--someone's grandmother, for instance, had passed in listening to someone speaking Gullah, you would assume that they're speaking about someone in the present tense that is still living.
Speaker 1: Can you give me an example of how you sound when you come back?  Can you please do that?
Speaker 2: Oh, boy, that's a rough one.  Well, you know, I mean Gullah is also spoken with eye contact.  It's spoken with, you know, body gesture, language, you know.  You have to like get into the character of speaking Gullah, and for me, that's very difficult.  But I guess, from, Richard had said, he said--I could say something like, "Inya", are you in here?  I could say something like, like "come back tomorrow" would be "cum bach morrow" very, very fast, very theatrical.  It's a language, but it's very difficult to speak Gullah with just sitting here and--.
Speaker 1: I understand, okay, I got you.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I got to be in the mood--I got to be in the place.
Speaker 1: I just heard, I've never been.  (Unclear)--.
Speaker 2: Well, we'll have to get you there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Hopefully, if you meet Mr. Simmons.
Story_ID: 7896
Speaker 1: I want to take you back, just give me, let's see, schooling.  I want to know the names of your schools.  Did you--?
Speaker 2: I first attended Dale Elementary School.  And then I went to PS 103 in Spanish Harlem.  I went to, I went PS 72 in Spanish Harlem, then I went to PS 108 in Harlem, which was between Seventh and Eighth Avenue on a 111th Street.  Then I went to Robert Smalls High School, which is in Beaufort, South Carolina, and after integration I went to Beaufort High School, which is also in Beaufort, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: And what year was this that you went to high school?  You went, let see--?
Speaker 2: I went to high in the late '60's [1960s], early '70's [1970s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  You went to New York at what age?
Speaker 2: I first went to New York at the age of ten, and I stayed three years, returned to South Carolina; went back to New York, and then went into the military.
Story_ID: 7897
Speaker 1: But I want to go back to your, you know, when you were ten and you first went to New York.  Was there anything significant about that experience?  I mean you were definitely out of the, the country into a urban area.
Speaker 2: Well, what was the most significant experience for me living in New York was having indoor plumbing.  I mean I just thought it was the greatest thing since bread.  And also living in a building, you know, that was filled with people.  And I was trying to figure before even entering a building, how are the places separated and how do they go up and down, you know.  Is it just one stairwell or does everyone have an individual stairwell?  My grand aunts lived in Harlem on a127th Street, Lenox Avenue.  And there were three of them.  There was Aunt Mabel, Aunt Lottie and Aunt Thelma.  And they all looked Indian.  They didn't look African American.  Actually, my generation is the first generation of Afro-American-looking people in my family.  And during the day, sometimes they would put on white makeup, if you will, and die their head red, and they would go in different communities and pass as white women or Italian women or whatever.  And even working, my Aunt Thelma worked at a factory, and they thought she was Italian.  My Aunt Mabel worked as a, I guess in some capacity of secretarial work, and she passed for something other than black.  And they did for a long time until they were in their fifties.  And, and they told stories about these events that was happening to them.  And, but they didn't tell it from a negative perspective.  For them, it was just something they had to do.  It was a way of making a living, and they took advantage of their looks and, and they used it to make money and to better their lives.
Speaker 1: So New York was, do you--did you change in New York and what prompted the move back to--?
Speaker 2: The move back to South Carolina.  I, what I did in New York, I walked New York as much as possible.  I walked out of the Spanish Harlem community into lower Manhattan.  I walked to the Empire State Building.  And this is the summer that I was there.  I walked all over Central Park.  I walked over to the West side of Chi--of New York because I was interested in seeing the differences in people and how they lived.  I was interested in seeing the different cultures and the foods and, and, and then living in Spanish Harlem, I befriended a lot of Spanish people.  And I, I just tried to take in as much about New York as I possibly could as a, as a child growing up in New York.  And when I went to school, it was exciting because I learned, I, I took courses in Spanish.  And, and there were other types of course that I would have never been able to take in South Carolina that I took in New York City.  Also, I had the freedom of walking to and from school.  I didn't have that freedom in South Carolina.  We were bussed to schools, bussed before integration and was bussed after integration.  You, I loved the fact that I could socialize with a person of any color and not have to be reminded of being the other color, someone black, someone from the South.  I could disappear easily in New York City.  I enjoyed that, again, getting back to being a loaner.  Even though you're around a lot of people you can, you can be a loaner around a lot of people in New York City.  My stepfather, Neptune Nelson, who was drove semi-trucks, every weekend, he would get us all in the car, in the station wagon, and he would take us all over New York.  We went to Yonkers, we went Staten Island, we went to the Bronx, we went to Brooklyn--we went up to Boston to visit an uncle.  So I had a great deal of adventures in New York in terms of traveling around.  My stepfather, our stepfather, Neptune Nelson, would take us to different restaurants.  So we ate Chinese food, and we ate Italian foods.  He was very much interested in introducing us to better things in life, things that he was interested in himself.  So consequently, he would take us into the better neighborhoods.  And we later moved to White Plains, New York in a place called Co-op City, and it was a lot of fun living there.  And I also went to--boy, I went to so many schools, I also went to Roosevelt High School for a summer.  That was to get out early, out of high school so I didn't have to return to South Carolina for the twelfth grade.  So I got out in the eleventh grade actually.  And that was a wonderful experience going to school in, in the Bronx because I had been to school with kids from Puerto Rico and the Caribbean and in the Bronx, it afforded me an opportunity to go to school with kids that were Anglo kids, Euro-American kids, and to sort of--to be a part of their world because in the South it's very difficult to be a part of, to be in the world of Euro-Americans, unless, you know, they're actively a part of your family.  But just on, on an open level, it was, you know, it's something that most African Americans didn't do.  And New York afforded me privileges for the library, to go to different galleries.  So there was a lot I got out of New York City.  I thoroughly enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 7898
Speaker 1: And when you went, returned to  Beaufort City, and went to Beaufort, you know, the integrated Beaufort High School, how long had it been integrated?
Speaker 2: I was the second year of integration at Beaufort High School.  And Beaufort High School, of course, is the school where Pat Conroy went to.  And, and it was, I think the question for myself and perhaps the question for most kids is that we were so looking forward to graduating from an all-black school because that's the only school we knew.  And I never felt a part of, and consequently, later, I never felt a part of any of the high schools in terms of Beaufort , Robert Smalls or Beaufort  High because I never got to, to really become a part of the high school at Robert Smalls, and I never became a part of the, the high school system at Beaufort High School.  I didn't go through graduation.  I didn't do any of the marching.  I only went to classes, and I took as many classes as possible at Beaufort High School because we had double sessions because there were so many kids going to the school, so many high school kids.  And I entered school (pause)--I entered school early at 7:30 in the morning.  And I was in school until 6:00 o'clock every day because I wanted to get out of high school as fast as possible.  And I as already twenty-five, thirty miles away from home, and so, you know, so we were being bussed.  And I thought I might as well just spend as much time in school taking as many classes as possible.  And that was for sports activity.  I was a part of the track team, which I considered boring.  I mean it was just something to do.  It was just a way of my exercising because I was a country kid.  I, I could outrun all the kids.  You know, so it wasn't competitional for me (laughs).  And there weren't that many black kids on the track team.  And I did not enjoy contact sports, so I wasn't a basketball player, a football player, a baseball player.  So I just ran track and field.
Speaker 1: Now, when you--is that, how old were you when you finished?
Speaker 2: Sixteen.
Story_ID: 7899
Speaker 1: Then you went into the service, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how did that come about?
Speaker 2: I, the service, was always known as a great way to travel, to get outside, and also, you know, the job possibilities in the military.  I entered the military, I went into the Air Force in New York City, and I was promised to, to enter as an illustrator because I scored high on the illustration test.  And because they didn't have any openings in illustration, they gave me a choice--and the two choices were: police or cook.  So I took cook because it was something that I was familiar.  I felt comfortable about it, and I just couldn't imagine walking around with a gun and not, and it not having a function.  You know, I was raised with guns.  I knew how to clean guns.  I knew how to shoot guns and I used it for a purpose, and the purpose was to hunt.  So I just, I just thought it was just a weird idea to walk around with a gun and not really use it on a, you know.  So, so I took cooking instead.  And I, and, and the cooking course, which was at Lockland Air Force Base in Denver, Colorado--Laurie Air Force Base in Denver, Colorado.  I also took courses in illustration, just to continue educating myself about art.  And I did that on my own time, and I stayed in the military for two and a half years.  I was extremely bored.  That was one of the most boring experiences I had ever had in my life at that time.  And I went, my last stationed site was Grand Forks, North Dakota, which was another story in itself.  And after two and a half years, I left the military and went to a vocational school to study textile and design in Grand Forks, North Dakota.  I had no interest in returning home, mostly out of embarrassment.  I mean, what are gonna tell someone; in the military, you didn't enjoy it and you cooked for two and a half years.
Story_ID: 7900
Speaker 1: After a year at the vocational school, my--one of my instructors literally put me on the train and said that you need to go to Chicago, go to the Art--Art Institute  of Chicago and see what that's like, and see if maybe that would be something you could become interested in doing.  And six months later I enrolled as a student-at-large at the Art Institute of Chicago, and then entered the fashion design program--went there.  On the first day, I could smell oil paint.  I went upstairs on the third floor and changed my major.  And from that  (pause)--and it was at that moment in time at the Art Institute that I also became a VA [Veteran's Administration] counselor.  And I was selected to become a VA counselor.  I had interviewed for some classes and the V--and the VA--the registrar saw me, later met me and asked if I would be interested in this job because I was a--I had also, I had to apply to get monies for supplies because of the military.  And she said that she wanted me to take on that position as a VA counselor.  And I thought well, making money on the side.  There's nothing wrong with that.  And I used that position to learn as much as possible about the history of the Art Institute of Chicago.  I had access to the archives.  And I learned that people like Charles White and other very prominent African American artists went to the Art Institute of Chicago and that they had no representation in the museum at all.  And many of the students that came through the Art Institute of Chicago, many of them I felt were coming in because they just needed something to do after leaving the military.  So after interviewing them, I encouraged a lot of them to go to the University of Illinois and to other colleges, institutions because they were really not artists, and I felt they were not artists.  I felt they just needed to do something.  And then I became friendly instructors and other people that worked in the administration section.  I met people at the museum.  In my studies, I also became very active with the Goodman Theater because I wanted to see the plays, and I couldn't afford it.  So I became a super, an usher.  I also did the same at the Lyric Opera House, I became an usher.  I went to the Chicago Symphony and did the same thing.  And, and I learned as much as possible about Chicago, Chicagoans and, and the whole artistic community.  I became very active in some of the dance groups in Chicago.  I was offered a scholarship by Ruth--what's the prominent dance--Ruth Page--(simultaneously)--.
Speaker 2: Ruth Page.
Speaker 1: --in Chicago, thank you.  And she thought I was in my teens, and I was already in my twenties, I was about twenty-three.  And I, and she was impressed that I explained to her that I felt my years as a dancer was about over because the life expectancy of a dancer is only about thirty.  And she then took me under her wings, so to speak, introduced me to some people.  And then I met Don Olson who was, I think he was director or president at Chicago Rehabilitation Hospital.  And he introduced me to Essie Kupcinet and Essie Kupcinet asked me to join the board, the committee board of the Alternative School of the Performing Arts in Chicago.  And I met another level of Chicago society, people like Dory Wilson, Mr. Ashford, Cal Ashford.  I met the Johnson [ref. to JOhn H. Johnson and George Johnson] families and all of a sudden I was meeting all of these very important and influential people in Chicago.  I met Richard Hunt through Leon Forrest because I went to some of the art shows, and Gold Coast Art Show, and then I met Ms. Gwendolyn Brooks, went to the South Side Community Art Center.  And I was introduced to Mr. William Carter, was introduced to Etta, Mrs. Etta [Moten] Barnett.  And then I realized that these are the people that were going to help influence me as an artist and really help to take me onto another level.  So I socialized with these people a great deal.  And I, of course, I met many of them at the Lyric Opera.  I would see them at the Art Institute of Chicago, at the major openings.  And, and I became somewhat of a socialite in Chicago.  And that was taking away from my art.  And so Richard and I, at that time, we were living at 200 East Chestnut at the Seneca Building.  And we hired Dory Wilson as our PR to take away the social aspect and introduce the artists to Chicago.  And, and that really began my career as an artist, as a known artist in Chicago.
Speaker 2: So this is all happening when you're a student still?
Speaker 1: A student and after being a student--(unclear)--(simultaneously).
Speaker 2: And after being a student.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, so--cause I was there with the time period--I mean I was--when, you're saying when you got introduced to Dory Wilson and that part, not introduced, but when you hired her, you had already graduated at that point?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, I want to go back just a little bit with what you found at the Art Institute and I'd like to even, you know, the person who sent you, you know, said, you know you really should go to the Art Institute.  You have some talent.  What was your work like?  Do you have any of those early pieces in--?
Speaker 1: Yes, when I was at the vocational school in East Grand Forks, Minnesota [sic. North Dakota], Bob Thompson was the professor's name.  And he was very supportive because he knew that I was more than a textile person.  And, and he encouraged me to continue drawing.  And I did a lot of realism-type work.  I did a lot of family portrait type works.  And after entering the Art Institute of Chicago, I did a lot of cubistic works because I was attracted to the, to the cubist period.  And, of course, that was my attraction to African culture and sculpture.  And I didn't know the tie in.  And then I painted a lot of surrealist work.  I fell with the work of Kurt Seligmann.  And I loved the work of Ray Yoshida,  who was a professor at the Art Institute of Chicago at the time.  I loved the work of Milton Avery and Georgia O'Keefe and Arthur Dove.  And so I used their works in terms of trying to create a foundation for my beginning as an artist.  And my first paintings of importance were painted at the address, 200 East Chestnut.  And I painted in one evening about twelve paintings that were the beginning of the Gullah reflection series.  Youths on right--White Horseback; Three Sisters, the Passing, the maquette [plaster relief] for the "Passing of Eloise" and then at the same time, I was offered to be in an art show in St. Louis at the Vaughn Cultural Center.  And I had six of my paintings on view.  And those paintings were going for two or three hundred dollars.  And after traveling--because of Richard, he afforded me to travel a lot, and traveling there, and found that the people were not interested in art.  I was a little disappointed, but I knew that my art was about something that I, I had experienced.  And after that I went to Geneva, Switzerland for a summer and studied art there in Geneva, Switzerland.  And what I gained from being a part of some of the artists in Switzerland was that those people painted what they knew, simply that.  And then I came back and I just went and concentrated on my past and my background and developed a body of work.
Story_ID: 7901
Speaker 1: The NCCU, North Carolina Central University, became very interested in my work because of Karol Green who was at the--he had just worked in renovating the Banneker-Douglas Museum.  And there was a new magazine out called the, I think it was called "The Afro-American Magazine".  And this magazine was supported by the Smithsonian, and it was to showcase Afro-American artists, and, and it was really one of the first important magazines in terms of pictures and histories of Afro-American artists.  It was called "American Visions" and my work appeared on the cover of that magazine.  And that was the, sort of national entrance to my work.  And from there I started to do a lot more shows.  NCCU picked up my work and used it as a traveling show with the help of Karol Green and Norman Pendergraft, and after the run of that show, the University of South Carolina became very interested in my work.  And they offered a show, the McKissic Museum actually offered the show, which is in Columbia, South Carolina, which is the museum on the campus of the University of South Carolina.  And they realized that my work--the importance of my work in terms of South Carolina culture and history and put together the book, "Gullah Images".  And that book was produced with, I think 200 and maybe eighty images in it.  And the writers in that book, I had complete control in selecting writers, thanks to the University of South Carolina and Catherine Frye and Robin Sum--Robin Asbury (ph.) Sumner.  I selected people that I felt understood the culture and understood me as a person.  And I asked Pat Conroy to do, to do the forward.  And I asked Ronne Hartfield to do an introduction of my Chicago days, and I asked Bettye [J.] Parker Smith to write about the African Diaspora connection and South Carolina.  And I also had the director of the museum to do the forward in sort of placing me with my peers.  And her name is Lynn--can't think of Lynn's last name right now [Robertson].  But anyway, so all these things were put together, which made it a very important book.  But I knew that that period, because of my interest in reading and my interest in the arts and the museum, and I had seen countless table-top books of artists, that I needed a very important book if it's to be sponsored by the University of South Carolina to be sort of the cornerstone, if you will, of a whole new breed of artists coming out of the South.  And, and that book did just that.  It really created a whole new essence of South Carolina cultural in terms of African American people and people could then look at the paintings and look at the art and also understand more about South Carolina and its painters.  And, and we have a tremendous number of painters--Jasper Johns is from South Carolina, W.H. Johnson is from South Carolina, Sam Doyle, native son, South Carolina folk artist.  So we have a tremendous body of people.  We have Mr. Halston from South Carolina who painted at the turn of the century whose a Charlestonian.  All of these people are tremendous painters coming out of South Carolina.  And most people never knew about these people.  And now, today, when you go to the Gibbs Museum in South Carolina, they are very proud to show off their Halstons.  They're very proud to show off any artist from the South Carolina area.  And I think a lot of that is due to the importance of the University of South Carolina creating that book.  And out of it, I also got an honorary doctorate degree.
Story_ID: 7902
Speaker 1: What was that early work like?  Was it as vibrant as this?  Was it as--?
Speaker 2: Not at all.  My early works were mostly copies of, of masters because that's what we did in art school.  I was a part of that last trend of artists that really went into the galleries of the museum and set up easel and could copy masters.  And, and I really, I truly believe as an artist, after five or six years in an institution, you really have no voice as an artist.  You really don't have an idea of what you're gonna do as an artist.  The people that were fortunate enough, and, and many of my peers at the Art Institute of Chicago were graduate students.  And it was the graduate students that were creating a voice for themselves, you know, a visual voice for themselves because they had eight to ten years of studying at institutions around the country, and some of them around the world.  And also as an undergrad, you don't have the opportunity to travel as much.  You certainly don't have the, the historical perspective because you haven't read enough.  And even though I was a, a later student, an older student, there was just so much for me to learn and to pull from.  And when I left the Art Institute of Chicago, all I was doing, basically, was copying artists that I liked and, and the fact that I enjoyed their works, and even doing figurative works on my own was very difficult because in art schools, you're not taught to paint figures with clothing on.  You're studying the nude figure for five or six years.  And for the first time, outside of the Art Institute of Chicago, my experience, you had to think of people in motion.  You have to think of people in terms of perspective on your own, not related to another canvas, not related to a setting necessarily.  You have to understand form.  You have to under--and, and, of course, you've learned and perhaps have understood all these things, form, composition, color, but for the first time after graduating, and you say that you're going to become an artist, then you have to actually do these things.  And that takes a year to six months to just finally grow into creating something that you can proudly say, this is a creation based on my experiences at an institution.  This is based on the experiences of artists that I have met and have seen their works.
Speaker 1: So you're saying that it took just six months to a year to find your voice?
Speaker 2: At least, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that happened after you graduated?
Speaker 2: After I graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was the first work of art that you did that would be reflective of finding your voice?
Speaker 2: The first piece would be, probably "Three Sisters" and followed by the baptism series.  I did about two or three paintings in baptism.  And then I did first Sundays and church scenes.
Story_ID: 7903
Speaker 1: Right at that time, I was finding myself, Richard and I were plan--preparing to leave and move to Florida.  So after two years at, out of the Art Institute and doing all of those paintings, Youth--Tales, and I was thinking in terms of relocating.  And we moved out of the Seneca Hotel to an apartment building on Willow, three--936 West Willow, right next to "L" track because we wanted to find out if we could live outside of a hotel setting because we were spoiled.  And we were used to having people coming in and doing things for us.  And so we rented the furniture and fixed up the place.  And that, and it wasn't creating a studio for me.  That wasn't good enough.  I wanted to have a happening place.  I wanted to have a place where artists and writers, artisans could come to and talk.  And I wanted to meet different people.  And I wanted to have these people in my life.  And I met some wonderful peo--wonderful, young, younger people that were living in the building.  And this is also some of the first, probably the first time that I started accepting young, younger people in my life, my age and younger, maybe a little older.  Before I was used to being around people in their sixties, seventies and eighties.  And mind you, I was still hanging out with those people in their sixties, seventies and eighties.  But I realized that the South Side Community Art Center, DuSable Museum, the theater on the South side of Chicago, I think it's called "T", THA or something.
Speaker 2: ETA.
Speaker 1: ETA--that many of those people had not been outside of their communities, and that because I was fortunate enough to live in a very grand place like the Seneca Hotel, that I could involve them and include them and bring them over to, to our home and have them to socialize, with not only Richard and myself, but other people as well.  I met very early at that time, Ranson Boykin (ph.) who was an incredible person in my life.  I mean he introduced me to a sense of Chicago culture that I could have never gotten from anyone.  [Robert] Bob Dilworth, who was also living in Chicago.  I mentioned Leon Forrest, I met--and Ranson Boykin got me involved with Katherine Dunham.  So I was very active with a fundraising project for reconstructing Katherine Dunham's work, and the company was Alvin Ailey.  I became very active in that.  I became very active in meeting the dancers.  I had already met the Harlem Dance Theater Company.
Story_ID: 7904
Speaker 1: It didn't take you but six to twelve months, and your, I love that, it's one of my favorite pieces the "Three Sisters" piece.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, thank you.
Speaker 1: It's not the--okay, cause it just reminded me of black women, you know, and so it is, the black, you know, even though we like to say, you know, "why do they always paint us as mammies?" so things like that are big.  It was, it's a nice, it's done in a nice way (laughs).
Speaker 2: They're Caribbean dressed.
Speaker 1: That's right (laughs), Carribean dressed, that's right.
Speaker 2: (Laughs).
Speaker 1: Sure, but it's done in a nice way.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 7905
Speaker 1: Are you saying that previous to that, were you still painting in bright colors?  I mean--?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no.  I, I wasn't, I--.
Speaker 1: But where did that come from?
Speaker 2: The bright colors?
Speaker 1: Yeah, where did that, when did--?
Speaker 2: Home.  I mean that's, that's what I saw every day of my life.  I wasn't able to--you know, after going to school for five or six years, studying European art, you don't have any sense of who you are.  I mean your mission is to create likenesses of what you're studying.  I mean I was studying, you know, classical Roman and Greek and, you know, stuff like that.  I mean, you know, you, you can't put a colored person in that necessarily, even you can if you go historically and stretch it.
Story_ID: 7906
Speaker 1: At the School of the Art Institute, you know, the, the focus was trying to get the classics down.  And we didn't have courses necessarily in, in African or Afro-American drawing.  The closest person that came to African culture was Marilyn Halberg (ph.), and I took as many courses from her as possible because I wanted to understand the, you know, some of the history and culture.
Story_ID: 7907
Speaker 1: Richard, did he have some role in you finding your voice or was it just one day you got up and you painted the "Three Sisters"--I was trying to (unclear) (simultaneously)--.
Speaker 2: Well, Richard [Weedman] has always had a role in my life because I, I met Richard when I was a sophomore in school, in college.  And, but his role was in just letting me be.  I mean he provided a wonderful place to live.  I didn't have to work two jobs any more.  I ate at the finest restaurants.  I, you know, I could afford to entertain all those people that I talked about and got to know.  And I could be supportive of, you know, their missions.  So, all of that is owed to Richard.  I, I could not have done any of those things.  And so he allowed me just the space and time to find myself.  And I don't think I would have been able to do that as easily and certainly not as early if it had not been for someone in his position.  And he was, he was working as the--I mean to give you an idea of our lifestyles, you know, there I was an artist wearing, you know, coveralls, you know, and making it to school and working two jobs.  And he was a Deputy Commission for the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Hospitals for the United States, San Juan and Germany and Canada.
Speaker 1: So he was your patron?
Speaker 2: He was my patron, my best friend and actually, we became lovers much later.  You know, I just needed a friend at that time.  You know, I, I just needed someone to believe in me, and, and he was that person.
Story_ID: 7908
Speaker 1: How did "Three Sisters" come about?  That's what I'm trying to figure out.
Speaker 2: "Three Sisters" is basically a painting about so many women I've seen all my childhood, and you know, standing on a, near a fence pole or out in the middle of nowhere talking.  In the case of "Three Sisters", these three women are standing in an open field right after a rain, and they're just talking about whatever.  It doesn't--it's not necessarily about anything, but they're just having a conversation.  You know, they're in the community.  They're talking about issues or concerns or support, and they're carrying sticks because the sticks are used to ward off snakes and little critters that might get in the way.  And everyone traveled with a stick when I was a kid.
Speaker 1: Now, but what was the epiphany?  What happened that it got created?  That's what I'm saying.  You went from the masters to "Three Sisters".  Was it gradual?  Was it--?
Speaker 2: No, it was a trend.  So I just, I feel into trends.  And I just--I mean I can remember very clearly working on some very difficult paintings about cubicism.  And I had--I used this model--Pearl was her name, beautiful model.  And I did a, a likeness of Pearl, and I brought it home.  And I thought, you know, this is a beautiful dark-skinned woman, and doing a likeness of her just isn't, it doesn't really feel right.  It's just a classical painting of a dark, Afro-American-looking woman.  And I started breaking up her--breaking the, her body up into parts and pieces and, and made it cubistic.  And I thought, well, that's not really what I want to do.  I'm, I'm not a cubist.  I don't want to be a cubist.  And then all of a sudden I, you know, I wasn't drinking or doing anything.  I think I, I think I had not eaten all day, and I was dehydrated.  And I just had visions.  I just fell asleep, and I had dreams, and I woke up and I just couldn't wait to hit the canvas.  And I painted until like 4:00 o'clock in the morning.
Speaker 1: And that was, the "Three Sisters" part, was it a singular piece or was it part of a series?
Speaker 2: It, at first it was a singular piece.  And I did about two others.  Dory Wilson has one of 'em because she loved that painting.  And at the time, she was working for us, and she says, Jonathan, let's do a barter.  So I did a "Three Sister" likeness for her.
Speaker 1: And then what was, what came after that then?
Speaker 2: Uh--.
Speaker 1: You said the drum (unclear), were you saying the "Drums"?  Or you said--?
Speaker 2: After the "Three--?
Speaker 1: After the "Three Sisters" what was the series you did after?
Speaker 2: Oh, after the, well, I, I just continued doing the Gullah series for like three or four years.
Speaker 1: Okay, but no, you said specifically there was?
Speaker 2: Oh, the "Baptism".
Speaker 1: The "Baptism".
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's all, the "Baptism" is a part of, of the Gullah series at first, the other aspects around the church.  Actually, the church was the most important and singular subject matter of all of those paintings, in the beginning, the church and some, some type of immersion in water, be it fishing or shrimping or something like that cause I could relate to that very much.  I did a painting that is in the collection of Mary Stewart, and it's of a hunter.
Story_ID: 7909
Speaker 1: The paintings that Doris Zollar [Chicago socialite] has are very different than my Gullah life reflection series.  Those paintings are more surreal, very surrealistic in, in style.
Speaker 2: The name of those, some of those?
Speaker 1: They're--those, it, it started out with human variation series.  I had done about twenty paintings in the Gullah series, and then I started to question myself.  So I did another style of paintings which is the human variation series.  And I had, I had--I was ill for a while, and I didn't know what was wrong with me.  And my problem was that I wasn't eating properly.  So I went to a doctor, and he told me, you need to get involved with the gym.  And so I did, and then I went to the other extreme.  I got into body building, and I gained about fifty pounds in muscles and stuff.  And out of that, I did the human variation series, which are paintings about muscular people and cubistic, but very muscular.  And the after that, I realized that I, I just--and I had a one-man show at the South Side Community Arts Center on that series.  And none of 'em sold.  I thought this is not a good run.  So I went back to painting, paintings about South Carolina.  And, and I've continued painting those paintings ever since.
Story_ID: 7910
Speaker 1: You know what I, I particularly, my--I wanted to ask you your favorites, but I had several favorites, but the thing that--I really like the sheets.  I mean, you know, because it reminds me of my childhood, you know.  I don't they're--sheets smell as fresh as if when they're dried outside.
Speaker 2: (Laughs) Well, the sun is the, is, is the natural bleaching agent.  I mean everything is clean when it's hung out in the sun.  Try washing something of color and leaving it out there for a week.  It'll just bleach it right out.  Of course, the fresh smell of the ocean breeze that we got in South Carolina cleansed everything, and also the fragrances from the, whatever trees are in bloom or plants.  You know, that all becomes a part of the clothes.  Stuff that you buy and you spray on your clothes or you put in the water, you know, it's taken out of nature.  And that's why the sheets are so memorable.  I, I could paint sheets for the rest of my life and never have one left in the studio.  So there's a time when you just have to move on, and after doing about thirty paintings in the sheet series, then I went on to other series.  I went to the, the night club series, which I did paintings of people in night clubs.  Then I did a series of people on farms, and I did a--and then I was, became very interested in doing historical series.  I did a historical series on Dave the Potter--Dave Miles, is his name.  He's from the 1820s and he was a Afro-American man, and he made gigantic pots.  And, and his pots were very valuable in the McKissick Museum [University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina] was doing a traveling show on his pots.  And they asked me if I would be interested in doing a couple of sketches of pots and Dave.  And I said, sure.  And so I did a whole series of paintings around it.  And all of those paintings have gone.  I then did a painting, a series of paintings around women and horses.  And those are all gone.  I did paintings of--I did a wedding series.  That's all gone and presently, I'm working on a swirl series, and these are women just swirling.  I also did a swing series, and most of those are gone, women in swings, and, but it's, I can just--I, I have an endless resource of ideas to paint from and simply because I learned and recorded very well all of my experiences from my childhood.
Speaker 1: Now, what are your, some of your--of the hats?  I love the hats too, so all of the hats.
Speaker 2: Well, the hats are as important as clothing, breathing, doing anything because in the hot sun, you know, you have to protect yourself.  And women always wore hats, straw hats, and the reason they wore the head cloth was to protect the straw hat from pulling their hair out.  And so that's why every time you see a woman wearing a straw hat, she has a cloth tied up underneath the hat cause it protects them.
Story_ID: 7911
Speaker 1: My favorite paintings are always the paintings that are recent acquisitions by my collectors.  Because then the painting takes on a whole 'nother life.  Is, it is, the painting is no longer about what I'm painting or it's no longer about me.  It's also about the person that is going to have this painting in their collection.  So I try to put a little bit of the person in the painting in terms of the fun I had meeting the person, the conversations we've had because that's all I'm thinking about the whole time I'm painting these paintings.  When I'm at home in the studio, I have about twenty or thirty paintings I'm working on with names on the back.  And every time I pick up a painting to work on it, I look at the name, and then I remember the person, and I remember what they were like.  And, you know, the, all, the entire event around them coming to the studio and making that purchase.  And that just makes for me the painting, and the painting takes on an added life, if you will.
Speaker 2: Have you ever had trouble letting go, letting a painting go?
Speaker 1: When I was younger, but not so much any more.  Richard [Weedman] and I have set up a adoption policy for our paintings.  And usually in a series, I'll paint fifteen to thirty paintings.  And the, the painting that does not sell or is left over for two or three weeks, that's the painting we keep.  That's the only way we can select the painting.
Speaker 2: So your adoption policy is to take the ones who are not wanted?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).  Okay.
Speaker 1: And we use those paintings for traveling, you know, museum shows and exhibitions and--.
Story_ID: 7912
Speaker 1: I want to talk to you about, now, well, before I go to that about the business of, of the art world, I want to talk to you about what you--anything else you would consider sort of important?  I mean you, your work is begin written and talked about a lot.  And you've reached a prominence at a, you know, a, I would say, early age as artists go.  But I--are there other things that you, in terms of your work process, and how you get to something or how you're inspired to do something, that we should know?
Speaker 2: My greatest inspiration is early morning.  I'm up at three [3:00 a.m.] and Richard and I dialogue from 3:00 until about 4:00, coffee and tea.  And then I go to work in the studio.  And I usually start out with my drawing on canvases, that's the best way for me to loosen up.  And then as the sun is about to come on, I go on a walk around the property for about a half hours, forty-five minutes.  And then I return to the studio and paint in oils, until about 11:00 o'clock, and we have a two-hour lunch, and eat anything we want, all we want.  Then I go back to the studio and paint until 4:00 and at 4:00 o'clock, Richard has his Manhattan.  That's his cocktail hour, and I might join him with a glass of wine or something.  And then we use that for more discussions if we need or whatever business we have to take care of.  And then I read for about an hour.  And--because of this time of the year, I can read two hours and still manage to get my walk in before the sun goes down because I like walking as the sun is coming and as the sun goes down because it shows the greatest differences in terms of colors in the sky and the landscape, shadows and colors.  And naturally, after a walk, we'll maybe talk a little bit more or if there's something specifically, he--specific he wants to talk about or even a documentary on television, nature channel or historical channel, we might watch that.  And that is a continuous for six days.  On Sundays we usually read--he reads the "Naples Sunday Paper".  I read "The New York Times" and learn about what's going on in New York, specifically in terms of shows and stuff like that.  Then we might, you know, during all of this, of course, the seven-day week, we have collectors coming in and new collectors and collectors that have been with us for a number of years, and we're introducing them to our collection.  And also introducing them to new paintings.  We just recently had our private collection on exhibition at the Naples Museum of Art, along with the David Driskell collection and the--what was the third collection?  David Driskell and Julia J. Norrell collection.  So that took up a great deal of our time.  That was the first time we've ever experienced having to run to the museum three and four times (laughter) a day, seven days a week.  So that was a lot of fun and also entertaining people at home.  We do a lot of that, and I believe as an artist, for me, as an artist, it's very important that I have all of the issues around my art making, the business, at our location, at the compound.  I think galleries are wonderful for artists that need galleries, but when I was in need of a gallery, when I was in need of galleries, galleries were not so much interested in my work cause they're not interested in depictions of Afro-Americans.  And I, so I devised a plan of creating the artists studio and, and grounds, and we moved--when we moved to Naples, we bought the house on ten acres.  And we later bought ten more acres, and then developed the house and built the studio.  And now, I'm in the midst of create--of landscape renovation because I would like to make it so that when collectors and visitors come, they can have access of the twenty-three acres to walk around and enjoy the, the greenery, the ponds, the waterfalls, and take in sort of a panoramic view of what we have created.
Story_ID: 7913
Speaker 1: So you're self managed?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: No agent.  Okay, you, so can you talk to me about the business of the art and how you got to that?  Boy, this--?
Speaker 2: Trial and error.  I think the best way one can get to any, anything is through rejection.  And, and I was rejected quite a few times.  And I didn't take it as a total negative.  Part of the rejection was simply that the images that I was painting were not images that people were buying.  I mean Afro-American folks only recently started buying it, you know, and in great abundance, artwork by Afro-American people because they, themselves, never saw it in the galleries.  And all African American people don't live in the same type of communities.  So Chicago, it took Chicago a long time to understand the importance that every, you know--we need more people other than Richard Hunt.  We, you know, we need, we need other artists from different walks of the African American Diaspora painting and selling and being a part of the galleries.  When I was a student at the Art Institute of Chicago, I went to just about gallery on Michigan Avenue and the surrounding areas and Halsted Street, and there were no artworks in those galleries by African American artists.  And so I realized very early on, even in Chicago, when we were selling paintings, that we sold paintings from our apartment.
Speaker 1: How did you build your audience--?
Speaker 2: Word of mouth.
Speaker 1: --your collectors?
Speaker 2: Word of mouth.  And word of mouth and also treating people well, with dignity, respect, making people feel comfortable about coming over to the studio, providing them with a refreshment.  I'm Southern.  That's Southern hospitality.  If someone needs something to eat, you fix 'em something to eat.  I mean they're gonna buy at that time a five, six hundred dollars painting.  So what's wrong my putting something on the stove for them to eat.  I also got that from my grandmother, and I saw it again in people Ranson Boykin (ph.) and Bob Dilworth, you know, they were doing the same types of things.  They weren't selling art so much, but they were doing those very same things.  And then I also had a cross culture of my involvement in, with people from the South side of Chicago, West side of Chicago, North side of Chicago, the lake district of Chicago.  So I could easily pull together a number of different looking, and types of people, just by using the phone.  And I learned that from Essie Kupcinet, I learned working as fundraising for the school, the Alternative School of Performing Arts, that you have to know your city.  You have to know the directions in the city.  You have to know the zip code.  And you have to know the area codes.  You have to know, if someone gives you an address, where they live in the city.  So those things, that, that was key for fundraising.  I remember people like Essie Kupcinet, Dory Wilson, Cal Ashford, many of the board members at that time, we would all sit around the table, and we would all talk about people that we were gonna ask for monies.  And if you could call a name, someone could come up with an address.  Some would come up an address, someone [would] come up with a telephone, someone come up with zip codes.  So we never had to use the dictionary to get any of that information.  Out, out of the twenty of us, we had all the information we needed.  And we took advantage of it, and we used it.  And I simply applied that to the business of art making.
Speaker 1: And so where's your collector pool?  Where is it located?
Speaker 2: I--hum, you might find this interesting.  First of all, it's, sixty percent of my collectors are women, 45 percent of those collectors are Afro-American women.  I would say 10 percent are Afro-American men; another 20-30 percent are Euro-American men.  The largest percentage of collectors, I think are out of--well, of course, out of South Carolina because--not, not just because of Beaufort and Charleston, but because of Hilton Head  seconded, by California, then Florida, Chicago, New York and Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: And you are--you've told me cause all of this is, is somewhat new to me, that you've almost moved to a commission structure sort of, or you're selling them--what is--?
Speaker 2: I have not, I've, I've not moved to, to commission structure.  I don't want to do that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Not commission, I'm sorry, painting on commission.  (Unclear) I meant painting on--.
Speaker 2: Well--.
Speaker 1: It's sort of commission--you, you're (unclear) selling.
Speaker 2: Well, what happens, what happens is that I always create the series.  I start out with a series.  And I've gotten so that it just takes so much time to put it on paper so I just draw on canvas, immediately put the drawings on canvas.  And before anyone sees the drawings, I've completed twenty to thirty drawings on canvas.  So people come through, and they buy what's already drawn on the canvas.  And they know that they either put fifty percent down or chances are that painting will be sold because we have people coming into the studio on a daily basis by appointment.  So we have, on average, I would say twenty persons coming through per week, into the studio.  And, and we don't tell them that they need to put a percentage on the painting if they want to hold it.  They already know that.  The people that come to the studio are people that are coming into the Florida area for golfing, tennis and sporting, fishing and vacation.  And people are just coming because of the studio.  So they, these people actually fly into Naples to come to the studio.  And they have an opportunity to look at works in progress, and to fly down to Naples and to see drawings on canvas and not to purchase one of 'em.  If you really want to have a Jonathan Green, it's a missed opportunity.
Speaker 1: So you've created a new paradigm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's happening.
Speaker 1: What do your fellow artists say about this?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I mean I'm not around artists usually.  I'm around artists that are young artists, that I'm helping.
Speaker 1: But what are the older artists, do they have--do you have any contact with them?
Speaker 2: The only--well, I, I mean I, I do, but we don't talk about art.  I mean we talk about life.  It's very difficult to talk about art because it, you know, it's like talking about writing with someone or talking about camera work with someone who is a cameraman or who is a writer or whose an artist. There're just so many other interesting things to talk about, which also in return helps to broaden your focus as an artist.
Story_ID: 7914
Speaker 1: I know that I had seen on the piece that you had created, you had started creating adult games or toys--adult toys?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Adult toys.
Speaker 1: But is that what they were called?  Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they're temple toys.  Yeah, they're for adults because adults usually can afford 'em (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, I was amazed.  And what are the range of your paintings, cause those were going for $15,000 a piece?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And the range of my paintings are from--well, actually, I have paintings as inexpensive as $3500 up to $7500--a $100,000.  So there's, there's quite a range there.  The average paintings that are sold are sold at between eight and $25,000, yeah.
Story_ID: 7915
Speaker 1: I would like to--more about, well, what I would like to do is some landscape sculptural pieces, environmental landscape sculptural pieces because I, I've always loved Martin Puryear and his work and what he's done and I've always been a person of the soil.  And so I would like to find a way to incorporate my work with landscaping.  And I'm starting to do that presently with the property around the house.  I think that I will always paint for a living, do paintings on canvases, but I'd like to have another side of me emerge, and I think the combining the fine arts with landscaping--and not landscaping in terms of, you know, just doing general landscaping, but building on the land something that could be somewhat permanent.  And this could include bronze as well as brick, cement, just using a variety of materials--haven't figured it all out yet.
Speaker 2: So you, you know, in some respects, one (unclear) I had, I want to go back to the question about--well, I want to go back.  Let me ask, then I'll make the comment, but the question about what haven't, what haven't you done that you would like to do?
Speaker 1: That's a difficult question because I get to do almost anything I want to do.  I, you know, and I, and I don't ask to do very much.  I love--what I love doing more than anything aside from work, is spending time with my collectors.  Richard [Weedman] and I are both collectors of art work.  We have a pretty significant art collection that we've built together over twenty-three years.  That's a passion, and I love to cook.  I love to eat.  And I like to drink good wines, and I like conversations.  I don't travel as much as I used to because I, you know, I'm creating all of those traveling experiences, getting parts of it and putting it on the property.  And I want to spend more time just walking around my twenty-three acres, exploring it, adding to it, taking away from, have it as a continuum work in progress.
Story_ID: 7916
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were all there together.  Pat Wilford, the young lady that died was really a good friend of mine at school.  She was a sculptress.  She did bronze pieces.
Speaker 2: So what do you think?  You, you feel that African American subject matter has great potential and a great--and there's a great market for it now?
Speaker 1: Yes.  And I think the--I think, I think what was important for me was finding a universal way of introducing Afro-American art to a broader public and the universality was simply using the Afro-Americans and all of their color ranges in doing things that people cherished, the necessities of life.  Births, weddings, ceremonies, death, cleansing, laundry, preparation of food, hunting, all of those are experiences everyone can relate to.
Story_ID: 7917
Speaker 1: One thing that strikes me, you use the Afro-American instead of African American, which was the term we used before we used African.
Speaker 2: I had an Afro (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, I'm just saying you didn't, you didn't come along with the rest of us when we're using African American?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I mean I lived an isolated life.  I really did, you know.  I came out of South Carolina.  I went to a, a happening school, the Art Institute of Chicago, and then I, you know, I, I became hitched with this Euro-American guy from South Dakota.  You know, I lived two worlds, I've two worlds all my life, and so that I don't always pick up on the terms (laughs).
Speaker 1: (Laughs) If you're a little behind, it's African American now, okay (laughs).
Speaker 2: (Laughs).
Speaker 1: That's been for a long time.
Speaker 2: Well, I used to say colored (laughs).  I graduated from that.
Story_ID: 7918
Speaker 1: I'd like to ask you what do you think you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Well, ultimately, I will be remembered for my work, and I think that's good enough for me.
Speaker 1: And do you want to leave a legacy and if so, what?
Speaker 2: You know, the legacy is just becoming a part of this art movement and surviving in it.  If I can survive in it, almost anyone can survive in it.  And I came from very humble beginnings.
Speaker 1: And with the beauty of African American artists, what?
Speaker 2: The African American people.  I mean that's the source, and for me, you know, African American people have been a part of this nation ever since the fifteenth century.  And we have been a participating part, we've been a part of every revolution.  And we've been a part of just about every Euro-American and their families that came here.  We have worked with them side-by-side.  We have befriended them.  We have died for them.  You know, we've married them, we've had their babies.  They've had our babies, you know, and we've always been here.  It's like right hand and left hand.  It's just how I see us.  You know, and until we can just shake hands and work together, then what is it?  We're not there until we can do that.
