Story_ID: 613202
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers and Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Would you state your name and spell it for me, including your middle name?
Speaker 2: Marvin Collins Griffin, M-A-R-V-I-N, C-O-L-L-I-N-S, G-R-I-F-F-I-N [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Marvin Griffin].
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: February the 20th, 1923.
Speaker 1: And where were you born?
Speaker 2: Wichita, Kansas.
Speaker 1: What is the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: My residence in Austin, Texas, 26--
Speaker 1: And, what is your, your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a minister, pastor of the Ebenezer Baptist Church [Austin, Texas].
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?
Speaker 1: It's May 14th--
Speaker 2: May the 14th--
Speaker 1: Two thousand and ten [2010].
Speaker 2: Two thousand ten [2010].
Story_ID: 613203
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you some little, some fun questions.  What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite food?  Do you--what do you like to eat?
Speaker 2: Liver and onions.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: August.
Speaker 1: What about a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, Africa.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, I haven't thought of it in that manner.  A winner never quits and a quitter never wins.
Story_ID: 613204
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your ancestry.  I'd like to begin talking about your mother.  Can you tell me what, what is your mother's name and when and where she was born?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Beatrice Howell and she was born in Oklahoma, Gans, Oklahoma, G-A-N-S, and descended from a Cherokee Indian [Native American] tribe.
Speaker 1: Do you know what year she was born?
Speaker 2: I'm not, offhand, somewhere, 1898.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you said she was a descendant of a Cherokee Indian tribe.  Did you know your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Mariah Howell, H-O-W-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: And tell me about your, your grandmother and then we'll go back to your mother.
Speaker 2: I don't know very much about my grandmother.  I was small when she passed away.  I remember her funeral.
Speaker 1: And, okay, we'll go back to your mother.  So you don't know much about your grandmother. Did you know anything about your grandfather?
Speaker 2: No.  Well I met my grandfather after I was an adult, okay.
Speaker 1: Who was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: William Collins [sic. S.T. Collins].
Speaker 1: And that's on your father's side.  On your mother's side, did you know your grandfather on your mother's side [George Howell]?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 613205
Speaker 1: Tell me more about your mother.  Why do you believe that she was a descendant of the Cherokee Indian [Native American]?
Speaker 2: We have, I still have somewhere some papers to indicate that she was a member.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So tell me about your relationship with your mother.  What type of mother was she?
Speaker 2: Well I was adopted by one sister and actually the child by birth of another sister.  So, the two sisters were involved in my early upbringing.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Beatrice [Beatrice Howell] was your birth mother?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and her sister, what was--
Speaker 2: Beulah [Beulah Howell Griffin].
Speaker 1: Beulah, she adopted you, at what age?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was about four.
Speaker 1: Do you remember anything about your mother, though?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me about your mother.
Speaker 2: Well they both lived a long time when I was, I was brought by my adopted mother to Texas and I was about five years of age.
Speaker 1: Okay, but what can you tell me about your mother?
Speaker 2: Well, she brought me to Texas--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and enrolled me in school, she was married so I have a stepfather but the, they always treated me as the actual birth child.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember anything about your birth mother?
Speaker 2: Yes I, she was working for people who were living in Kansas and she was one of their house servants and she spent her life doing that, lived to be in the eighties.
Speaker 1: Do you know about her education?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: She (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She just worked for those people that were, all her life.
Story_ID: 613206
Speaker 1: Your Aunt Beulah [Griffin's maternal aunt, Beulah Howell Griffin] actually became your mother?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was her husband's name?
Speaker 2: Well she married a couple of times, one was named Blose [ph.] and that's the only one I know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me about, about your mother, Beulah.
Speaker 2: Well she married a man in Kansas and they moved to Dallas [Texas] so at the age of seven I was in Dallas and educated in the school, public schools of Dallas.
Speaker 1: Okay, your, your mother, Beulah, what did she do?  Did she work outside of the home?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What did she do?
Speaker 2: She worked for a family in Dallas.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your father [William Collins]?
Speaker 2: Well my father was in Oklahoma so I didn't know much about him.  I didn't have any knowledge of what he was doing.
Speaker 1: Okay, well I'm talking about Beulah's husband.  He raised you, they were married so they raised you--
Speaker 2: They were married, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --as their own children, as their child?  Did they have any other children of their own?
Speaker 2: No, there were three of us that had the same mother.  I was the oldest and there was a girl named Pauline and a boy named George [George Howell] and all of us had different parents.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you all lived with Beulah and--
Speaker 2: No, they--
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: --I came to Dallas and, with her, and--
Speaker 1: Pauline and George, they were your brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Yes, half.
Speaker 1: Half?
Speaker 2: We called them half.
Speaker 1: Okay, and their birth mother was Beulah?
Speaker 2: No, their birth mother was Beatrice, Beatrice Howell.
Speaker 1: Your birth mother?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So Beatrice Howell, your birth mother, also gave birth to Pauline and George but you all had different fathers?  Is that what you're saying?
Speaker 2: Well, my birth mother gave birth to myself and Pauline and George.  Pauline and George had the same mother but different fathers.
Speaker 1: Yes, and did Beulah bring all of you to Dallas or just you?
Speaker 2: Just me.  She treated me as her son from then on.
Speaker 1: Okay, and can you tell me, you said, okay, once you got to Dallas, who was living in the household, Beulah and her husband and you?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Tell me who her husband was at that time?
Speaker 2: Jesse Griffin.
Speaker 1: Jesse Griffin.  Now, I understand that you had a different name at birth.  What was your birth name?
Speaker 2: Roland Marvin Collins [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Marvin Griffin].
Speaker 1: Okay, and your, your new, your adoptive mother changed your name to Marvin, right, Marvin Collins--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Griffin?
Speaker 2: Well they changed it to William Marvin Collins.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And later they had this done officially through the courts.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when did they, so, officially, then they changed, they changed your name to William Marvin Collins but you were born Roland Marvin Collins and then when did they officially change your name to Marvin Collins Griffin?
Speaker 2: I did that myself.
Speaker 1: Oh, you did that as an adult?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Story_ID: 613207
Speaker 1: Now your father, you said you didn't know much about your father, what about your grandparents.  Did you know any of your relatives on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Well my father was alive but I didn't know him.  I looked him up, I was in Chicago [Illinois] and I heard he was in Chicago and looked him up in the directory and found him and called and he answered the phone.
Speaker 1: And tell me his name again?
Speaker 2: His name was William Marvin Collins [William Collins].  I'll show you his picture.
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell me about that conversation when you called him up on the phone.  Was that the first time you had spoke to him?
Speaker 2: Yes, I, as a, as a boy, I think I remember faintly meeting him once and he told me he was my dad.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what the conversation was like--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --when you called him?  No, okay.  So you met him one time.  Did you know any of his other relatives?
Speaker 2: Yes, he had brothers.  He had three brothers that I met, they all lived in Oklahoma, one was a preacher, one was a farmer. I remember he had about two hundred acres of land--
Speaker 1: And the other--
Speaker 2: --near Fort Gibson.  I remember myself at an early age I was at Fort Gibson, Oklahoma prior to coming to Dallas [Texas] in 1930.
Speaker 1: Okay, any other information about your father's family?
Speaker 2: And my, I'm, as an adult I met my grandfather and he lived to be almost one hundred.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Sanders [S.T. Collins], or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember the meeting?
Speaker 2: I didn't, I didn't meet my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Oh, you didn't meet him, you just--
Speaker 2: I went to his grave and saw his tombstone.  I took pictures of it and I can't remember the names, Sandra something, it wasn't Sander, it was some--it starts with an S but it was not a name easy to remember and I never called it, I just saw it written somewhere.
Story_ID: 613208
Speaker 1: Now, and you're about seven years old and you come to Dallas to live.  Tell me about where you went to elementary school.
Speaker 2: I attended elementary school in Dallas, Texas, Julia C. Frazier [Julia C. Frazier Elementary School] was the name of the school.  I was enrolled there at the age of seven, it was an elementary school.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the teachers there?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Mr. Dunleavy, Dunleavy [ph.], Mr. Jackson, Clifford Jackson [ph.], Terrell [Eulalia E. Terrell], those were some of the teachers.
Speaker 1: What was your, your favorite subject in school, in elementary school?
Speaker 2: History.
Speaker 1: Why was that?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I just loved history and the way the teacher taught it, the way he put himself into it, dramatized it like and I was favorably impressed with him and the subject.
Speaker 1: What type of student were you?
Speaker 2: Well I was good in arithmetic and I was a good student, did well in class, the first few years, the thing that I didn't do too well in was conduct.
Speaker 1: Were you mischievous?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What were some of the things that you would get in trouble for?
Speaker 2: Well I, I got in trouble for talking when I should have been listening and, of course, once I got in trouble because the teacher wanted me, the fellow wanted to look on my paper to see if the answers that I was giving and I told him I wouldn't do that so the teacher thought I was disturbing the class and I got a whipping for that.  I was never able to explain that.  So I was in trouble for talking and other times I was innocent but that time I was guilty, they thought.
Speaker 1: What other activities, besides school work, were you involved in in the elementary school?
Speaker 2: Drama, I liked acting and, I mean, we had minstrels in those days.
Speaker 1: You had what?
Speaker 2: Minstrels, in other words, our school would have programs and those participants in, what we call them, we'd paint their faces black.  Now, we were already black, and we painted our faces to participate in this program, we called it a minstrel, something like, maybe you don't remember seeing anything by Al Jolson.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well we would, we'd be doing that with a black group, painting themselves black to demonstrate the characters in the minstrel.  Doesn't make sense as you think of it now but we thought it was great.
Speaker 1: Okay, were you involved in sports at all?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't see myself being knocked down and having to get up and all that.  I wanted to deal with academic matters.
Story_ID: 613209
Speaker 1: Did your family attend church?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  My stepmother, Beulah [Griffin's maternal aunt, Beulah Howell Griffin], was very active in the church.  Her husband, Jesse [Jesse Griffin], was a deacon for a while.
Speaker 1: What church did you attend?
Speaker 2: We attended, at the beginning I attended church, two Sundays had a Methodist preacher and two Sundays had a Baptist preacher.
Speaker 1: Why was that?
Speaker 2: Well that's the way it was in the rural areas in those days and there was a way you'd have, I didn't know the difference between Methodist and Baptist, really, I'd just go into the church service and I grew up having an appreciation for both Methodist and Baptist without really knowing much difference except when they had baptism and not too far from where we lived and there was, and then for a short time, we lived, all three of us, in, together, until I was taken to Dallas [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we're talking about Dallas, the churches you went to, a Methodist church and a Baptist church and you said that they did the baptism not too far from where you lived.  Was this in Dallas?
Speaker 2: No, this is in Fort Gibson.  I started the school in Fort Gibson.
Speaker 1: In Fort Gibson--
Speaker 2: Oklahoma--
Speaker 1: Oklahoma.
Speaker 2: --which is about nine miles from Muskogee [Oklahoma].  The fire department had to come from Muskogee to Fort Gibson.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Tell me, do you remember any of the baptism ceremonies, how that--
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: You just know that it was near--
Speaker 2: I was there and I saw them, some of them take it and I--
Speaker 1: Where was the baptism held?
Speaker 2: It was a lake.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a lake, and you waded off into it.  That was the way.  I was baptized not, later in Dallas at the age of, about nine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I, my adopted mother took me to Dallas, she was very active in the church and so she saw to it that I was at church, I was at school, didn't miss any time from school at all, never in my life.
Speaker 1: What church did you attend in Dallas?
Speaker 2: Well I attended Bethlehem Baptist Church [Dallas, Texas], Bethlehem, and later that church split and we had a Greater Bethlehem [Greater Bethlehem Baptist Church, Dallas, Texas] and I went from there, that was about in my, around nine or something like that.
Story_ID: 613210
Speaker 1: Do you remember the neighborhood in which you lived and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) East Dallas [Dallas, Texas], was the name of it.  It was considered a rather rough section and I told people I was from East Dallas, and they say boy, they thought I was a bad dude and they had a name for a knife called the East Dallas Special.  So, and in those days when you went away to some other neighborhood, like you had a girl or something, my friend and I went out one night, I was taking what later became my wife [Lois King Griffin], her, to the movie and the, my friend was taking another girl and we were both going to different sections of town and he got thrown, we had rocks thrown at him when he was coming away from, that night after he took the girl home and there was, I ended up with a fellow and found a trolley, the streetcar we called it, and we, he got off in the front of the bus and we got off at the back of the bus and it so happened that this might have been a boy that my friend was date- not my friend but this girl, who later became my wife, dated.  So he got thrown, had rocks, had taken his girl home and I encountered difficulty and this fellow that was taken, who later became my wife, home.  I got off at the front of the car and she, this fellow got off also and we confronted each other say, "Man, is this your girl?"  That's what he asked me and I said, "That's what I'm trying to find out."
Story_ID: 613211
Speaker 1: Okay, let's, let's go back to elementary school [Julia C. Frazier Elementary School, Dallas, Texas].  We'll talk more about your dating years and how you met your wife [Lois King Griffin] a little later on.  Now, you said that you were a good student?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And were there any dreams or aspirations that you had in elementary school?  Did you even think about what you would like to become?
Speaker 2: Yes, I wanted to become a preacher.
Speaker 1: When did you decide that and why?
Speaker 2: I was about seven and I would announce that there would be a sermon that night and I'd get under the streetlight and preach and I recall on one occasion that I announced that there'd be a sermon tonight here under the light and my stepfather [Jesse Griffin] had been ill and people were in the habit, many times when there was illness, to send some food over to the house and they sent some food over there and my father was to eat it but my mother [Griffin's maternal aunt, Beulah Howell Griffin] took the, a little of it and ate and that night when I preached in the sermon I said, "It's the wrong thing to eat a sick man's food," and my mother called, "Marvin [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Marvin Griffin], get in this house."  That was the end of that sermon.  So I, I had a good memory and I would go with my stepmother to teachers' meetings, listen to the explanation given about the Sunday school lesson and I would remember it because I would be there with her each Wednesday night.  Sometimes I'd be the only child there and so I remember those stories and I knew more scriptures than the average child my age because I was going to church with my mother a great deal.
Speaker 1: All right.  You talked about a few of the teachers.  I just want to make sure that the teachers that you mentioned were the teachers in Dallas [Texas], in your elementary school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and the teachers were very supportive?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was there one in particular that encouraged you?
Speaker 2: Well they were all good teachers.  I, I liked Ms. Jolly [ph.], she was a beautiful woman.  I've thought of her, she was a real good looking woman, for a seven year old, and, and schools were very well disciplined and it was like family.  I don't remember any discipline problems such as the kind that we're witnessing today in our school system during my early years.
Story_ID: 613212
Speaker 1: What was the neighborhood like where you lived in, in East Dallas [Dallas, Texas]?  Tell me, give me who was on the block, who lived there and who were some of the store owners and if you remember any of your friends and what their parents did for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, we were very, very poor.  Most people out there, nobody out there had ever gone to college with the exception of the teachers.  No, no, no boy or girl in my class in elementary school had anybody that had gone to college.  So, a dream of going to college was another world.
Speaker 1: Who lived in your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well, for the most part there were poor people.  We had, I don't, I don't remember any encounters with the police or anybody, anybody during those days in my family or outside the family.  As I grew up, I went to Lincoln High School in Dallas [Texas].  Lincoln High School was built to accommodate five hundred students and there were two--2500 students going there.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: So what they did was to separate the two.  So you went to school a half a day.  I went to school, you know, high school, seventh and eighth grade, I would go to school a half a day, from 12 [sic.] to 12:20 was one session and from 12:40 to 5:00 was the second session.  So you had a half a day.  I worked in the printing shop those first--got a job setting type by hand.
Speaker 1: When you were in high school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 613213
Speaker 1: We're talking about Lincoln High School [Dallas, Texas].  Before you go on to the job, tell me more about Lincoln High School and the half days.  Not only did you go half days (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, not only did I go to school the half a day, I worked in the printing shop, the other half, a black newspaper.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the newspaper?
Speaker 2: The Dallas Gazette, and you have to, in order to learn about the printing, you don't see it now, but you set type by hand in the printing shop and there are about twenty-two letters, or something like that on a line, ten point type and that was, something that took--you had to learn and where all the letters were situated and then you had to get the copying, set it up by hand.  If you have, one line is about twenty letters, you had to reach in that twenty times just for that one line and that, and it meant, if you made a mistake, turned the letter backwards, he took off a penny.  So you could work all day and not make anything.  So you learned to be very critical 'cause it had to be exact.  You had to spell it right or else you would set up a case type and the man makes a few changes and he can use it but you don't get the pay for it 'cause the person who edits it comes by and the boss saw it and it's been very helpful to me because it made me very critical, it made me very critical.  So now when I look at the church bulletin or anything that I can, meaning to find errors, people don't like that too much but that's what happens.
Speaker 1: How much were you paid for that if they took a penny off each mistake?
Speaker 2: Some, that's what I was trying to say, you weren't paid anything.  You could work all day and make a few errors and then, and, and you don't get any money and the man who, that you're working for comes in later and makes a few changes and he's got all your day's work.
Speaker 1: But if--were there days that you didn't make any mistakes, how much would you get paid?
Speaker 2: Well, you, you'd make three or four dollars, not in a day.  It all depends but you could, it all depends on how many hours you put in and I'd put in the extra time, well we got, we were pretty good 'cause times were hard, time, pretty good where you, you were, worked there--he put us on salary, the owner put, and we'd have to pay, you know, we could make a pretty good salary.  He put us on salary so, so that, he wouldn't have to pay us too much.
Speaker 1: What was your salary amount?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I don't recall.  It was, it was just about, it would take about thirty minutes to stick a type.  They, you look at a column, average column in the newspaper and, and it'd take you about--three or four dollars in a day's work.  You see what I was doing, I had several jobs.  I worked in the print shop and I threw The Dallas Morning News and I went to school.  I was, I was overburdened and I knew I was able to do better than I was doing.  I mean, I passed, I wasn't, I didn't make any bad grades but I knew I was capable of being at the top but I wasn't.  I--sometimes I'd get up at four o'clock in the morning, throw a Dallas Morning News, be through with The Dallas Morning News and be in class at eight o'clock and I'd go to sleep some time, back in the, "That Griffin boy back there [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Marvin Griffin], wake up."  I was just worn out but I finished and I finished, you know, in the middle of the class.  I did all right.  I knew I was capable of doing better and I finished high school, I was not in the honor roll at all.  When I got to college [Bishop College, Marshall, Texas], I said well I, I don't come from one of the outstanding families and all that, I have an equal chance, ain't nobody knows me, don't know them, so when I got to college, I was on the honor roll, practically all the time.
Story_ID: 613214
Speaker 1: Who helped you prepare to go to college?
Speaker 2: My, my mother [Griffin's maternal aunt, Beulah Howell Griffin] kept telling me, "You can go to college, you can do this and you can do that," she encouraged me.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that encouraged you as well?
Speaker 2: Yeah, one, my history professor, "And Marvin [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Marvin Griffin] has the kind of mind that he ought to go to college.  If I had the money, I'd pay for it by myself," and that encouraged me.
Speaker 1: So what colleges did you apply to?
Speaker 2: Bishop [Bishop College, Marshall, Texas], I wanted to go to Bishop.  It was the most expensive school in, in Texas and that's where I wanted to go. Didn't have no money but I wanted to go.
Speaker 1: So how did it work out?  How did you apply and get accepted and then, how did you pay for college?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember that conversation walking with my stepmother, said, as far as I was treated all the time I was, I was her son, nobody thought of me, is what I'm telling you, that's new and we came from high school graduation [from Lincoln High School, Dallas, Texas], the two of us walking, talking about where was I going from there and she wouldn't let me stay out of school a year, make some money and all and "Everything I gave and you may not go if you stay out a year." I told her now, "We don't have any money." "Well, God will make a way."  And so, I wrote to Bishop, got accepted at Bishop and excelled and Bishop costs in those days, I was supposed to pay thirty dollars a month, that included room and board but we didn't have thirty dollars a month so that first month I was supposed to pay thirty dollars, I didn't have it, next month I didn't have it and you were supposed to be out of the dining hall if you didn't pay your bill.  So, I started sticking around, staying in the dormitory, finding an empty room up there, stayed, made friends in the dormi- in the kitchen crew and they would save some food and hide it in the drawer right there in the kitchen and I finished eating, year out there, doing that one year and then the war [World War II, WWII] was in progress and they needed help so I was able to get a job in the dining hall and I waited on the teachers' table, that was the best table and I finished with honors.
Speaker 1: Now, you graduated from high school in 19 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen forty [1940].
Speaker 1: In high school?
Speaker 2: I graduated from high school in 1940.
Story_ID: 613215
Speaker 1: Now tell me more about your academics and the professors at Bishop.
Speaker 2: Well, the teachers were very good, very good.  I had very good teachers.  So, and then I was, a group of us decided, we were going to run the school.  So we challenged the professors, you know, in sociology and economics, challenged the professor, the teacher, to ask us something about the lesson we don't know.  And so he enjoyed that and we enjoyed it and we were organizing among ourselves, eight of us, a group we called, the clique, the most influential men on Bishop College campus [Marshall, Texas], made a position of, made up of men of position, scholarship and character and I was head of the debating society, somebody else was the head of another group and we, and I was also head of the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].  So we, among us, we ran the school we thought and, and when my senior year, the president of the college called a little meeting and he said, we want to scatter these positions around.  We had already caucused, my group had, and I was going to be the president of the senior class.  He said, "Now, we're going to scatter these things around and you wouldn't select Marvin Griffin [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Marvin Griffin] as head of the class. He's already overtaxed."  So they got somebody else.  I was also the candidate for the, for the senior prom, head of the senior, I was elected class president and I missed it by one vote but I was encouraged by then and I was, each year, I was more certain that I was going to go to college somewhere.  I didn't know how I was going to get there but I was going.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, and what you were just speaking about, was in high school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 613216
Speaker 1: So, let's go back to college because we, we, you graduated already and we were talking about Bishop College [Marshall, Texas].  The clique was formed in high school, not in Bishop College?
Speaker 2: No, it was formed at Bishop.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, okay, 'cause we kind of went back and forth there so I just want to have that clear.  Okay, so, who was the president of Bishop at the time you were attending?
Speaker 2: J.J. Rhoads, Joseph J. Rhoads, R-O-A-D-S [sic.].
Speaker 1: And what type of administrator was he?
Speaker 2: Very efficient, he went to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and his work, he was very militant.  In fact, one of the trustees told me this story that Marshall [Texas] was not big enough to hold J.J. Rhoads and, they had on their campus.  Teachers were underpaid, getting--white teachers got far more than black teachers and he took up the fight.  He had a private school. Bishop was a private Baptist school and he led the fight to, in Texas, for the equalization of teachers' salaries and won.  So, there was some white members of the board who were somewhat sympathetic to the cause but they didn't, it was a dangerous thing.  In fact, there's, we talk about black folk voting, there was not enough liquor in the whole county to make a black person drunk enough to try to vote. That's the kind of atmosphere that he lived in and was president and he inspired us to help, a man with that kind of courage in a time like that.
Speaker 1: So what happened next?  How are you now paying for college?
Speaker 2: Well I went to, I went to Oberlin [Graduate School of Theology, Oberlin, Ohio].
Speaker 1: That's after you graduated from Bishop?
Speaker 2: Well, a group of us, there were--Bishop decided we were going to go to college--going to go to graduate school together.  So I, they finished, one, one fellow lived in, in Marshall so he finished early, he went to school in the summer.  I finished, after all the struggle I had, I finished in three years instead of four, I did it all in three.
Speaker 1: So what year did you graduate from Bishop?
Speaker 2: My degree has '43 [1943] on it.  I was supposed to finish in '44 [1944].
Speaker 1: And what did you, what was your degree in?
Speaker 2: Sociology, social studies.
Story_ID: 613217
Speaker 1: A group of you decided you're going to go to grad school together?
Speaker 2: So they went ahead of me but I finished, they finished ahead, and one, one, a couple, yeah, a couple of them finished ahead, they went to Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio] and they told them that I'd be coming later.  So they went there in '43 [1943], I came along in '44 [1944] after they'd been there a year so people, their friends were expecting me and--
Speaker 1: Where is Oberlin?
Speaker 2: Oberlin is thirty-some miles, almost forty miles from Cleveland [Ohio].  First school in America to accept women and--
Speaker 1: What did you study there?
Speaker 2: Theology.  Oberlin was founded by Christians and the ministers, so they had an arrangement where they, you didn't pay any fees for tuition.  So, it was easier to go to Oberlin, you paid, you did well in school, you can make it with a budget of $150 a year, that's a whole lot of money but school gave you most of it and my wife [Lois King Griffin] and I, we lived together, I had married just a few months before going back to school.  I had another year at Oberlin [Graduate School of Theology, Oberlin, Ohio], she came up from Texas and in the meantime my mother had been killed in a car accident and she finished after that, after that.
Story_ID: 613218
Speaker 1: Well let's go and, back and talk about when you met your wife [Lois King Griffin] and where did you meet her?
Speaker 2: Well I was two years ahead of her and I met her in my last year.  I had one--
Speaker 1: At Bishop [Bishop College, Marshall, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Where did you meet her?
Speaker 2: Well she stayed in, she stayed in North Dallas, she lived in North Dallas [Dallas, Texas] and I lived in East Dallas [Dallas, Texas] and I met her at Bishop.  We didn't meet in Dallas [Texas].  That summer after I had met her, I dated her, went over to her house and had that experience that I told you about.
Speaker 1: So when did you get married?
Speaker 2: We got secretly married in forty--in '43 [1943].  We started courting in '42 [1942].  You couldn't be married and live on the campus so we didn't announce it until I--two years later.  She was working as help in the kitchen and I finished in '47 [1947].
Speaker 1: Finished what in '47 [1947]?
Speaker 2: Oberlin [Graduate School of Theology, Oberlin, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Oberlin, okay.
Speaker 2: That's a three year program.  You see, Bishop was a program that's designed for four years. Oberlin was a program beyond Bishop, designed for three.
Story_ID: 613219
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about Oberlin [Graduate School of Theology, Oberlin, Ohio] and the courses that you were taking and are you still preaching?  I know you're no longer under the streetlight but (laughter) talk to me about the classes and the professors at Oberlin.
Speaker 2: Well, here I was out of Dallas [Texas] by then, you know, I was waking up to the academic world, the challenge of academics and becoming aware of that and I had no preparation for the kind of atmosphere into which I was ushered and I, I listened to fellows talking at the dinner table and they were talking, and they're just talking, and they were talking about things, philosophy and all that, the great theologians, that I had never heard of, you know.  So, and we had a professor from Cambridge, spoke with a dialect, "And the year of our Lord, we must do so and so," and I couldn't understand what he was saying.  By the time he'd tell a joke and I'd understand what the joke was about, it's too late to laugh and he had a class in church history and I loved history but I, I wasn't doing too well with it, I don't think, but he had a rule that you must be, you must take the course a whole year and take one exam, you either pass or you fail and everybody was on edge about that professor and his course, in church history, but I started and I was going to really hit the books on it and I spent time in the library and he wrote me a personal note and he told me in the note that he was very proud of the work that I've done, that I was the most improved student in his class and I suppose, and I worked in a similar movement.  I represented the college and in my last year they sent a representative from Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], I had, by that, by that time I had finished Oberlin, or was about to finish Oberlin, so I would have had two degrees, seven years beyond college and he offered me an opportunity to go and work on another degree at Yale and spend some time in Europe, get a Ph.D. and all of that.
Story_ID: 613220
Speaker 1: By that time we had a child, a first child [Marva Griffin Carter], and we had been together for two years in college [Bishop College, Marshall, Texas] and three years in seminary, five years, and was expecting the first child.  So I thought I had a, I needed a rest so I didn't take, I often wondered, I talk about it now, what would have happened to me if I had gone to Europe and writing some books and all of that, you know, but I, I went to Cleveland [Ohio] and couldn't get a job.  I had these two degrees and couldn't get a job.  So, well, and leaders of industry that hire people to do their hiring, saying, "We're not going to hire you. You're too well qualified."  Said, "We invest in you and you're going to go somewhere else, we don't blame you, you're not expected."  So I was ashamed to come back to Dallas [Texas] so I stayed a while in Cleveland, and a pastor there helped me get a job and I wrote my pastor, counselor, told him I needed a church, he helped me get a church and he said, "Well I have this job with Southern Baptist [Southern Baptist Convention]. It's not a church but it pays, it pays good, better than some church and so I--," and he wrote the application for me and I got the job.  I would be coordinator for mission work involving black and white Baptists and I came back there and he put me in a situation where I'd teach courses for ministers who needed help.  They were not college graduates and all that but yet they were pastors and they needed help and they had a man who was a pastor of one of those large churches in Dallas and he was the head of it, one, because, head of a school that he wanted to establish there and there was another school there and then they hired me to organize the school.  I had a difficult situation but I got in there and won their support and got them all to work together and stayed there a couple of years and I came down to, by that time I was stay--I was in Dallas at, on Hall Street.
Speaker 2: Now, let me just ask a few things so that we can stay on track as far as the date.  You, after you graduated from Oberlin [Graduate School of Theology, Oberlin, Ohio], that was in 1947, you moved to Cleveland, Ohio and when you started working for the Southern Baptist, where were you?  What state were you in then?  Were you still in Ohio?
Speaker 1: You see, I didn't stay in Ohio very long.  When I, when I left Ohio, I came back to Dallas.
Speaker 2: And that's where you asked for help finding a job and so the job, the Southern--
Speaker 1: No, Cleveland was where, well I, here I asked for help twice, you're right.
Story_ID: 613221
Speaker 1: So in Cleveland [Ohio], where did you work in Cleveland?  Did you get a job in Cleveland?
Speaker 2: Well I, I joined the Antioch Baptist Church [Cleveland, Ohio] and I just worshiped there and then I stayed in Cleveland until I got the job in Dallas [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, now you said this was with the Southern Baptist [Southern Baptist Convention]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now tell me a little bit about the Southern Baptist.
Speaker 2: The Southern Baptist is one, was one of the largest and richest Baptist groups in the world and they, their roots are with this country.  So, even if, there's always been Southern Baptist and black Baptists working together in this sense but according to the plan, the Southern Baptist has, black slaves were missionary objectives.  They had prayer, preaching and all that on the plantations and they reported in their convention their progress with the slaves and all of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in, what year is this that you get the job with them?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-eight [1948].
Speaker 1: All right.  So being that this is basically a white organization, is there--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They controlled it but in the meantime they always had mission work with blacks--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --during slavery time, they had a report and they had somebody in charge of what they called, Negro work.  It was under their way, they financed it.  They even financed one or two schools and paid the president, black.  So there's always been some kind of relationship.
Story_ID: 613222
Speaker 1: So we were talking about the Southern Baptist Convention, okay.  So tell me more about your position there and then we're in 1948.
Speaker 2: I had an office downtown in the black area, the Hall [Street] and Thomas [Avenue] and it was a building, we stayed in it, we had classes for children, after school and we also had classes for youth on Wednesday night and I taught two nights a week to ministers who needed help and I stayed there about two and a half years, two, three years, then I, I came home one day, in the meantime my wife [Lois King Griffin] had a job teaching in Dallas [Texas] 'cause both of us were from Dallas and as far as our adult life was concerned, had been in Dallas, I came home one day and the teacher, well let me see, how did it happen? I, my wife (pause), I had the privilege of trying to collect this (pause), they put me on the program for the B.M.E. Convention [Baptist Missionary and Educational Convention of Texas; Baptist Missionary and Education Convention], I start there.  That's the oldest convention, black Baptist convention in Texas and I grew up in the church that was a member of that convention and they put me on after I finished Oberlin [Graduate School of Theology, Oberlin, Ohio] and when, the young minds, you know, upcoming leaders, they put me on, for the theological lectures.  They didn't ask me, they just put me on and I was in it then.  I said, you know, I mean, they didn't give me the courtesy of, of responding, they just put me on.  I'm not going, I'm not going to say anything and they put me on without saying anything, well that's the way I looked at it, I'm not going.  So they put me on again.  I said I'm going this time.  They have the courage, the nerve to put me on, twice, and I'm saying maybe, and I'm going to select something to talk about that they may not like.  I was young and rebellious.  So I went, and I went and talked about the inspiration of the scriptures and I got down there and behold, my college president, President Rhoads [Joseph J. Rhoads], who was president of Bishop [Bishop College, Marshall, Texas] when I was a student there, was in the audience and he sat on the front row and led the question period.  And so, and they enjoyed it so much they wanted me to repeat and have another session the next day and a week or so after that I went home from the convention I got, came home and my wife said, "You have a call from President Rhoads' wife [Lucile Bridge Rhoads]," and I called him and he said, "Well, Dr. Jenkins [Joseph Newton Jenkins] is ill. He's a trustee of Bishop and need a young man to carry on during his illness, could you do that?"  I said, "Yeah."  So I went down there for about a month and he died so I became the elected pastor of the church, the youngest pastor they ever had.
Speaker 1: Of what church is this?
Speaker 2: Ebenezer [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Austin, Texas], not Ebenezer, New Hope [New Hope Baptist Church, Waco, Texas], the oldest, started church 1866.  The president [Rufus Columbus Burleson] of Baylor [Baylor University, Waco, Texas] and the pastor [S.G. O'Bryan] of First Baptist Church [Waco, Texas], helped organize that church back in 1866.  And so, Texas history has a prominent place in it because of the relationship and I got started.  Sam Houston, one of the fathers of the state, was pastor.  No, he got baptized by the president of Baylor who was the, so it's rich in history and I stayed there eighteen years.  I was the youngest pastor, as I said earlier, at the church it is.
Story_ID: 613223
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, when were you ordained and where were you ordained?
Speaker 2: I was ordained in Dallas, Bethlehem, Greater Bethlehem Baptist Church [Dallas, Texas], I told you earlier--
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: Forty-two [1942], while I was a student at Bishop [Bishop College, Marshall, Texas] and the war [World War II, WWII] was going on and if you are ordained, you didn't have to go to war or anything, you could get in line for, get training for divinity student, preachers and divinity students could have special consideration.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went on to, to New Hope [New Hope Baptist Church, Waco, Texas] and what year is this?
Speaker 2: Forty-two [1942].
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty--when, no, no, 1942, the year that you are elected pastor of New Hope, what year?
Speaker 2: This is--
Speaker 1: This is 1951?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I almost have to sit down and write down these dates now, you know.
Story_ID: 613224
Speaker 1: Tell me about being a young pastor and what you faced when you got to New Hope [New Hope Baptist Church, Waco, Texas] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well they figured I would not make it.  I was the youngest pastor.  So they predicted my failure and I, I had never held a business meeting and all this.  I didn't know what to do because the older ministers in the city were jealous of, some of them didn't think I should have been called to that church, young, inexperienced, first time church.  Many of them wanted, wanted that church themselves.  So I just went into my own little shell and did my own little work but I just didn't bother anybody and I found out I was doing things they had dreamed of, you know.
Speaker 1: What were some of those things?
Speaker 2: Well, I organized the children's choir and had, and changed the order of worship and--
Speaker 1: Changed it how, the order of worship, how did you change it?
Speaker 2: Well, when you have the offering, where you, what you, and the various groups I, you know, youth groups and the youth activities, those were some of the things.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you realize, because you're only about twenty-eight years old at this time, is that correct?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  I, I have to take a pen and figure that out.
Speaker 1: Okay, well that's about how old you would have been. Did you realize the rich history of that church?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you expound more about, about the church?
Speaker 2: Well they kept very good records.  There was a man who was church clerk for years and he wrote in it, detailed things they would have, when they had business meetings and people would put out at the church and I had a love for history.  So sometimes I'd sit and read for hours to see what had happened back for that church and some of the people were still living and we had so I, I knew what had happened in the past 'cause I read it and I'd hear about the church, a lot of old people so you had living history and I appreciated it and made use of it.  I was the youngest pastor. Nobody had ever been that green, so to speak, but I, I'm always the person who's slow to change and yet I, I presented nothing that they didn't accept.  I was the youngest they ever had.  All my deacons were old enough to be my father.  So it was pretty, it was easy for people who, from outside to predict my failure.
Story_ID: 613225
Speaker 1: What were some of the things that you read about in the history [of New Hope Baptist Church, Waco, Texas] that you used to your advantage or is there some stories you can share about the history?
Speaker 2: Oh there were things, there were people who were put out of the church for dancing and all those sort of thing.  Well, you read all that and you know that but it gives you a sense of, of understanding that you ordinarily wouldn't have if you're open to it and I had a good relationship with and I'm a gradualist, you know, I don't go and try to make people understand something overnight.  For example, I take this, this is one thing I did because it illustrates what I am, a funeral.  Well you know how we are as blacks in funeral.  I'll, sometimes will go on up and kiss the body and all of that and, or you go and that's the last thing we look at sometimes, and that was especially true sixty years ago and I had one of those funerals, very emotional and I came home from the cemetery, and I had a meeting with the deacons that night and I, and I told them, and we talked about that and I said, it being a good thing if we just have, the body could be brought to the church and people wanted to see it, they can look at it and then later it can be deposited.  Don't have the viewing of the body, this is the last thing I said, if that's the last thing, how do you expect people to look at that without going to pieces.  I says, so we had the funeral, the idea, advantage to, having people to come to the church and I wanted to before the funeral and then view it and with the last thing be in their minds is the hope of reunion and resurrection day and I said, "What do you all think of that," and they said, "We think that's a good thing, pastor, if we can get it."  So we took it to--I said we'll take it to the business meeting, and they voted to do that and so we became the first church not to open the body, you know, and other churches will follow and this church followed it.  I was just coming in then and I was reverend then. That's an illustration.
Speaker 1: Okay, so do you believe that your training at Oberlin [Graduate School of Theology, Oberlin, Ohio] helped you when you became a pastor?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, it helped me but then I think many young people are impatient, they want to do it overnight and, of course, knowing how to give people time to understand change, temperament.  Many young men in the ministry, I think, are restless and expect to get too much done overnight and people are deeply rooted in beliefs and they don't listen to the older generation.  I always had a relationship with them and listened to them and learned from them.
Story_ID: 613226
Speaker 1: What other things did you accomplish during your eighteen years at New Hope [New Hope Baptist Church, Waco, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I also was concerned about continuing education so I developed a relationship with the Jewish community.  I looked on their bulletin board and one day I saw what they have, a study abroad and I talked to the rabbi. I said, you know, I said, "It's a good thing I'll never get there," and he said, "You can never tell. You ought to apply."  So I applied and I got to, a grant to go abroad and spend one month in Israel with a group of Jewish scholars and I, I think they gave me, they gave me the synagogue, synagogue gave me out there, a good offering and by that time my children, I had three girls, and they were in Boston [Massachusetts], in college, and they were all in separate colleges.  So I had told them it was a good thing if they get an opportunity to study abroad.  Well my oldest daughter [Marva Griffin Carter] told me to do it.  It was an opportunity for her to spend some time with a German family.  She was in music and she, and she could get a grant and would only cost so much money and I told her to apply for it and she got it and I had another one [Gaynelle Griffin Jones] in another school in Boston and, you know, Emerson [Emerson College, Boston, Massachusetts] and she had an opportunity to go and take English history in places in England, you know, and she took that, and the other girl [Ria Griffin] was in high school, she needed help in mathematics, she went to a school at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] they had in the summer and we were having a good time in education, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, why did you feel it was necessary to reach out to the Jewish community?  What was your, your purpose in doing so?
Speaker 2: Well I felt that we had much to learn, they suffered as we had suffered, they, and we have a common history, we can learn from each other.  When Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed, they came to our church.  When my wife [Lois King Griffin] was, was planning the wedding, we, I rewrote the ceremony and used some ideas about freedom and I found them to be a friend to our people many times and they quietly do certain things, you know, and when I got ready to build a parsonage, it was a Jewish architect who helped me and guided me.  So I found them to be, have a similar history and we worked together until I came here and even as I came here [Austin, Texas], I maintained those ties for some time and now, you know, the rabbi left and all that and I left and all that.
Story_ID: 613227
Speaker 1: Who were some of the theologians that might have had an influence in your life in the way that you think, as far as your theology?
Speaker 2: Well, all the leading theologians, probably a great deal from them.  Well I read a book by Harry Emerson Fosdick.  Have you heard of him?  Well Harry Emerson Fosdick was one of the great preachers of yesteryears.  When I was in seminary, he was on radio every Sunday morning.  When Rockefeller [John D. Rockefeller, Jr.] built Riverside Church in New York [New York], he, the first, he, through his giving, Harry Emerson Fosdick became the pastor of that church, Riverside, and that's been fifty years ago.  I used to listen to him over the radio Sunday morning when I was at Oberlin [Graduate School of Theology, Oberlin, Ohio] and he has a story of his life to living up these days and I read it and I wanted to do some of the things he did.  He, he traveled, went to the Holy Land and all that, I wanted to do that and I looked for those opportunities.  When they came, I stepped in and it was a long time before--I had the privilege later of going to Union [Union Theological Seminary, New York, New York]. I was, spent a summer at Union.
Speaker 1: In Union, which--
Speaker 2: In New York.  I spent a summer.  They had a program there where you could enroll for a week and they had scholars, some of the great scholars of our day, who the lecturers and I went there.  So here a few weeks ago--
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this.  Since we went back, since you went back to Oberlin, who was Walter Marshall Horton?
Speaker 2: He was one of my favorite professors.
Speaker 1: Tell me about him.  Did he have an impact on your life?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He, he was one of my professors, very quiet, except for, he, and very humble, I guess that's a better word, very humble, and I guess, and was considered the leading theologian at Oberlin and, but you have to also consider the fact that he was in theology, theologian--he's a theologian.  Somebody else is in Bible and then someone else is in church, they were all in their own right, outstanding.
Speaker 1: In his class, in theology, do you remember some of the things that you had to learn and develop, like developing your creed, for example?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me what, what was that like to have to do that?  I mean, or how does it help you today?
Speaker 2: Well, it Christianizes your thinking. Why, for example, I admire creed, what I believe, I didn't think they was right that women had rights to, well men had a right to spoke and women didn't. I didn't think that was fair and I was, it was radical in those days to even say that but that's just an example.
Story_ID: 613228
Speaker 1: We're still at New Hope [New Hope Baptist Church, Waco, Texas] for these eighteen years, is there anything else that you accomplished or hoped to have accomplished that you did not?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, they left out the main thing and I guess I accomplished.
Speaker 1: What was that?
Speaker 2: That was the parsonage.  The church had never had a parsonage.  In my early days, I told the church, you know, we needed a parsonage.  As a matter of fact, that was my first project and I raised about five or six thousand dollars, which was a lot of money in those days for a parsonage and, and after I raised, I said, quite a bit of money, five or six thousand, people were getting mad. "Well, how many thousands is this going to cost" 'cause most of them lived in houses that didn't cost over six thousand dollars and I had about ten thousand dollars.  So I said, I better hurry up and start building something.  So we had to buy some land for a parsonage and we built what was considered one of the finest parsonages in the State of Texas in the black community, which is still there and then I never wanted to build but I ended up building one of the finest additions to our church.  So I ended up being a builder.  So we, we have a choice piece of downtown property that will compare with any church anywhere, that's the crowning work of my forty years.
Story_ID: 613229
Speaker 1: After eighteen years, what, what happened next?
Speaker 2: What happened next?
Speaker 1: Yes, after you, when you're getting ready to, how did you leave New Hope [New Hope Baptist Church, Waco, Texas]?
Speaker 2: I just announced that, I felt, needed the spirit to go to--
Speaker 1: To go where?  Where were you going?
Speaker 2: To, from New Hope? Um-hm.
Speaker 1: To Ebenezer [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Austin, Texas].
Speaker 2: Okay.  How did that come about?
Speaker 1: Well, I, we had a relationship, we were pastors and that we decided that we would teach at each other's church and take care of the eating, room and board and let them take the course so, about five or six of us got together, founded a little faculty and put on teaching classes and not take up, a small honorarium just to cover expenses and help each other and do it at my church this time and I'm responsible, next year, it's your church, and the man who was the father of that idea was from Ebenezer, and he was from Bishop [Bishop College, Marshall, Texas] so when he left Ebenezer to go to another church, the people had heard me and they wanted me to come.
Story_ID: 613230
Speaker 1: Now before you go to Ebenezer [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Austin, Texas] and we talked about what you accomplished at New Hope [New Hope Baptist Church, Waco, Texas], but these, this is during the civil rights time 'cause you're at Eben- at New Hope from 1951 to 1969.  So, how was the church involved and you yourself, involved in, in civil rights?
Speaker 2: Well, we were involved, things were happening all around us and yet they were not as, as much fighting go on in the streets. There was not that in Waco [Texas].  They had their little group over there that didn't come in the church, the milk company.  The milk company wanted to, refused to have a black salesperson in the black community.  So a few people told him, okay, next time you drive the bus through here, we're going to turn it over, his milk truck, turn it over.  And so, the people downtown became disturbed.  The chamber of commerce people [Greater Waco Chamber of Commerce] called and wanted a group of the black leaders to get with the white leaders and see, you know, avoid everything, problems like that.  So, we did and I called, sent out letters to everybody that thought he or she was a leader and said, the people downtown want to know what we want and we want to put it down and work together on it and we know you all should have certain things and should have had it long ago. Let's have an orderly manner about which we will do this.
Story_ID: 613231
Speaker 1: Let's pick up where we left off about civil rights at-- in Waco [Texas].
Speaker 2: Well, we came, we had a meeting and the chamber of commerce people [Greater Waco Chamber of Commerce] and head of the newspapers, the editor and all, said, "We don't have a trouble here. We want to work together and how can we proceed? And you all go out there and stop that."  I said, "Well, what do you mean, go out and stop? We didn't start it.  When we have certain hopes and aspirations, certain things we want to see accomplished and realized, you assure us those things and we can assure you of some things."  "No, we can't do this."  "Well, we can't either."  So they said, "Well, all right, well, put down the things you want and bring them to us and see if we can't sit down and work this thing out."  So we said, "Okay," and said, "anything happens in the black community, you contact Marvin Griffin [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Marvin Griffin]. Anything happens in the, he'll be the leader for the blacks and the chamber of commerce man, Ward [Joe L. Ward, Jr.], would be the leader for the whites."  So, Abner McCall [Abner Vernon McCall], the president of Baylor [Baylor University, Waco, Texas] said, "Well, we'll, we'll open up Baylor.  You can't make us do it; we'll do it because it's the right thing to do."  Somebody asked, said, "We're going to--we'll open up the hospital; nothing will be in the paper about it, we'll just do it.  You tell your people be--they get--man restaurants, they're gonna be open at such and such a time on Sunday, such and such a time and nothing in the paper." But if anything that needed to be conveyed to one group, they'd call me and I would call the other fellow and we went through and nothing was ever in the paper.  They called me the other week, they're having some sort of anniversary and they're writing this up now, Waco is, you know, and we went through that whole period.
Story_ID: 613232
Speaker 1: It's a long, it's a long story, you know, but we worked together and we trusted each other, we didn't misrepresent each other and we got through and so I consider, consider Waco [Texas] one of the better--well, they called me the other week about Zilker Park [Zilker Metropolitan Park, Austin, Texas].  The Zilker Park in Waco is Cameron Park, beautiful park, but blacks couldn't go in there, in there.  And so, I decided to have a picnic there, a church picnic there.  Some of our people were afraid to go to the picnic and no, and after we told them it was open.  I guess some of them were thinking, they couldn't carry themselves sit in there and play and rest, a picnic in that park but some people did and they were doing it when I left.  What I, we often did, I discovered it when we had a meeting with the leaders and told them what our position was, they agreed with it so it was not like Selma, Alabama.  Everybody's not, they were a different type of white person and whenever we laid down over what we thought should be, most of the time they agreed.  To illustrate that, we had a housing program.  Most of the housing you get in the community comes through the federal government but we had nobody on the board.  I talked to the head person about it, "We ought to have a black person on the board."  "No, you don't need no black person.  We know what you all need, you don't need that."  So I went to, to Washington [D.C.] and I went to Washington and I saw some of the records they had in the housing that, over there and the leaders of the city told, said the right things and they done the right thing so you, you can't have a fight unless you've got two people who want to fight.  So we worked out every, every matter that I know, that we had.  When we came together and sat down, we, Baylor [Baylor University, Waco, Texas] was integrated, the lady who was the first woman on the faculty [Vivienne Malone Mayes], she had a Ph.D. in math, was a member of my church [New Hope Baptist Church, Waco, Texas] and, you know, now when I came to Austin [Texas] I wanted to go over to Baylor and take, just audit the class in Greek and not be enrolled, just let me sit in the class and the professor said, no, and he did it in such a disposition that you, was nasty in the way he said, no.  One student followed me out of the class and apologized for the professor but that's the, that's a minor incident compared to the problems we undertook to solve during the time we were there.
Story_ID: 613233
Speaker 1: When was the first time you met Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: I was at, I'd have to check the calendar.  We had a convention and a convention in Chicago [Illinois] and there was the other convention, the large black convention.  Then there was a convention in, in Michigan, in Detroit, and I left a day or so early from Detroit and came to Chicago and I was meeting old friends so they said, "Have you met Martin Luther King?"  I said, "No." He said, "Come on around here, I'll have you to meet him."  He was standing outside the building like many us do at conventions, you know, standing out talking.  Well he said, "Martin, I want you to meet Marvin [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Marvin Griffin]." He, yeah, and we talked for a minute or two and I left and left him still standing there and I said to a friend, I said, "You know, he's too important to be as available, accessible as he is. Anybody just walk up and do anything."  The next few weeks he was stabbed. That's when he was stabbed, just before that.  I marched with him.  I went up to visit my daughters in Boston [Massachusetts] and I'm, they were having a march that day and I joined in the march.  That's another time.  Then in 1963, there was a meeting held in Evanston, Illinois, celebrating one hundred years of the civil rights struggle, what 1963, from 1983 [sic.] to 1963 and he gave the final address.  Whitney Young was there, he spoke that night and I picked up, produced a book.  I kept it a long time.  I gave it to my son-in-law.  That's the limit of my contacts, as far as they were, with Martin Luther King.
Story_ID: 613234
Speaker 1: Was there other black churches in Waco [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What other churches were there?
Speaker 2: Well you had, Toliver Chapel Baptist Church [Toliver Chapel Missionary Baptist Church, Waco, Texas], it was a, what we call it the mass church.  I had what was called the silk stocking church.
Speaker 1: Why were they given those names?
Speaker 2: Well that's the heritage, where the convention and where the black community is and they, every time where you had several churches, you have a, a mass church is more emotional, the class church is more sophisticated.
Speaker 1: And a silk stocking?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What type of church is that?
Speaker 2: It's the class.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's the classy church, okay.  That was the only church?
Speaker 2: No, there was, there were many churches and some, as the time grows you create, some of them have been created since I left.
Speaker 1: So Toliver Second Baptist [sic.], do you remember who the pastors were?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  They're all different now.  One was Reverend, Reverend Hegman [O.L. Hegman].
Speaker 1: Hegman.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So did you-
Speaker 2: Back in, back in, in the earlier years, there were Dr. Jenkins, J. Newton Jenkins [Joseph Newton Jenkins], he was pastor where I am [New Hope Baptist Church, Waco, Texas] and he built, it's a beautiful church, you never would think that it was a black church you pass by it because it was, it was in every respect well built, took him twenty-some years to build it and he was raising money for that and while he was raising money, there was, apparently he had, a black man was accused of killing, raping a white woman. They took him downtown, put him in jail where he was going to have his trial but go ahead with his trial, a group of white men came in, marched into the courthouse, took him, drug him out to the streets, lynched him and people left the town by droves, black people did.  And so Dr. Jenkins, pastor of the church I pastored at, they told doctor, doctor what's his name, Johnson [ph.], that he shouldn't be building this church. Black folk are leaving the town by the droves, shouldn't be telling, build a church for 'em.  He said, "I'm not building a church for the people who living--leaving. I'm building for those who are going to stay."  And so, so I, I think that all of us want the same thing, you know, freedom, they want to get a job, education, we want the same thing.
Speaker 1: Did all the churches come together to work on community affairs at all?
Speaker 2: The closest we got together was what I just told you about the other day.  So, and it's about parochialism. People are divided that way, hard, but--
Story_ID: 613235
Speaker 1: As people were leaving, some people were leaving because of that incident that happened but did urban renewal sweep through any large portions of Waco [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, that's another story.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, Baylor [Baylor University, Waco, Texas] needed to expand.  See, when you're on this side of the, the situation, you can understand why certain things were done but when you're in the midst of it, you don't.  I tried to stay abreast of what was happening in the city.  If they don't want you to know, you can't know 'cause they got to tell you and they'll tell you what happened is we got, they started all this urban renewal and I was, I'm a young college graduate, a young pastor, I'm going to keep up with this and that was a hard thing to do.  I said to the, could--by that time there was another pastor down in, in town and we were good friends and we did everything together so I said, "Cooper [ph.], let's go down here to Baylor, find out what they're, what this urban renewal is 'cause they, if we find out what it is, we'll get it from them, it's their program." It's, your, he never said much, he let me do all the talking and I went down with him, we went together and went to the law school library, said, "We want to look up urban renewal, urban renewal."  So this, the young girl at the, at the library was confused. She didn't know what, so Abner McCall [Abner Vernon McCall] came up. We didn't, I didn't, he said, he went and got the book and brought it back and gave it to me.  Now he was the head of the law school then, he later became president when we were there.  So, we had a black church in the city, they were right next to Baylor, they were going to use it, take it too, and they did.  So, but, how the community reacts and what happens depends, to some extent, like they're taking in Houston [Texas] that situation, they have them reacted as quietly and as calmly as this young man. He's dead now, but there's a Third Ward [Houston, Texas]. There's a situation where the community is dead set on staying where they are and they've been nursing that battle for some years.  That's, there's two, three church, the oldest church, the Antioch [Antioch Missionary Baptist Church], in Houston.  So, and they haven't been able to move the blacks and there's a small element of blacks there that represent the founding fathers.  Now they could have got $7 million and built a new church with a new plan for the community activities and all of that but they waited to the dreams and the hallowed ground of the fathers.  So what happens and while they're doing that, the church is getting smaller and, and the opportunities for that, having a downtown church are diminishing all the time.
Story_ID: 613236
Speaker 1: You now are, after eighteen years [at New Hope Baptist Church, Waco, Texas], move on to Ebenezer Baptist Church [Austin, Texas].  So talk to me about your, your first year, say, how you come into the church and, and what happens.  Are you accepted?  Do you have many challenges?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I had a, well I consider myself a very fortunate pastor at Ebenezer. I came there, young, energetic and all of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you say, what year are we in when you, when you come to Ebenezer, what year?  Do you come right in '69 [1969] or is it 1970?
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I believe it was '69 [1969] and I became active in politics because I always had a love for politics and for law and all of that.  I had a love for all that, history, active and all those times, you know, when I was in Waco [Texas], I was very active in politics.  So, you see pictures of John Connally as governor.  When he was elected, I was head of the Progressive Voters League [Democratic Progressive Voters League]. Progressive Voters League, I was the leader.  So, we got--
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about that organization, what is that?
Speaker 2: Well, it was to get black folk prepared to participate in the electoral process.  When, when we had the opportunity to, when we were, so to speak, emancipated, we were not, we couldn't vote fully, you couldn't participate in the Democratic primary and they, they kind of acted, they made us powerless because we had no voice as far as you had to pay poll tax.  You had to pay $1.75 poll taxes in order to vote and that's main, primarily for poor people and white people that did participate.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the first time you voted?
Speaker 2: I voted the first time when I was twenty-one, whenever that year was.
Speaker 1: And you had to pay a poll tax?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, well I'd go out and there was liberals, the conservatives, the moderates, you had to go there and find out who you want to support and why and get people to vote and I had a congregation so I got them registered and I'd run off a sample ballot that I wanted them to follow and the people had nothing else out there fighting, no competition, so over a period of time, it gave us strength.  You get seven hundred votes that many people don't vote anyhow, but when you get seven hundred votes in a close election, you, you're determining the results and I did some of that.
Speaker 1: What were you running for?
Speaker 2: I wasn't running for anything, I'm the pastor. I'm for the community and I'm finding out the best candidates that are going to give us what we want.
Speaker 1: Oh I understand, okay.
Speaker 2: And my name isn't on the ballot but I had them almost, sometimes almost crying, they're coming, you know, we'll get you support because you mean the difference between victory and defeat and if nobody's out there working against you, you can, you know, pretty strong, before people realize it sometimes they're not paying attention, paying attention to what you're doing at first but when you start gathering more votes, they do.  So, and I would pass it out. I'd do things then what you can't do now and get away with.  I'd pass them out on Sunday mornings and I ended up, I ended up being appointed by the governor to the board of trustees of Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas], the largest black university [HBCU] that we had.
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: You don't remember, okay.  So do you remember when--
Speaker 2: You see, I stayed, I stayed, from '63 [1963], I know, from '63 [1963] to '69 [1969], I had that and I was chairman of the board for seven years which means you had, at that time, we had a $20 million budget which was a whole lot of-- it's way beyond that now.
Story_ID: 613237
Speaker 1: And what else were you involved in (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the meantime--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: In the meantime, I decided earlier than that, because I was going to go to Southwestern, Southwestern Seminary [Southwestern Baptist Theological Seminary, Fort Worth, Texas], the largest Southern Baptist seminary in the world, had opened its doors and I decided to go and enroll and I enrolled and I became the first black graduate with, with a seminary degree.
Speaker 1: Did you also attend Union Baptist Seminary [Union Baptist College and Theological Seminary] in New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: No, this is--this seminary is Southern Baptist but when I went to the seminary back in '55 [1955], it took me one year to get that degree.  I had already been to Oberlin [Graduate School of Theology, Oberlin, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Yes, you had been to Oberlin, in '55 [1955], you got, is when you went to Southwestern?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, I'm sorry, what, what degree did you get there, at Southwestern?
Speaker 2: M.R.E., Master of Religious Education, M.R.E.
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-five [1955].  Did you attend Austin Presbyterian Theological Seminary [Austin, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: When was that?  Do you remember the year?
Speaker 2: No, I think it's up there.  It's on the wall over there.
Speaker 1: Okay, and there, you--
Speaker 2: I, I got an earned doctorate, that was a four year program.
Speaker 1: And, and, okay, and we'll look for the year for that.  Now taking those, to get those degrees, what prompted you to go back to take those degrees?  We'll look for it later, we'll look at it later.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm listening.
Speaker 1: What prompted you to go back to school to, to get those degrees?
Speaker 2: I, I, in my mind, I never stopped.  I, I, for example, one summer, I went to Union, you see this is not in sequence that I'm giving, another summer, I went to school here in Texas on a foundational grant, continuing education for ministers.  I was the only minister, black, in the class but I always kept abroad, you know, lately since I've been pastoring, I mean the last years, I haven't done that but I, I left out a whole story of economic development.  You see, I acted in politics, I've acted in economic development.
Speaker 1: Where were--where in economic--I'm sorry, economic development, in Dallas [Texas]?
Speaker 2: No, in, in Austin [Texas].
Speaker 1: In Austin.
Speaker 2: It'd be better for you just to drive by and look at it.
Speaker 1: Okay, we haven't gotten there yet so that's probably why we haven't talked about it yet.  Now--
Speaker 2: Do you have any pictures of the church, anything?
Speaker 1: Yes, we'll get those at the end.
Speaker 2: Well, that's another story where we're at--
Speaker 1: Okay, well.
Speaker 2: --a project of about $10 million--
Speaker 1: For the, for Ebenezer [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Austin, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 613238
Speaker 1: If you would, can you talk to me about the different conventions, Baptist conventions, and I know you wrote a book on Missionary Baptist conventions ['Texas African American Baptists: The Story of the Missionary Baptist General Convention of Texas,' Marvin Griffin], so, if you can expound on that for a little bit.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Sit back, sit back please.
Speaker 1: Sit back a little bit, thank you.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And look at Denise [Denise Gines].
Speaker 1: How's that?
Speaker 2: Talk to me, yeah, tell me about the convention.
Speaker 1: Well, to begin with, we had the Northern Baptist Convention and after the Northern Baptist Convention, there was the Southern Baptist Convention and blacks were in the Northern Baptist Convention; in the course of time, blacks were in the Southern Baptist Convention.  So you had three conventions, Northern, Southern and black.  Some blacks were in both, some, some Southern blacks were also in the Northern Baptist Convention and some were in the Southern Baptist.  Am I confusing you?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And then, the black Baptist convention became independent, efforts on the part of blacks to organize because of segregation.  They wanted to have their own expression and contribution.  So, there were those even in the North who did not accept the blacks and one issue was Sunday school literature.  They didn't think blacks had enough sense to write, you know, Sunday school literature and so that was a struggle both in the black and the white.  Now, there was a longing for fellowship on the part of the blacks and so many of them organized their own groups apart from any of this I've talked about and in the course of time, they grew.  Southern Baptist supported some of the black efforts so they wanted to have influence so they supported some of the black efforts.  The first efforts were in Sunday school literature, weren't much of it were supported by Boyd [R.H. Boyd], he came out and got with Southern Baptist and they helped him in establishing the publishing board [National Baptist Publishing Board; R.H. Boyd Publishing Corporation, Nashville, Tennessee] and the publishing board will remain funded at that time by blacks.  And so all these, then they, the other groups emerged because of the desire for leadership.  Who was going to lead?  Who was going to carry this out, you know.  As time went on, you had, first of all, these two, well you had all these groups.  You had the white Southern Baptist, Northern Baptist and then you had Negro Baptist and what we called USA [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.]  and then they started fighting over who's going to be president.  And so, then the more progressive group came out of, out of USA and farm, what we call the Progressive National Baptist Convention [Progressive National Baptist Convention, Inc.].  If I were going to join the most progressive group, I'd join that one but when you're called to a church, you're called to a church that's already with one of them so, most of the time, unless you are a strong pastor or you want to engage in a fight, you just leave it alone, just take it where they are, stay there for a while, if it's a smaller church, and move on somewhere else and avoid all that.  And all of these conventions, the sad thing about it, have not been able to support one strong black institution.  So in the course of time, my prediction is, we're going to lose all of them.  We're on the road to doing that.
Story_ID: 613239
Speaker 1: Which one is your church [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Austin, Texas] affiliated with?
Speaker 2: We are in, we were the first church to join the Southern Baptist Convention.  I was not there, the other minister, who's dead now, he was a friend of one of the white pastors in Austin [Texas] and they encouraged him to come join, the door was open, he did.  I was there in the state but I was in Waco [Texas].
Speaker 1: Are there many other black churches involved with Southern Baptist?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  As quietly as it's kept, it's going to be the most powerful group in town, in, in conventions, because when you join a Southern Baptist, in order to be anybody in there, you got to pay and they, they expect you to pay according to how much your budget is and if you don't do that, well you can't be in the fellowship with the big boys who are white, who are doing it.  So, I--
Speaker 1: What is the--
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: What are the benefits of being a part of their group?
Speaker 2: Well, everything. You're dealing with the richest body in the world, the richest there is.  So if you're going to have any influence, you's better sit down with a person who got access to all the money you need.  You may not get it, but you may, you could come closer to getting something.  For example, I wanted to go to seminary, Southwestern [Southwestern Baptist Theological Seminary, Fort Worth, Texas] had all the, at the time I was going to seminary, again, I said, I went to Oberlin [Graduate School of Theology, Oberlin, Ohio], Oberlin's a great school, let's see how I can do over here with Southern Baptist.  So I went over there to become, and ended up, I, I didn't go there expecting to be the first black.  I just wanted to study and stay abreast and I got over there and ended up being the first to finish.  The advantages, you, they have access, a lot of doors open.  For example, maybe they have programs, foundational grants and all that, well they don't send that money over, it seems to make the most of it and just by being around sometimes, you get, you find that the doors are already open, you just walk in it and they have, for example, I read the other week, not too long ago, a few months ago, it's been, it hadn't been a year yet, I was telling you about Harry Emerson Fosdick.  Well Harry Emerson Fosdick is dead but the church has been moving toward being a church that is open in every respect.  So, they called a few years ago a young man who was president, who was a member of the faculty of Union Seminary [Union Theological Seminary, New York, New York], they called him, as pastor to this church that Harry Emerson Fosdick founded in money, he endowed it.  Well they called this young man, he taught at Union and he stayed there and he retired a year or two ago.  So they had to call a new pastor, they called a fellow who's black, and they called this black fellow--
Speaker 1: Was he part of the Southern Baptist Convention--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: --the black guy?  Okay.
Speaker 2: See, Fosdick was considered liberal, radical, all that.
Speaker 1: I see.  Let's--
Speaker 2: But they, they called this fellow, I'll tell you and I'll be through with it, he was called to this church and he has a thous- he received, they offered him $600,000 a year salary and that church is endowed forever.  I don't--so they don't care about what anybody else says or does and he had to, I think he limited to some extent, the money he was going to give but he was prepared to take care of anything that church had.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now I don't know any church that was able to do that and I, oh, and he went there and some of the things that this black preacher ordered that he couldn't do, he had, you know, he has a pretty strong position on some things and so he resigned, this black man, so he was probably offered the highest salary that we know about and--
Story_ID: 613240
Speaker 1: Now, back to your church today, you've been at Ebenezer [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Austin, Texas] for many, many years and one of your, your pride and joy projects was the economic development.  You want to tell me about that?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What year did you found, find, did you found the East Austin Economic Development Corporation [Austin, Texas]?
Speaker 2: I'd have to look that up.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So tell me about, about that project.
Speaker 2: Well after being pastor for some time, it dawned on me that if I were really going to help our people, I'd have to do it through economic development.  It took me a long time to come to that and after I saw, and I looked over there and I saw the Catholics, a lot of the programs that they do, they do it through economic development and you have to get, and there are certain provisions made by the government, you can get, just non-taxable.  For example, food programs and all kind of programs that are already arranged, all you have to do is just use them but we don't know that and it'd take me a long time, you can have degrees and not know and I didn't know but little by little I saw the light and I came late, I'd go to meetings and I--people talking about economic development, something they read out of a book, they didn't know anything about anything 'cause they didn't have nothing to show.  And so I went over there, went to several conferences, then finally a fellow came who had participated in economic development in New York, I think.  So we, we got together and you can't take these things with us because we're not ready for that.
Speaker 1: What programs did you initiate through this program?
Speaker 2: Well first of all, I had to get some money to make a study, that's number one, but first of all, before you do all of that, you got to declare yourself economic development and you have to get, you have to get organized by the state and that takes, that's hard to do and you have to organize, you have to get a charter and then you have to have a board and you have to answer to, report to the government.  All that's involved and it takes time to do that and I wrote them several times, it took me a couple of years.
Story_ID: 613241
Speaker 1: So what has come out of it?
Speaker 2: So after you do that, you have to have your plans, where you going, economic development, well that's, that's a problem with us.  So we, I finally ran across a program, person, I've got to think what we did.
Speaker 1: Did you all have any affordable housing programs for rental homes or for home ownership?
Speaker 2: We have affordable housing, we have that now.  We have twenty-four units, twelve units, twelve units and we could have had more had we had the land and this is directly across the street from the church [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Austin, Texas], there're twelve duplexes, and this is for elderly people.  You can't make over a certain amount of money and stay in those houses.  Now you can't get that program unless you have a charter and you have to get it funded.  I had to get a feasibility study and I found a foundation to pay for the feasibility study but then after that, I get a grant from the federal government of $700,000, you see, which I couldn't have gotten and--
Speaker 1: Are there any other programs through that organization [East Austin Economic Development Corporation, Austin, Texas]?  I mean, is there, do you have a program for down payment assistance?
Speaker 2: No, we can do all of that and there are other groups doing it but we could do it.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: In other words, the more people you have, another one of the problems that I think is a great deal, I don't talk about it is many of these programs that help the poor, the people who claim to be so much concerned about the poor, don't work for them, for these programs.  There's some people, I've been trying to organize a food program but there's some people, they, they don't want people to see them working for food.  There's one lady who has a problem with food stamps, she doesn't want anybody know she's getting food stamps.  She goes across town somewhere where she won't be seen by all the people.
Story_ID: 613242
Speaker 1: You also developed the Ebenezer Child Development Center [Austin, Texas], is that, is that correct?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: That was in ninety (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You see, we have the only, only one in town among our group that is fully accredited, nationally accredited and we have facilities for about 100 kids and we have about eighty some and childcare is expensive, it's almost prohibitive unless you're making a big salary.  You see, I don't know what it--I can't keep up with it myself but all the way from a hundred to two hundred dollars and you have to get it subsidized even if they, they, most of us do.
Speaker 1: Well you've always been an advocate for learning and childcare and education and, you know, it's been a while ago but you were the first black president of the Austin Independent School District board, is that right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you just talk about, a little bit about what you accomplished during that time?
Speaker 2: Well, there were programs that we were successful in getting implemented by my presence, they would, we would not have gotten had not I been on the board.  For example right now, they're closing schools in Austin [Texas], they're closing them and they couldn't have done that when I was on the board because there were other people who thought like I thought and we made a difference and right now I'm trying to work now in a strong program, music, they're taking music out of the schools.  There aren't many black people bought a trumpet and got through college on that trumpet, like many are doing in football today but, and there are other programs that you can initiate far more room out there than you have energy to give.
Story_ID: 613243
Speaker 1: What are your, what are your concerns today about the African American community?
Speaker 2: Well sometimes I feel very frustrated because the problems I worked on for forty years ago are still with us, sometimes worse but you have to take comfort in the fact that you keep on working and when it's all said and done, that you'll make a difference.  You have to have that faith otherwise you won't.
Story_ID: 613244
Speaker 1: What would you like your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I don't know (laughter), my successes determine that, but I--
Speaker 1: Well, what would you like people to say about you?
Speaker 2: Well, somebody asked that question, he did his damnedest (laughter) but I tried to make a difference, really, that's what I think.
Speaker 1: If you had to send a message to the future generation, what would you say?
Speaker 2: If I had to send a message, I would say that you can make a difference, you can change for the better if you have the determination to keep on and keep that faith and go forward and create a better world than you found.
Story_ID: 613245
Speaker 1: Tell us who's in the picture.
Speaker 2: The governor of Texas, myself, the secretary of state [Roy Barrera, Sr.] and members of the board of trustees of Texas Southern University in Houston [Texas].
Speaker 1: And this is Governor--
Speaker 2: John Connally.
Speaker 1: And this is 1968?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: This is, this is 1984, giving investigations at the state senate [Texas Senate]?
Speaker 2: I can't see that.  Can you bring it in a little closer?  Oh, I'm giving the prayer, invocation, state's hearing.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Do you know what this is?  This is at the White House [Washington, D.C.], 1968, Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson].
Speaker 1: Lyndon Johnson is speaking to a group of Baptists.
Speaker 2: This is who now, this is--
Speaker 1: Lyndon Johnson speaking to a group of Baptists, a meeting called by secretary--this is the, can you hold on just a minute, I have to collect my thoughts, matters of church and state.
Speaker 2: Done?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Um-hm.
Speaker 2: This is the World Council of Churches in Evanston, Illinois, 1954.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  See Benjamin Mays, see in that white suit back there?  See--
Speaker 2: Here.
Speaker 1: No, move over, front row.
Speaker 2: Over here?
Speaker 1: Yes, that's Benjamin Mays.
Speaker 2: This is a group of elected officials admitted in Washington [D.C.] in 1975 from Austin, Texas.  All of these are black elected officials along with the congressman.
Speaker 1: Okay, I don't see any--hold on, that's, let's take this one down.  This is you here?
Speaker 2: Yeah, with the children's hour.
Speaker 1: This is in your robe.
Speaker 2: I had a, I had a children's sermon every Sunday and see the little children around there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Got it.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  That's everything we had taken down.  I don't see any, one more in this kitchen.  This is one of your family.
Speaker 1: That's my son-in-law and his son, in the red and my oldest daughter [Marva Griffin Carter], my youngest daughter Ria [Ria Griffin], my wife [Lois King Griffin], myself and this is my granddaughter and my son-in-law [Robert Jones] and my middle daughter.
Speaker 2: What's her name?
Speaker 1: Gaynelle [Gaynelle Griffin Jones].  I was trying to think of my daughter [sic. granddaughter] right here, Athena.  Athena is on TV now.  She goes wherever the president goes.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Yeah, she's, she's on NBC, MSNBC.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What's her last name?
Speaker 1: Her name is Athena Jones.
