Story_ID: 79152
Speaker 1: Okay, well we're going to start out, and I want to start out by slating it.  And I'd like to have you state your name and your date of birth, and today's date and our location.  So start out with your name and date of birth.
Speaker 2: My name is Ernest Green, and the date of birth is September 22nd, 1941.  And today is January 22nd, 2003.
Speaker 1: And our location?
Speaker 2: And our location is Washington, D.C., 800 Connecticut Avenue, Northwest, Washington.
Speaker 1: And you're a Junior, right?
Speaker 2: I am a Junior, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I, I also wanna say that my name is Julieanna Richardson, I'm the Videographer and Scott Stearns is the--I'm the Interviewer and Scott Stearns is the Videographer and Amy Billingsley [HM] is the observer.
Story_ID: 79153
Speaker 1: I start out always with asking five questions that are a little "People" Magazine-ish.  So just short answers, no relevance to anything.  I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: Probably gumbo.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: September.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Favorite-Rome [Italy].
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I have to think about that.  Little Rock.
Story_ID: 79154
Speaker 1: Okay.  I want to start out by asking you about your family and the--and your background.  And I'd like you--I'd like to start with your father [Ernest Green, Sr.] and what you know about his background and his family.
Speaker 2: Well my father was born in Monroe, Louisiana, moved to Helena, Arkansas and around the early part of the 1900's moved to Little Rock [Arkansas].  He was a, a--he was a janitor at the post office.  He also was a veteran of World War I.  And he also to supplement income, worked as a waiter at the Little Rock Country Club.  He handled parties there.  He was twelve years older than my mother.  They met in Little Rock.  He--most of his sisters, his family, moved to California, Oakland, in the 20's [1920's] and 30's [1930's], and he remained in Little Rock.  He [Ernest Green, Sr., father] finished high school and he went to Mount Zion Baptist Church in Little Rock [Arkansas], was an active member there.  He was a hardworking man.  We spent some time doing activity--ball games.  In Little Rock it was segregated baseball stadium.  He passed when I was twelve and I'm, I'm his namesake, I'm a junior.  Ernest Green, Senior.  And the older I get, I--he was, he was a quiet kind of person, but I think I take some of the personality from my father.  And the image as a provider, as someone who stood his ground and was well regarded.
Speaker 1: Let me--you know because he was--you were young when he passed away, do you know anything--did he ever share with you, I'm just saying, anything about his growing up or his family?  Maybe--maybe, maybe not.  You said he was a quiet man, so I--
Speaker 2: Well he didn't talk a lot about his family.  I mean over the years with my aunts and cousins, a lot has been, been pieced together.  But he was in a family that was both on my, my mother's side and my father's side, my, my grandparents who I didn't know, who had passed before I was born, were described by relatives as assertive people.  And black in the south before the, the 1900's, the, the nineteenth century, if you were assertive, that was a quality that would probably get you in trouble.
Story_ID: 79155
Speaker 1: Education was a, was a, was an expectation and he [Ernest Green, Sr., father] always--the times we were at home was very conscious of schoolwork and, inquired how I was doing and what I was accomplishing and what, what, what were the outcomes.  So it was a house in which you were expected to achieve, and the--being a janitor in the post office was, was a good job.  It was a good job in the sense that it was steady.  It had the, the federal government behind it, and that I, I always say that, that the post office at the time my, my father was there, you had overqualified African American men performing the functions.  So I mean the post office benefitted, especially in the south, by having men who didn't have other options.  And so you really had people who in another world, probably would not have been at that job as they had been able to go other places.  But the--he talked a little bit about his experience as a, a, an infantryman in, in World War I, and the thing that always--you know I always focused on is that here they sent him away to France to protect the French and when he came back to Little Rock, he couldn't vote.  He couldn't vote in the Democratic primary without a poll tax and a whole series of other things.  So I guess part of that--who he was and what he did, you know, sort of gave me a, a foundation to believe that, that I could change some things around me.
Story_ID: 79156
Speaker 1: Now tell me your mother's name, and can you tell about her background, and--
Speaker 2: My mother's name I Lothaire, L-O-T-H-A-I-R-E, Lothaire Scott Green.  And she was one of two children of Eugene Scott and my mother, my grandmother who passed before I was born, searching for--I think the-- Bertha Scott.  My mother was born in 1899 and she and my aunt [Treopia Gravely] went to Wilberforce College [Wilberforce, Ohio] and I think my mother graduated in--it was two years that they attended Wilberforce.  My mother graduated in either 1918 or 1920, but early, early '20's [1920's].  And that the expectation that two black women go away to Ohio and then come back to, to Little Rock [Arkansas] to teach, was, you know, they were fairly unique at that point in time.  So this was a--these were two people who were expected to achieve and, and strive and try to move things around.  And I always--my mother like my father [Ernest Green, Sr.], you have this experience to go away from Little Rock.  Little Rock at that time was a fairly small place.  You see the rest of the world.  Why don't you just go on out to see a broader part of the world?  And, and my, my mother had pointed out that she had received a scholarship to study.  She was, she was fairly good as a, as a tailor and a millinery person, hats and all, and she got a scholarship to go to Pratt [Institute] in Brooklyn [New York City, New York].  But my, my grandfather said you know, you gotta come home.  Two years away from home is, is enough for a, for a, for a woman, especially an African American woman.  And I--I used to always at, at, at--early on thought that my grandfather was--had penalized that cause you know, who knows, I--she could have been the next Dior and you know, could have been living in New York and all of that. And the more I thought about it, you know, at that time my [maternal] grandfather [Eugene Scott] was a fairly enlightened man.  There, there were few black males who were willing to send their daughters off to college and let them pursue as much education as they could absorb, especially in--this is 19, 1920's we're talking about.  So that my, my grandfather was the--he was a postman.  And his name was Eugene Scott.  My brother is named after him, the last name, Scott Green.  But this group of people I was surrounded by really were sort of the bedrock that made me believe that, you know I could walk on water if, if it was necessary.
Story_ID: 79157
Speaker 1: One of the other things about my, my mother [Lothaire Scott Green], a couple of things.  One was that she and my aunt [Treopia Gravely] had taught at the local high school, which was--Little Rock [Arkansas] had two high schools; one black, one white.  Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Little Rock, Arkansas] for a very long, and so that almost anybody over twenty-five, thirty year period that came through Dunbar High School was taught by my aunt whose name was Treopia, T-R-E-O-P-I-A Scott, her married name was Graverly.  And my mother.  She and my mother were a, a part of a group of teachers who helped underwrite a suit.  They, they--there was one teacher, Sue Cowan [Williams], who sued the Little Rock School Board for equal pay between black and white teachers.  Well obviously, she--when she stepped forward to sue them, they fired her.  And the way that the case was handled that the other teachers banded together and provided for her salary for, I think it was for two years.  Now they weren't making a lot of money.  I mean I--the--I was going through some of my mother's old papers and in 1954, she filed her income tax of less than six thousand dollars that year, you know.  It's just--it's almost incomprehensible.  It is--even in that period of time and translating for the value of the dollar that anybody could raise three kids on that amount of money and, and then do some of these other things. But the, the lawyer who handled the case was Thurgood Marshall.  And Little Rock being segregated, he ended up staying at our house.  I was very small then, so I don't have much memory of it, but my sister--he stayed at our house during the period of the trial.  Now you reflect back on it for--there was no long line of people offering Thurgood Marshall a room in their house.  You know that clearly was gonna brand you and identify you as somebody who was, who was an upstart, an "uppity negro."  And she was very quiet about it.
Story_ID: 79158
Speaker 1: I mean she was--she also had another trick that I thought it was [unclear] at least--whenever we went to the downtown stores to shop, she made certain that her credit card, it had Mrs. on it cause she didn't want anybody calling her girl or you know, auntie or whatever the term was, and that they had--when they addressed her, had to address her as Mrs. Green.  It was, it was that quiet sort of demeanor.  Belonged to the--kept her membership active with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  I think the membership at that time was five dollars a year.  But she made certain that she quietly stood her ground.  And that was, that was the household I grew up in.
Story_ID: 79159
Speaker 1: And to me, when I watch the '54 [1954] decision when it was handed down, or all I remember were that the newspapers were screaming.  They had headlines the size of, of a you know, entire newspaper that you know, the, the way of the south had come to an end.  And I always remember the one newspaper who I thought treated black folks the most demeaning was the one that protested the loudest and my view was if they were--if they were against something, I was for it.  I, I didn't, I didn't have to know anything about what the decision meant that I knew enough to react.  That these--I wanted to be on the other side of wherever this newspaper was.  It was the "Arkansas Democrat".
Story_ID: 79160
Speaker 1: And so in '54 [1954] I think I was thirteen at the time the decision came down.  You know like any other thirteen year old, I paid a little, a little attention to it.  I watched the next year and I think there was one or two school districts in Arkansas, northern part of Arkansas, that desegregated in '55 [1955], and there was a place in Tennessee, I, I, I want to say Ocoee, Tennessee, where they had a lot of trouble, riots.  They had to call out the state troopers.  And I sort of paid scant attention.  Each September, '55 [1955] and '56 [1956], of how school desegregation was going.  And then when the, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], Mrs. Bates, sued the Little Rock School Board, the case sort of I guess in my view, kind of plodded along.  I was clearly not a, an original complainant in the case.  But what I thought Little Rock School Board was gonna try to see if they could accommodate--and, and Little Rock [Arkansas] at least my perception of it compared to other deep south communities, was reasonably moderate.  It wasn't Jackson, Mississippi or Birmingham where you know, my view of those two cities, that they had a very hard mentality about black folks and how you keep order and what you can and cannot do.  It's all in degrees now when you look back on it.  But I saw the Little Rock School Board trying to do some accommodating and I Thought in my head that if I--if they accept students to go to Central [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas], I would apply.  From the time that the first suit was handed down.  I didn't pay a lot of attention to it.  In my 11th year in, in high school, 1954 did more to bring more new schools in the south for black people than any other single--I mean every, every school district that--if it was a new building, they, they found a way to find the money, right up to the May 17th decision.  And so we had a new high school, Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Little Rock, Arkansas], which was the old high school became a junior high.  And Horace Mann [High School, currently Horace Mann Magnet Middle School, Little Rock, Arkansas], in fact I was in the first class of, complete class of tenth grade, tenth, 11th, 12th that went through Horace Mann.  And so that--the year, '56 [1956], '57 [1957] at Horace Mann, somewhere in the spring of that year, the--we were asked in class whether we were interested in transferring to Central the next year.
Story_ID: 79161
Speaker 1: I wanna take you back for a little bit cause I wanna really understand you know, the things that sort of formed your youth.  And I want first for you to give me your sibling's name and his birth--aren't there--you have two?
Speaker 2: I have a brother and a sister.
Speaker 1: Okay, so if you can give me their names.  And then I also--well give me that.  Not just, just the names.
Speaker 2: My sister is named Treopia after my aunt [Treopia Gravely], and she will kill me, but if I--she's a few years older than I am, she's five years older than I am.  And my brother's name is Scott, Scott Green, and he's two years younger, I'm the middle child.  So--and for--we, we were all--our parents were older when we were born.  In fact, my father was in his late forties, early fifties time that my sister was born.  In his middle fifties when I was born.  So they were--they all were surprised when this large family finally, finally developed.  But we've always--we're a close knit group. And, and growing up in Little Rock [Arkansas], I mean if, you know, as I said earlier, we were the children of these teachers.  We--my mother [Lothaire Scott Green] and father [Ernest Green, Sr.] owned their own house.  Had lived at the block that we grew up since the 30's [1930's].  Active in the local AME [African Methodist Episcopalian] Church.  You know we, we didn't know that, you know, we had a, at that time, we thought a nice, quiet, middle class existence.
Story_ID: 79162
Speaker 1: What was your first memory?  Do you, do you remember your first memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my--the size of our backyard, you know playing with--we had a dog, Spot.  Playing with that.  That was--and my--and I guess the other memory of growing up was that my mother [Lothaire Scott Green]--my fourth and fifth year, year when I was four and five years old, taught me at home.  I learned how to read.  So when I went to school for the first grade, that was the days that they, they promoted you.  So they moved me from the first to the second grade the first day I went to school.  My sister skipped two grades because she had spent time at, at home reading, math, all of that.  So I don't think they do social promotions these days, but the one thing that we did as, as children was, you know to be tutored and, and taught at, at, at home.
Story_ID: 79163
Speaker 1: Do you--can you describe some other parts of sort of family life?  You know there or that, you know the block that you lived on.  What was the address?
Speaker 2: The address was 1224 West 21st Street.  And it was a, it was a block--the neighbors to my left was Harvey Jackson, he was a brick mason, owned his own business.  Across the street was the Brunson's, he was a postman.  He was also head of the Boy Scout troop that I belonged to.  To our a block--I mean two doors up was a nurse.  The--Mr. Napier, the Napiers.  I think he was in real estate.  Two blocks, I mean two doors going south was a dentist, Robinson.  So it was a, it was a neighborhood that at that--it probably in today's world, it, it represented you know, the Cosby's.  It was as stable a neighborhood of achievers and people who represented the best of, of moving ahead in black life that you--the, the corner store was run by Mr. Powell.  And he had owned the business for a long time.  So it was a, it was a block in which you knew practically everybody there.  The expect--everybody on the block knew everybody else's children.  The expectations were always, you know you had to do well.  Were expected to--I, I don't think anybody on our block as a child was not expected to go to college.  Now didn't know how they were gone pay for it, but all of those, all of the kids that I grew up with as friends, in fact Jefferson Thomas lived half a block from where I grew up.  Gloria Ray was three blocks from where I grew up.  Melba was a little bit fur--Melba, Carlotta, Terrance, Elizabeth were more west of where I was.  The Mothersheds weren't that far away.  So this block, 21st and Pulaski, was kind of an intersection that you had this man who owned his own business, Mr. Jackson.  You had the Brunson's who in the course of when I was in high school, Mrs. Brunson kept roomers.  The Roomers were black students who were attending University of Arkansas Medical School.  And one of the people who was a student there was Hank Foster, who was, who's in Nashville with Meharry, was a candidate for Surgeon General under President Clinton.  So that was my, that was my world.  And I didn't know--I mean I thought that was the way everybody's world was.  It's probably--it's taken me sixty years to figure out that I step back from it--really how unique a world that really was and a world of high expectations, a lot of achievers.  People who made impact.
Story_ID: 79472
Speaker 1: Now I wanna take you back still to that block that you were talking so wonderfully about.  And I wanna ask you if you would sort of close your eyes and think about what either sights, smells or sounds remind you of, you know of childhood and growing up.
Speaker 2: Well I, I suppose the, the, the block didn't get the street paved until I think I was seven or eight.  So it was dusty in the summer.  They'd--as most southern communities, the, the black community didn't have paved streets.  But that, that block I remember in the summer was one in which neighbors looked out for, for everybody's kids.  In fact, my nickname was Brother.  Well there fifteen brothers it seemed like on the block.  So when, when somebody's mother called Brother, we all ran.  But it, it was that kind of support.  And, and the, the thing that, that really struck me; I worked one summer for Mr. Jackson as a, as a brick mason's helper.  That helped cure me--I--that focused me on education more than anything.  I had taken in ninth grade shop, bricklaying, so I had, you know I was, I was really moved by this black man who had this business, always seemed to have a lot of money.  He was making more money than my mother [Lothaire Green], who was a schoolteacher.  And he was the--was the skilled craftsman.  And so I wanted to follow Mr. Jackson.  Well in the neighborhood, Mr. Jackson was the nicest, sweetest guy in the world.  When I got on that job, Mr. Jackson was--I was a slave and he was Pharaoh.  And it--but it also taught me about--I mean how this, this man ran a business.  He was serious about it.  He had, he had certain things he had to accomplish.  It made me understand a little bit about discipline.  I didn't like it, but I understood that when I was working for this man, there were certain expectations.  He didn't coddle me.  I was, I was thirteen or fourteen.  I didn't get half rate because I was a kid.  And, and my grandfather was sort of the same way.  We had--my brother and I had paper routes.  We, we sold the "Discipline Courier".  And a humbling experience is always selling a weekly newspaper, going back to collect the money, you know you hear all the stories.  I, I don't know what it cost, but it was--say it was, it was 30 cents you had to, had to get for the, for the weekly newspaper and you know, people would tell you come back you know, next week.  I'm--but he, he told--he showed us that you know in selling this newspaper, collecting the money, what you were expected to do, what time you were expected to be there.  Again, a sense of discipline and achievement and, and some sort of outcome, which is what I look back on both of these experiences.  They were tough, but I learned from them.  And the other thing about the, about the brick masonry experience, it made me commit myself to stay in school.  That I decided that, that maybe being a brick mason wasn't as glamorous as I thought.  And that I should try and do as well in my, in my coursework as, as I possibly could.
Story_ID: 79473
Speaker 1: Now what was the young Ernest Green like?  Were you introspect, were you quiet, were you mischievous, were you--what were you like?
Speaker 2: I think I was, I was probably more mischievous than I was quiet.  I, I thought that I, I--my experience was what everybody else was experiencing.  I had a, had a set of friends that we were fairly close.  In fact I was, I was very interested in, in jazz.  And we had a group called "The Jazzmen and the Jazettes."  And this was when rock and roll was beginning to, to develop, but we would get together on weekends and listen to Earl Garner and Lester Young and I've forgotten who else.  It may have been some early Charlie Parker.  I was in the high school band since the seventh grade.  Played tenor saxophone and the marching band.  And this group of friends was mainly oriented around, around music.  And my view was that this was a nice world, I suppose in some ways I, I wanted to see the other side of the mountain.  I wanted to see a broader world.
Story_ID: 79474
Speaker 1: My sister graduated from Hampton [Institute, Hampton, Virginia], and we drove as a family, my brother and I, my mother [Lothaire Green] and aunt [Treopia Gravely], drove out to Hampton and then up to New York and Washington and came back home at the time of her graduation.  And this would have been I think 1955, '55 [1955], '56 [1956].  So this is all pre-public accommodations.  This is a trip through the--to Hampton, Virginia from Little Rock [Arkansas].  We stayed at a couple of private homes along the way.  Time you got finally above the Mason-Dixon I remember you know, New Jersey turnpike, eating at a restaurant with whites as opposed to segregated south.  Seeing New York and, and Washington, visiting relatives.  But always thought--I guess that experience was one of those that, that rather than to move north, I wanted to try to see why we couldn't change, change Little Rock.  Let's--instead of coming to Washington--well Washington, I remember that being fairly segregated.  But New York was, was less than, than clearly the Little Rock experience.
Story_ID: 79475
Speaker 1: But those things, as well as the [Emmett] Till case.  I remember the picture in "Jet", and you know just thought it was one, horrible.  Two, for somebody to do this just for, for whistling.  But I was also a creature of the south that I also I couldn't, couldn't imagine a black kid whistling at a white woman no matter what the circumstances were.  Now you know we were all conflicted, maybe growing up in the south, that somehow was he, was he responsible for, for the punishment they gave, but the punishment that they meted out obviously was more, was more than, than the incident.  A, a certain survival skill growing up in Little Rock [Arkansas].  You just couldn't imagine anybody black having anything to say any white female.  That was a, a taboo.
Story_ID: 79476
Speaker 1: The, the other thing, though that, that sort of struck me was the, the beginning of the, of the bus boycott in Montgomery [Alabama].  It began in December of '55 [1955].  So that was--and watching it unfold for that year, had tremendous impact on me.  That I just--the fact that these people decided to change all that on their own, again, was an indication that change was coming to the region.  And that it was gonna arrive in Little Rock [Arkansas] as well.  Now I mentioned earlier that the neighbor was--had, had roomers who were medical students at the University of Arkansas [Fayetteville, Arkansas].  So I had observed the medical school had admitted a few black students.  I knew one of the first individuals, Jackie Shropshire, his mother taught me in the fifth grade, was first African American admitted to the University of Arkansas Law School.  The--there was a black woman, Kirby, who was the first graduate of the University of Arkansas Medical School.  We knew the family.  The buses in Little Rock the year before we went to Central [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas], were desegregated, the library.  So partly Little Rock was making a quiet change and that was sort of the milieu that quietly Little Rock was trying to change.  I figured it wasn't gonna change for most black folks unless somebody was willing to step up and be the change agent.  And it, it seemed to me that this was our time.  And that, that when the school board finally said they were gonna admit transfer students, the, the September of '57 [1957], well that was my senior year.  I figured I could always go back to Horace Mann [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas], so why not give this new thing a try.  And you know that's kind of how I ended there.
Story_ID: 79477
Speaker 1: You know--I wanna know why was this--what do you think this whole sense of--cause you've mentioned it several times, of wanting to go out, you know, of--you know be of a world larger.  Did it start before that trip to Hampton [Institute, Hampton, Virginia]?  I mean were there things that you read that made you aware?
Speaker 2: I, I always thought--I, I guess--I mean it's a combination of things that there was always a broader world than Little Rock [Arkansas].  And maybe it's a classic growing up in a small town and believing that there are other options out there, but I mean I was--I got support for that thought.  And I always thought--I mean I knew that I was gonna go to school beyond high school.  I mean it was just form the moment I can remember, we were always expected to go to college.  I--my mother by the time I went to Central [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas], my mother [Lothaire Green] had--and I guess this, yeah this is an experience that--my mother had finished--I mentioned earlier the two years at Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio].  Well when she came back to Little Rock and before I was born, she went to Arkansas AM and N [University of Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical, and Normal, currently the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas], which was the black college in Pine Bluff and finished the other two years.  So she had four years of graduate school, I mean of undergraduate school.  And then when I was--wasn't a teenager, she went to, went to Atlanta to AU [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], Atlanta University for a couple of summers to pursue a master's, and finally finished the master's at the University of Arkansas [Fayetteville, Arkansas].  But they wouldn't let her grad--they wouldn't let her come up to Fayetteville to march to receive it.  They mailed her, her diploma.  And so you know again, it's another one of these slights that didn't make sense, the logic of it just went past me.  And I guess I thought that somehow if I had a chance to correct some of that, I wanted to be in the middle of it.  I just couldn't see how everybody didn't see this as a unique opportunity to change something around us in Little Rock.
Story_ID: 79478
Speaker 1: And, and, and everybody in that neighborhood--there was, there was only one neighbor who said--who stopped me one day.  Now he may have been expressing an attitude that a lot of them had, but this was Mr. Napier.  He stopped me one day--this was between the time that we first tried to enter and before Eisenhower [President Dwight D. Eisenhower] sent the troops.  And he, eh stopped me and he said I don't understand what you're doing.  He said you, you're screwing this up for all of us.  He said your mother's [Lothaire Green] got a good job, you all own your own house, Eisenhower is never gonna support you, and all you gone do is basically bring the wrath of all these white folks in town down on us.  We gonna, we gone take the burden for, for whatever you all think you're doing.  And the more I thought about it, you know, one was I clearly wasn't gone stop.  But that probably was an attitude of a lot of people.  He was just willing to set, step forward and express it.  And it was a period in which people again, were scared.
Story_ID: 79479
Speaker 1: Now your mother [Lothaire Green]--what, what year was her suit you were saying?  The suit that she--
Speaker 2: It was in the '40's [1940's], '47 [1947], '48 [1948].
Speaker 1: And would you say your household--there was a lot of talk about you know, events of things and sort of the making change.  Was there a lot of discussion within the household about that?
Speaker 2: There wasn't a lot of discussion.  There was--the discussion was when it occurred, that you never put down the people who were stepping forward.  At least that was, that was my experience.  It wasn't--there were probably some places where it was discussed constantly.  That wasn't the case.  But, but it was also a--I guess a, a quiet sort of recognition that these were people that we ought to, ought to acknowledge.  Whether it was Rosa Parks, Thurgood Marshall, or Mrs. [Daisy] Bates and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and she and her husband had the--were publishers of the black weekly, the "Arkansas State Press".  And my mother was--we subscribed to that and we followed it.  So these were-Nixon [President Richard Nixon] talks about the silent majority.  And these were--my mother and my aunt [Treopia Gravely] and grandfather were, were quiet supporters.  Now it was only when my grandfather [Eugene Scott] passed and I went to another funeral, I think it was L.C. [Lucius Christopher] Bates' funeral.  I got stopped by somebody who told me the story of how my grandfather tried to vote in the Democratic primary.  In the, in the '40's [1940's].  And they ran him away with a, with a pistol.  They never talked about that when we were growing up, but, but again these quiet acts of defiance and that when I said I wanted to go to Central [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas], nobody said hey that's a dumb idea.  You're gonna make things difficult for us.  I want you to really think about that.  They said almost, all three of them, that that's what you wanna do, we're behind you.
Story_ID: 79480
Speaker 1: And you--so tell, talk about how you came to the decision to do that.  I mean you were, you were--wasn't there a community center that everyone was hanging out?
Speaker 2: Well there was Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Little Rock, Arkansas].
Speaker 1: Dunbar, okay.
Speaker 2: Well I had a job that summer at the Westwood Country Club, which was--Little Rock [Arkansas] had two country clubs, one for gentiles and one for Jews.  And my next door neighbor, Mrs. Waller, after the summer before since I, I figured I wasn't gone be a brick mason, I, I got this job through the, the next door neighbor as a locker room attendant in the men's locker room, swimming pool.  And it was a great job cause you got, you got food.  It was also a number of the, of the waiters at the, at the country--at that country club were teachers cause again, given the pay the teachers were receiving, most, most teachers, especially the black men, were supplementing income by doing other jobs, and this was, this was regarded as a good summer job.  I was oblivious for the most part to what was going on.  I was enjoying my summer.  This was kind of a cushy summer job.  I had a--there were a few members' children same age as I was and you know, they--we'd--they come into the locker room and we'd have a chance to talk and I was the worker, they were the, they were the members.  But we had a decent relationship.  My aunt [Treopia Gravely] who was the guidance counselor for the high school, had really been following the process.  She probably knew a lot more about what was really going on at the school board and how the selection was occurring than I had, than she had either let on or paid attention.  And one day early part of the summer, she said you know I, I hear that you're one of the students that they're considering for transfer, you know.  Well I figured you know, considering that I and twelve, thirteen of my buddies who all had signed that same paper I remember in the spring.  And I--it really didn't focus for me until we got the invitation to come down to the school board as a group.  And the nine of us were there.  And I turned around and said, you know, I, I counted noses and, and grades and we had, had three in the tenth grade, had five in the 11th grade and me, the only senior.  And it struck me for a moment, what's, what's, what's wrong about this picture?  Why am I the only one out of the 12th grade?  And then after I talked to a few of my friends, well you know I didn't wanna go cause I didn't wanna give up being in the senior play and the prom and this, that, all the other senior activities.  And I thought to myself, I said well we--somebody's gotta step forward and I can always go back to the high school that I left if this doesn't work out.  That was my first thought.  And we got--somebody's gotta be willing to push for change.  And I, I thought, you know, this was the right, this was the place to be.
Story_ID: 79481
Speaker 1: So what did they tell you at that meeting?
Speaker 2: Well they started describing all the things you couldn't do.  That being a transfer student wouldn't be allowed to extracurricular activity that we had participated in.  I couldn't be in the band.  That I'd been part of the--I'd been in the Honor Society in the 10th and 11th grade, couldn't participate in that.  Minnijean [Brown] couldn't participate in the choir.  Jeff [Jefferson Thomas] ran track in junior high school, he couldn't--athletics.  So it was, as usual was starting out with a whole litany of things you couldn't do and it--I, I'm sure part of the thought was that some of us would say at that point well I don't wanna, I don't wanna transfer.  I wanna stay at Horace Mann [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas].  And almost--and, and maybe, maybe they all--everybody had a quiet thought at that time that this is something I ought to walk away from, but none of us did.
Story_ID: 79482
Speaker 1: And, and I, I--I mean maybe your project and some others will finally get to the core of it.  But the one unifying thread for all nine families were that a parent or parents believed we were at the right place, and that we ought to be doing this.  None of the parents stepped forward and said you know, hey hold it a minute; I wanna reconsider this.  I'm not sure I wanna see, you know, Jefferson [Thomas] or Terrence [Roberts, HM] or Carlotta [Walls, HM] in the middle of it.  Now I think it was a group of people that had a lot more foresight than they've ever been given credit for.  And they certainly had a lot more gumption and, and resiliency than the average person.  So in a certain sense the expectation among the nine of us probably was all over the map as to what was gonna occur at Central.  My view was it was--there was gone be some difficulty.  Now this is before Faubus [Governor Orval Faubus] sent the troops and all.  But for the most part it would be acceptance by the bulk of the white students there.  I had a, I had a summer, I had a, a job--the--my junior year working at a shoe store in, in downtown Little Rock [Arkansas].  Started out I was the janitor and by the, by the middle of the spring I was--by Easter I was selling shoes cause this was--what was the shoe store?  It was Baker's, had a big, black clientele.  Saturdays they'd get crowded.  They didn't have enough people to, to sell the shoes and I got to the point that I could, I could sell the shoes.  And of course, was a big, black customer base.  I, I got into it.  In fact it got to the point, there was one incident where you know I'd gotten so good at it that whites would come in and want me to be the salesman.  And I said, you know, of course figure a way to get, to get out of it.  But the other part of that was that there were a couple of other students who were salesmen and they attended Central [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas].  And there was one kid who was a big jazz buff like myself, and we ended up striking up a, a pretty good relationship.  So I thought I had a couple of experiences that if--in going back to this country club, there was one fellow, he owns a very large security firm based out of Memphis [Tennessee], Arrow Littman.  Littman was--his family were members at Westwood.  And when the--after we went to that meeting, school board, the next day our names were all in the paper.  This was the--these were the students that the Little Rock School Board had selected.  And so you know, the genie's out of the bottle then.  I mean it got a--I had--I got my first taste of that this deal was maybe a little bit bigger than I had thought about 'cause this kid came screaming into the--you know, how could you do this?  You seemed like such a nice guy, you know.  And, and what he was saying was you know, you--all this is gone change.  And, and again you know, the uppity challenger operating outside of your place, you've disrupted our relationship.  And my first thought was hey, if it makes you uncomfortable, so be it.
Story_ID: 79175
Speaker 1: Now, so you said, you know he, he sort of said what--you were working at this--you know you were talking about the shoe, the store and people reacting and saying, you know, you were gonna mess things up.  Let me-was there a lot of--that meeting occurred when?  What was the day--do you remember the date?  It was 1950.
Speaker 2: It was '57 [1957].  It was either late July or early August.
Speaker 1: Okay, and can you go through sort of a sequence of events because there's a--there was a lot of--let's see, fifty, late--so you had finished your junior year.
Speaker 2: I'd finished my junior year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well the, the--when the--we finally met as a group, I think we had a couple of meetings during the course--between September, probably the month of August with--at Mrs. [Daisy] Bates' house.  Sort of a series of meetings as to what to expect the Central [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas] experience was gonna become.  And the month of August, the governor's office was involved in a lot of meetings that were--the of Georgia came for a rally.  There was a lot of protest going.  The white--it was the Citizen's Council that was leading the charge during the month of August for a series of--it was nothing happening, you know, organize.  The black community wasn't holding pro-desegregation rallies.  Obviously, you know, people were very quiet about it.  And Mrs. Bates began to try to I think prepare us as a group how we would handle things so that our discussions were getting ready for the first day of school, where we were gonna meet as a group.  I grew up--the, the church that I attended, Bethel AME [African Methodist Episcopalian] Church, was also the church of three, two of the, of the nine, Melba and Gloria, both all--we all belonged to, to Bethel.  So there was quietly also a group of, an interracial group of ministers who were trying to help prepare the community to accept our attending, our attending Central.  And I think also the political leadership in Little Rock [Arkansas] for the most part, wanted to quietly pull this off because again, they saw themselves as sort of a more progressive community, forward, than a lot of other southern communities.  I mean it's really why Little Rock was so early in terms of time among all the other landmarks in the south.  'Cause most school desegregation, a lot of other communities, didn't occur until the '60's [1960's].
Story_ID: 79176
Speaker 1: Now, was there a lot of discussion among the, the kids, the children.  I mean were--what you were at that point.  Were there--was there a lot of discussion or was there discussion with Mrs. [Daisy] Bates and your, you know and your mother and, and--I would say your mother [Lothaire Green] and aunt [Treopia Gravely] played a very big role.
Speaker 2: Well they played a--probably played a much larger role than they, than they talked, talked to me about.  We didn't--the nine of us didn't have--I don't remember a, a great deal of discussion about what that experience was gonna be.  I mean because we thought--you had taken nine students who were very good, they were outstanding students.  I mean I was probably one of the weaker ones of the nine.  I mean you had, you had really some, some real brain power there.  They were--they had outstanding grades.  Probably cumulative grade point average was 3.9 among you know, all of us.  Well at the end of the day, we kind of finally figured out, you know, the school board selected some of the best students they could find in Little Rock [High School].  For the most part, came from very stable backgrounds and had been very active students in their individual grades and classes.  And--now whether they, the, the question that I think has never really been addressed, is what was the criteria the school board used to select us?  And of the students that didn't attend--I mean that's never been a list that I've seen, that the ones that were selected and who decided not to come forward, what was the difference with them?  Was it parents, was it grades, or was it activity?  Can only piece it together--had little bits and pieces 'cause one is nobody wants to line up now and say I was not one of those to go.  I, I missed out on the opportunity and so we don't know who the ones are that didn't get selected, or didn't select themselves.
Story_ID: 79177
Speaker 1: And so your group, the [unclear], and your close friends, what were they saying?  Were they proud of you?  Were they like you know, what do you think, you know I mean the--
Speaker 2: Well for the most part they were proud of, of what I had done.  They were I think a little apprehensive.  And maybe one or two of them were people who had been selected and turned it down.  But my friend across the street, Waldo Brunson, another guy Henry Shed, and Teroy [ph.], Benton, Gus Bowers, I can think of the names now.  They all were--they, they were supportive of my attending Central [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas].
Story_ID: 79178
Speaker 1: And so did you have any sense of trepidation at all?  I mean at all or was it you were on a mission?  That's what I'm just--I mean and--
Speaker 2: Well I think I was on a mission.  The first time that it really struck me that this was gonna be a tough mission, was the first day that we attempted to get in and got separated from Elizabeth.  And I went home and watched television and saw the mob that was behind Elizabeth.  Cause for us, the eight of us, it was--we went as a group.  We had this large contingent of ministers and all, and after a couple of times of trying to get through the, through the line that the state National Guard had formed around the school, we went back to Mrs. [Daisy] Bates' house.  And I really had no idea the, the kind of harm that Elizabeth [Eckford] was facing until I saw television that night.  Then it finally dawned on me that there were a series of people out there who really wanted to, to bring harm to us.
Speaker 1: Now in today's world, probably psychologists would have been brought in to deal with the kids and--
Speaker 2: And traumatized and what--
Speaker 1: Traumatized--but those, those--the types of thinking weren't around at that point I don't think.  But what--I mean that day that she got separated, was it clear?  Did Mrs. Bates realize immediately I forgot to tell the family cause it's been--
Speaker 2: I think that it was, you know, sometime during that morning, I, I gather when we were standing at one end of Central [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas] and Elizabeth was at the other, that there was a couple of newsmen who said that there was a lone black girl at the other end of the school and here she was separated from us.
Story_ID: 79179
Speaker 1: Do you think people were surprised by Faubus, Governor [Orval] Faubus?  Do you think that they thought maybe he was a different type of person?  You know, or do you--
Speaker 2: Faubus was up until that time, regarded as a southern moderate.  A huge black support, my mother [Lothaire Green] had voted for him.  And he was not a, you know, a real segregationist.  And Arkansas you had--governor had to run every two years.  So--and then, you know, you're constantly campaigning.  And I think he decided he had to play to eastern Arkansas, which was the big segregationist' base, and that if he didn't placate them, he was gonna be challenged by--there was a state senator, his name was Johnson I think, who was regarded as a real segregationist, real, real redneck, that--and Faubus was gonna outseg [ph.] him.  And that's why he played, you know the National Guard, brought them in and, and you know, raised this Constitutional crisis.  Because really up until that time, the expectation of the school board, of the Little Rock Mayor, the, the local--the Arkansas Gazette, Harry Ashmore was the editor of it.  All the expectation at that time was that Little Rock was willing to accept integration quietly of Central [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas] and that the nine of us would, you know, go there and get through that year and it would be over with.
Speaker 1: Not knowing that it would turn into a, a huge circus and a combat, combat field.
Speaker 2: And into a huge Constitutional crisis and, and I, I've always said that partly the powers to be in Little Rock Arkansas' didn't realize that, that it was the development of TV [television] news was beginning to mature at that time, so you had this culmination of a huge news story that finally got played all over the world.  You sort of had, you know, you had this evil guy Faubus had these nine angelic children who simply were pursuing education.  They weren't--we weren't storming the gates.  We weren't blowing up buildings.  And then, then the, the last one was that Eisenhower [President Dwight D. Eisenhower] was forced, my view, by what he saw as a second rate politician Faubus, who was upstaging him.  And you know here was a guy who had won World War II, former president of a university without a, a PhD.  He was the hot candidate that both parties wanted for President before he selected--coming in as a Republican.  And that he's got this pipsqueak of a governor who's really pulling his chain.  And I think at some point he just decided to use overkill.  Now he was--I mean you know the history of Eisenhower was he was no big fan of, of integration--his experience with the Army and all of that.  He, he was a reluctant participant.  Truman [President Harry S. Truman] forced him to do that.  But you know when he had us, Faubus and this crisis as to who's gonna--which, which powers sovereign, the state or the federal government, he decided to step in there.
Story_ID: 79180
Speaker 1: Now your first day at school, when you finally, you know, got in.  You were taken in through the, the side door.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What--did much happen that first day?
Speaker 2: Well the first day I was, I mean my focus those three weeks--cause I was the senior.  I was really getting worried that I was losing time and wouldn't graduate.  I mean I was--my main focus was graduating from high school and going to college.  I didn't know where.  I mean I hadn't picked a college.  But I saw this time that I was losing really impacting negatively on my being able to get the credits and the hours and classes and all that.  So that first day when we finally got in the school and stayed half a day, I think I was in my physics class and they sent a monitor to, to, to get--you heard some of the noise, depends on where you were in the school.  The school is a huge building.  And the--they sent a monitor to pull us out of class, this was right before noon.  And we went to the principal's office and when--that's when they said they were having trouble keeping control of the mob out front and they wanted us to leave for our own safety.  Well you know first I thought it was a ruse.  I mean I'd spent three weeks trying to get into this school and now I'm finally in class and now they telling me I'm gone have to leave again.  You know, but being a, a good, good boy, I followed orders.  So when we got into the cars and sped out, we were all shocked at what was going on.  And you know the, the hostility and anger on these people's faces.  So when I finally got home again, the power of television, and saw you know, the turning over the police barricades and trying to run through them and overrun the Little Rock policemen, I, I really was beginning to worry that we'd never get back into this school 'cause Little Rock's local policemen were never gonna be powerful enough to protect us against, against these people.  And then that night received the telegram from President [Dwight] Eisenhower.  This was--let's see--my birthday, I turned--my birthday is on the 22nd of September.  And I turned, turned seventeen, did I?  No, I turned, yeah I turned sixteen because I was a year, I was a year advanced compared to my peers.  So it was--I was fifteen going into the senior year, sixteen in '57 [1957], yeah, 'cause '41 [1941].  Yeah, so it would be--I turned sixteen that September.  Anyway, the telegram came the night of my birthday and the 23rd was when we finally went into Central [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas].
Story_ID: 79181
Speaker 1: And so how was that-- one, did the school, I mean your school that you had come from was newer.  But did the school--was it--you know when you anticipate something and then you get in, but I mean was it--
Speaker 2: Well you--when you knew that--when, when we got--I mean the first class I went to, the physics class was night and day from the laboratories that we had at, at Horace Mann [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas].  And that we were dealing with beakers and equipment that we only had in very limited supply.  Sciences and technology, it was really apparent the difference; it was significant.  The size of Central [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas] obviously when you got in there, was a lot larger than anything I, I had expected.  Now the other thing that--because Little Rock as a small community, the stadium that Central High School has was also the stadium that the black high school used, just used on different nights.  And so you had enough of a physical experience about Central and had peeped under the tent a little bit to know that they had more than what we had at the old high school.  And that while I wasn't sure that I thought initially I was gonna become an engineer, but my math and science after that, that year I decided that engineering wasn't gonna be my forte.  But the science labs and the range of mathematics courses were all a lot more significant than we had at, at Horace Mann.
Story_ID: 79182
Speaker 1: So your--didn't your physics teacher give you a hard way to go?
Speaker 2: Gave me an incredible, difficult time.
Speaker 1: Did you learn in that or was it just difficult that we don't--I don't think you can do it and I don't want you here?
Speaker 2: Well it was that, and I had an opportunity to ask one of the teachers some years afterwards, that my impression was this guy was an incredible racist and a very difficult teacher.  The person said I was right on both points, that he didn't, clearly didn't want me in that class, but he was regarded by students at Central as the very meticulous--I mean we did a lot of, a lot of lab experiments.  And those experiments you know, you had to be--you had a mark to meet.  And if you were one one hundredth of a percent off, you know, you were graded down.  The thing that did happen with that course that I got a, a lot of tutoring.  It's like one of the tutors was a biophysicist at the University of Arkansas Medical School, on the faculty, who helped me on, on Saturdays.  He was white.  He was active, he was a Quaker.  And he spent a lot of time, Dr. Wixom [ph.], helping me get through that course.  And by the skin of my teeth I, I eked out a C or a D.  Yeah, a D one term and a C the other to get through physics.
Story_ID: 79183
Speaker 1: Wa-- was that sort of traumatic for you, because you had been at--you were a national--(unclear)
Speaker 2: Yeah, well it was--but it was also--I figured that this guy didn't want me there.  And somewhere along the way, and when I--the courses--before graduation, I found out that I had been accepted at Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan].  So I figured all I had to do was to graduate.  Yeah it was, it was probably if I'd stayed at Mann [Horace Mann, High School, Little Rock, Arkansas], I would have graduated near the top of my class.  At Central [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas] I was somewhere in the middle.  And I go back to that Gloria [Karlmark] and Carlotta [Walls] were--had much--were much stronger math and science students than I was.  But it dawned on me that it really wasn't the grades that were important 'cause they--I thought the most important thing was to complete that year and receive that diploma and if I achieved that, I would have cracked an enormous barrier.  Done something that nobody else had ever done in Little Rock [Arkansas], and be the first black graduate out of Central High School.  And they didn't want, they didn't want that to occur.  You know we had the experience of Minnijean [Brown] being expelled, and they really were--they--the segregationists, the, the Citizens Council Group, were really trying to see if they could eliminate as many of us, either push us out or we drop out on our own.  And I thought that again I became sort of duty-bound, that I was gonna complete that year and was focused on, on achieving that.
Story_ID: 79184
Speaker 1: Do you--what other--so you were in class every day.  Were you--was, was there a siege every day?  I mean some incident that happened--
Speaker 2: Well it got to be a--there were--you have to really divide into two parts.  The, the first semester when the troops were there was a lot easier for us 'cause moving back and forth in the hallways with an armed guard, they, they were less likely to try and, and hassle you.  When the--after the Christmas break when we came back in January, the beginning of the year, '58 [1958] is when all hell broke loose.  The harassment, and that was also the time that Minnijean [Brown] was expelled so that the harassment increased.  They passed around cards that said one down and eight to go.  They seemed to have targeted me as--obviously since I was the senior, to try push out.  So the break-in in lockers, the time in phys ed with glass on the floor and the towels being thrown at you, all of that was--it got to be like a job.  I mean there were a couple of kids who you knew when they came around, they had one task.  They were going to school just to try to see how miserable they could make our lives.  And, and--but for me, you knew who the, the constant troublemakers were.  So if I saw Joe Smith coming this way, I knew I was gonna go on the other side and avoid it.  But I also knew that if I stay--the longer I stayed there, the more ticked off they became, the more--because their mission in life was to try to remove me and my mission in life was to stay there and make their lives miserable, finishing out that, that, that year.  And after you got--to me after I got past April being a senior, it was, it was a lot easier.  So our most difficult period was really from that January through that spring till the end of the year.
Story_ID: 79185
Speaker 1: Now I want to ask.  Had your, your contact with whites, had it been pretty limited up to that point except let's say you know you worked at Baker's, the shoe store and you worked at, you worked at the country club.  But had it been limited and was--I mean your sort of view of the world, was it--were there--I know you--there were students that were friendly, friendlier to you, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  Well there were a few that were friendly.  One of them was a, a woman who was friend of the guy from the shoe store, had a big interest in jazz.  And in fact I got called--she, she and a group of students tried to when we first got there, to share lunch with us and, and to generally befriend us.  I got called into the principal's office early on that you couldn't eat with white female students; that that was unacceptable, and that we would have to stop that.  Now what started to happen was that the first couple of weeks, the most avid segregationists boycotted the school once we got in.  I think once they decided that we were there and they finally figured out that they were exerting more punishment on themselves by not going to school, they came back.  The moment they came back, they started to exert a lot of pressure on any white student who tried to be friendly to us.  Immediately I'm sure they got on the call list, they were threatened, their families were threatened, family business or if it was something that somebody owned, was threatened with a boycott, etc.  So it was a great deal of pressure on any white student who wanted to try to be friendly to us.  There were a few that still tried.  There was one fella who was my lab partner in physics.  And he stayed the lab partner throughout the entire year.  He was probably having as much trouble in physics as I was, but he didn't flinch on that.  The--towards the end of the, the school year as we got closer to graduation and we got to the point of yearbooks and all of that, there were a lot of white students who finally came forward and said how supportive they were of me at the end.  And signed my yearbook and showed, showed, you know, some support.  But it was a--this was a period in which I think any white person who stepped forward and tried to befriend us, was gone be labeled a "nigga lover".  The incident that happened with Elizabeth [Eckford] and when she got on the bus, the woman Lorch who helped her get on the bus was--the family was ostracized.  They were accused of being Communists, all of that, and eventually had to leave Little Rock.  And I think a great deal of pressure--some of the ministers who were in that first group that tried to support us--great deal of hostility, pressure.
Story_ID: 79511
Speaker 1: Okay, now was there a lot of discussion about you marching?  I mean everything was, you know--
Speaker 2: That was--the school board initially tried to get me to--the principal of Central [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas], not to participate in the ceremony.  They were gonna mail me my diploma and I--hey, I mean I, I didn't need a roadmap on that.  This entire year I had endured, I was gonna be at that ceremony.  And there were initially some news reports that there were still people trying to see that I didn't march.  Shoot, or try in some way to, to make certain I didn't show up for the, for the ceremony.  And I just thought you know, listen, nothing's gonna deter me from, form the ceremony because this is part of what I struggled all, the whole nine months to achieve.  So--
Speaker 1: Now were--you, you had a surprise guest that day too, right?
Speaker 2: It was Dr., Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  He was--
Speaker 1: Did you know he was coming?
Speaker 2: I didn't know he was coming.  He was--I think he was the commencement speaker at Pine Bluff, at Arkansas AM and N [University of Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical, and Normal, currently the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas].  And he had a relationship--he knew Mrs. Bates.  And I didn't find out he was in the audience until after the ceremony and my mother [Lothaire Green], my mother, Mr. Jackson, my grandfather [Eugene Scott], my brother and my aunt all were at the ceremony, and he sat with the family.  And then he left--he had to--either another speaking engagement that he was leaving to get back to Montgomery, so he had to leave right away.  So you know it was not a, a long time.  But there's a picture of he, I and Mrs. Bates together.
Speaker 1: That must have been a wonderful day.
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: Everyone, everyone--so what was happening back at, you know at home after the, the, the--
Speaker 2: Well afterwards we had a, had a, had a party at the house and like the "Life" Magazine did a, a whole photo shoot of it.  Yeah, I mean it was--this made me feel that, that it was worth all of the, all of the struggle.  And that--and, and I got reinforcement from my friends that they were proud of, of the accomplishment.  I mean we didn't have, we didn't have any due of--Dr. King being there, that was a nice touch.  But when you're six, sixteen going on seventeen graduating from high school, you've, you've reached your, your apex.  Now looking back on it, of course his, his being there was, was a very special touch.
Story_ID: 79512
Speaker 1: Now what--how did Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan] come about?  I mean you were already admitted, but how did that--where did that fit in whole scheme of things, and how did that event--
Speaker 2: Well it turned out that the National Merit Scholarship had a, a section of some special effort scholarships for, for black students.  The woman who ran that project, Lois Rice, she's still here.  She was the mother of Susan Rice, a woman who was in the Clinton Administration ran--the Assistant Secretary for Africa.  And somewhere during the course of the, the winter, they contacted me to assist in, in trying to select colleges.  And I had looked at a lot of Midwestern liberal arts schools.  I wanted to go, again, to a college that was, that was desegregated.  I thought at the time I wanted something small as opposed to a large institution.  But I had--there was a, a professor from a historically black college, Philander Smith Pipes.  In fact his daughter Harriet Pipes, was a faculty at Howard and is now at Michigan State.  He was one of the first black faculty to teach in a large university.  I knew that he was there.  And I thought that Michigan State was something that I ought to look at.  Now it turned out that the--I received this anonymous scholarship from Michigan State.  And at the time, I didn't know who had given me the scholarship, and you know this is--I describe it today our children go visit campuses and stay in the dorm and kick the tires and you know we--they see fifteen campuses before they, they make a decision.  My--you, you went where you got, you got accepted.  And I knew a little bit about Michigan State.  I thought, you know, it was, it was an environment that I wanted to go to and decided that was the school I was gonna, gonna go to.  Turns out I went back in '94 [1994] to give the commencement address and receive an honorary doctorate.  And in the course of discussion with the present president who was in school when I was there as an undergraduate, turns out the president of the university at that time, John Hanna, was a personal scholarship from him.  He was also--he was Chairman of the Civil Rights Commission under Eisenhower.  So I gather he saw all of this--saw Little Rock unfold and wanted to do something.  But I ended up four years, an undergraduate degree and then stayed on for a year and a half for a master's at, at Michigan State.  And it's been--I mean the relationship between myself and Michigan State has obviously been a, a very strong and connected relationship and I'm very involved with the university does and they involve me.  And as an undergraduate receiving an honorary degree from a place that you thought you'd be lucky to get, to get out of, was, was a high achievement.  So I'm, I'm very proud of that.
Story_ID: 79513
Speaker 1: Now that's--so in the year you became a media darling, though, in many ways, right?  The first to graduate.
Speaker 2: Well I didn't, I didn't know I was a media darling.  I mean I, I, I think over the--when I first went to Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan], there was a lot of, of media coverage of my going there.  They--in fact I had--was that--well, the summer between going to--from--graduating from Central [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas] and going to Michigan State, we--the nine of us had a whirlwind summer.  We--the--there was a union--the Hotel Restaurant Workers Union in New York brought us to New York.  They feted us.  We were given a key to the city.  Robert Wagner was mayor, Abel Harriman was Governor.  Lena Horne was doing Jamaica then.  And so Terrence [Roberts, HM] and I, we couldn't get jobs that summer in Little Rock.  We got the Ladies' Garment Workers Union to provide employment for us.  So we lived in New York [New York City, New York] that summer between my freshman year in college.  And it was a magnificent summer.  I got practically overdosed on jazz.  I saw Thelonious Monk and Miles Davis and John Coltrane and went to the Five Spot.  We also--I think that was the summer that--it may have been, it may have been the summer following.  But anyway Lorraine Hansberry had written "Raisin in the Sun".  And she had also done a piece on, on Little Rock, on Elizabeth [Eckford].  And I wrote her a note and she invited me to, to her house.  She lived in the West Village.  Spent time with her, got to see the play, [Sidney] Poitier and Claudia MacNeal and Diana Sands and Ruby Dee [HM].  I mean this was, this was about as rich an experience in New York as, as one could have.  But that, that summer before I went to Michigan State, living in New York, the jazz and all the music that, I could, I could soak in, really sort of prepared me for, for my college experience.
Story_ID: 79514
Speaker 1: So in many ways with all of the--you know with awards we received.  That was also the summer that we received the Spingarn Award from NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  We received a special award from "The Chicago Defender", I think Abbott Award.  It'd gotten to the point that you sort of ex--when I went to college, I, you know I expected, I expected to, to, to have all, all of this attention.  And, and the one thing about the Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan] experience, they--all of the colleges at that time seemed to whenever black students applied, they, they paired black student, all black students together, you know.  Somehow they could tell without pictures and all of that.  But when I came to Michigan State, they found for me the--one of the highest achieving white students.  I had a white roommate.  In fact I had white roommates my entire four years as, as an undergraduate in the dorm.  And the, the fellow who was my, my roommate the first year, Larry Osterling, was, was Mr. Everything at Michigan State.  He was the GM [General Motors] Scholar in engineering, captain of the football team, basketball team.  His father was Michigan State alum, All American basketball player.  I mean they obviously--they found the student to pair me with and you know, Larry was, was a lot stronger student than I was.  I mean the first, first month in getting adjusted to the place and the media and the attention finally had settled down and realized I got a task here I'm supposed to do and to finish out my time at, at Michigan State.  But having said all of that, after a while you begin to adjust that you were there to study and not to be the media darling.
Story_ID: 79515
Speaker 1: Were you, were you called upon a lot, though, by the movement, the Civil Rights Movement, to make appearances and things like that?
Speaker 2: Well initially, and in fact that first year I did do a couple of speeches.  The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] invited me out to California, to Oakland to do a few speeches.  But I figured out kind of early that if I was gonna graduate from Michigan State, I was gonna have to make some choices.  And, and partly my mother [Lothaire Green] helped me focus on that too, that I was there to, to get that degree.  And I--nobody ever said look you got--you dummy, you got this scholarship, you really need to focus on that.  I, I kind of with her help and my own insight, I came to the, to the point that I needed to, to focus on it.  And in fact there were very few black students, black male students there on academic scholarship.  I always tell the story I, I got stopped by a fellow who was on the football team and he said, he stopped me kind of the, the first or second day I was on campus.  He said what do you do?  I said what do you mean what do I do?  I'm a student here.  No, no, he said what do you do?  He said you're too small to play football, you're too short to play basketball, you look too slow to be on the track team.  You must be here on a soccer scholarship.  'Cause his view was that, that anybody at Michigan State, a black male, was there on some athletic scholarship.  And the fact that you were there on a academic scholarship was just unheard of.  So it, it, it began to click in my head that I would--if I was going to achieve the goals that I had set down for myself, that I needed to finish out that undergraduate degree and try to concentrate.  And it was hard because this was--a, a good friend of mine, Ivan O'Donnelson, was very much involved in going down to Mississippi, Midway, during the time I was at Michigan State, Aaron Henry.  This was the--early beginnings of the, of the student nonviolent movement, the sit-ins began when I think I was a junior.  I was president of the campus NAACP for a couple of years.  But I got grounded enough that while my, my heart was in--wanting to go, you know, join the student movement, that I thought I was better off trying to stay there and finish out those four years.
Speaker 1: So that grounding came primarily from your mother?  Your mother your--was your grandfather still--
Speaker 2: My grandfather passed when I was in college and my aunt [Treopia Gravely] passed, I think my grandfather [Eugene Scott] and aunt passed within a three month period.  But it was primarily my mother, you know.  She kept reminding me why I was there and what was expected.  So...
Story_ID: 79516
Speaker 1: What do you think--I do want to ask this question.  What do you think your father [Ernest Green, Sr.] would have thought about this whole, you know, experience and things?  Or do you think it might have, you know, that he would have had the same sort of push and drive that your, you know your, your mother [Lothaire Green] and aunt [Treopia gravely]?
Speaker 2: Well I always believed that he would have, have had the same.  Because I, again that, that experience as a, as a World War I veteran made me believe that he always thought too it was better to try to change things in, in Little Rock [Arkansas].  And then it got reinforced by the--all of his sisters left Little Rock to live elsewhere.  And he decided to, you know, put his stake down and, and remain there.
Story_ID: 79517
Speaker 1: Now you've said Dave [David] Gottlieb, that's--you met him.  Was that--and he--and wasn't he sort of a mentor?
Speaker 2: He was a, he was a very heavy influence on me as an undergraduate and graduate student.  And he was a Sociologist.  He was one of the--he was a terrifically popular professor.  He, he'd have a spring lecture and have 500 students in the spring lecture.  I mean it was--they kind of--and he did a lot of, of, of popular coursework.  Made it current, understood the music and, and student attitudes of that time.  So his view on society as a sociologist was something that a lot of students would flock to.  And I, I thought that when I--my first two years were sort of a, a broad social science, divisional social science background, degree.  And it was Gottlieb who, who helped convince me that I ought to pursue a graduate degree in sociology.  So I was able to get a fellowship.  I studied under him.  And then as I got to the master's, I figured that I really wanted to have more of an activist involvement.  I wasn't sure--I, I didn't think I wanted to teach.  I was married at the time.  My son Adam was born.  I decided I wanted to come to New York.  And I had--the summer experiences--I had had a great deal of involvement with the Labor Movement.  And I was able to--from one of the previous summer experiences, the fellow who was head of the Educational Department, AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organization], his name was Jack Sessions.  I came back to Washington [D.C.] during the--just before I got my, my master's and interviewed for a couple of jobs.  And there was one that was involving the A. Philip Randolph and Bayard Rustin, there was an effort to try to get young blacks and Hispanics into the building trades, into the apprenticeship program.  And I decided that that was--I had done a little bit of studying in labor industrial relations, skilled trades discrimination was something I had some general interest in.  And signed on to this organization.  It was then the Workers' Defense League for fifty five hundred dollars for the year.
Story_ID: 79518
Speaker 1: Fact, I had a, I had a one of those crossroads experiences.  I, through my NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] relationship, had met the fellow who was the, the Youth Director, Herb Wright.  One of my other great experiences was we brought Sarah Vaughn to Michigan State's campus through the NAACP.  It was a big deal 'cause student organizations at that time didn't bring talent and all of that.  But anyway, Herb got me an interview--[sirens].
Story_ID: 79519
Speaker 1: Well anyway the--I had a summer job the year before I graduated from grad school working for "Look" Magazine.  And I was a, sort of a cub reporter.  In fact I covered the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Convention that year that met in Atlanta [Georgia] and interviewed Lester Maddox, or tried to interview him.  Lester Maddox didn't want to have a lot to do with me.  And so I kind of saw myself, if opportunity presented itself, to be a journalist.  And Herb Wright got me an interview with NBC [National Broadcasting Company] '64 [1964].  'Cause this was before the '64 [1964] before the, before the election.  And it was a choice between working for NBC News as a, as a, as a researcher on the election campaign coverage, and working for this organization trying to recruit young people for the Oppression Program.  And, and I'll never forget NBC News was paying five to ten dollars more a week than I was with the--but I decided that I wanted to, I wanted to have the involvement of this program activity.  And that, that experience, you know was one of my richest because at the end of the day to be around [A. Philip] Randolph, Randolph was in his later years, and, and [Bayard] Rustin, was really to be around two of--really the giants of the 20th century.  And I, I always say that I have had a rare experience of personal public relations of three or four people who are just powerhouses in their own right, Jesse Jackson [HM], Andy [Andrew] Young [HM], Bayard Rustin and A. Philip Randolph.  To have the experiences of being around them over a period of time is to really see folks who are able one, to promote their ideas and issues and two, to promote themselves so that they get their point across.
Story_ID: 79520
Speaker 1: But the apprenticeship experience began in New York in '64 [1964].  That was you know--in fact I think the first week I was in New York I was demonstrating at the World's Fair New York, civil disobedience.  Spent a night in Rikers Island jail as one of the protestors holding up the Triborough Bridge with Bayard [Rustin] and Jim Foreman, a bunch of folks.  That was New York, getting to-Malcolm [X] was beginning his ascendency.  In fact, his brother and I went to college at Michigan State.  He grew up, Malcolm grew up in Lansing, Michigan.  One of my other friends in college was the son of [Nnamdi] Azikiwe, the first President of Nigeria.  So all of these contacts flowed from the college of the New York experience.  But the--when I finally got to New York and started working with this training program, that experience led me to--I ended up at the Labor Department as an Assistant Secretary of Labor.  One of the people that I worked with who was a young college professor looking at discrimination in skill trades was this guy Ray Marshall.  And Marshall turned out to be Carter's selection as Labor Secretary.  In fact, I, I think I hold a, a unique honor that Carter, President Carter was unsure of who he was gonna appoint as Secretary.  He had a holdover from the, from the Ford administration, John Dunlop, who was a professor at Harvard and Ray Marshall.  And when I--first time I met President Carter he said I know who you are because both of my people that I'd interviewed for Secretary of Labor said that their choice for Assistant Secretary of Labor was gonna be you if they were selected.  So I thought that was, that was a unique, a unique position to be in.
Story_ID: 79521
Speaker 1: But I used all of my--I, I kept seeing a relationship between what I had done in Little Rock [Arkansas] and how it, it, it helped build sets of relationships, ability to meet people.  Had a chance over the years to meet Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] at some other venues and got to--and Andy [Andrew Young, HM] was usually traveling with him.  The work with [A. Philip] Randolph to see you know, what, what he had done.  I met Bayard soon after the '63 [1963] march.  In fact, I came to the '63 [1963] march as a, as a student.  We drove all night from East Lansing, Michigan in a, in a raggedy Volkswagen that barely made it and you know was out here in the throngs of people.  I mean I wasn't on the stage, didn't, didn't have any role, but was one of those faces in that crowd of 100,000.  And I always thought that you know, that was, that was the place to be, a special moment in history.  One thing Little Rock taught me though, and that, that one you gotta be willing to step up.  And two, that these moments are only fleeting and that you--that, that you really have to be willing to assert yourself.  And that you can't wait for your friends to, to designate whether this is something we ought to do or something that, that we can't do.  So that standing alone was I guess an outgrowth from the Little Rock experience that I was able to carry through a lot of different phases in my, in my life.
Story_ID: 79197
Speaker 1: When you were, you were with the, the--were you with the Randolph Education--that's what it was called--
Speaker 2: Well it, it finally became the Education Fund.  It--they didn't develop that until sometime in the '70's [1970's].  When, when we--when I came out of graduate school, came here, it was the Joint Apprenticeship Program.  And Bayard [Rustin] was, was Chairman of the committee that oversaw the organization.  When I first came to New York, I was a staff person working for someone, and then I think in '68 [1968], '67 [1967], '68 [1968], I became the Executive Director of this small organization.  And then in the early, late '60's [1960's], early '70's [1970's], we started receiving federal support.  Received the Labor Department grant and then the project expanded to other places.  The--this was a period in which there was a lot of conflict around construction jobs, and the--we developed a close relationship with AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations] to work with apprenticeship committees and in many ways between the direct action and our organization which was helping people qualify and to prepare them, tutoring for the entrance exams and all of that, it, it was--this was an interesting period because some of the activists saw us as accommodating the, the unions.  And I guess again my Little Rock experience, what was it that you wanted to achieve?  Was it to get people into jobs or simply protest the issue?  And I thought that it made more sense getting African American males in as electricians and plumbers and pipefitters and sheet metal workers, etc., and that this was a way of achieving that.
Story_ID: 79198
Speaker 1: So at some point the--in fact the interesting--the early '70's [1970's] we got invited by the Mississippi AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations] to Pascagoula, Mississippi.  The--Pascagoula had the shipyard there.  Litton had just started to develop shipyard and one of the issues was to continue to receive the federal subsidies, they had to have an integrated workforce in skills, skilled jobs.  When the senator from Mississippi, his father was a ship fitter at the Litton Shipyard.  And the thing that we did, in fact when we first went to Mississippi, I mean I, I remember the incident of going to--we stayed at a Holiday Inn in Pascagoula and went to the swimming pool and got in the water and everybody white got out of the water.  This is still Mississippi in the '70's [1970's].  But that experience also was--one of the people who helped us recruit young potential apprentices for the shipyard was, was Alexis Herman [HM] who became Secretary of Labor.  So introduced Alexis to her first labor related, labor related experience.
Story_ID: 79199
Speaker 1: But the recruitment and training program that I ended up heading was really I guess about--over ten years I, I chaired that until I was appointed by Ray Marshall to come to Washington as Assistant Secretary of Labor.  And I had, I had great trepidations about whether to accept it 'cause here I was enjoying the, the achievements of what we were doing with the project.  Really a hands-on experience seeing a lot of young African Americans gain good jobs.  And to go into Washington, the bureaucracy--was I gonna be able to be effective?  There were enough stories about Washington chewing up and spitting out people and not being able to make the changes.  So again another one of those forks in the road.  What do you do?  Which choice do you make?
Speaker 2: Now you're playing on a totally bigger stage at this point.  Right, as Assistant Secretary of Labor.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So how was that?  I mean it's different.  Do you think a lot of the skills that you had gotten in the previous--
Speaker 1: Little Rock was the beginning of all that.  It's, it's just a building block on the set of relations.  Obviously the difficulty handling--you figure if you can handle Little Rock, you ought to be able to handle most of these other experiences.  So that, that what I found again the set of relationships, the building blocks, the, the contacts, the networking as they use the term, all came into play.  And, and I keep reverting back to my experience at Central High School [Little Rock, Arkansas].
Story_ID: 79200
Speaker 1: Now what things did you learn from working like with--you worked more with Bayard [Rustin].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What things did you learn from him in that process?
Speaker 2: You learned to quickly size up people.  You, you learn that first appearances are not necessarily the ones that are really gonna move you along, move your agenda.  And you learn that--I, I learned from Bayard to have long term goals, to figure out where you wanted to try to be over a longer period of time.  That changes were not just, I don't know, sprints, but they were really marathons.  And I, I--and Bayard is a, you know, a superb organizer.  You learn to appreciate skills in trying to determine how you get to these long term goals and his March on Washington experience was invaluable in terms of that.
Story_ID: 79201
Speaker 1: Did he talk about how that, that, that march came about and his role in that?  Did he ever--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he [Bayard Rustin] spent a lot of time talking about that.  I mean mainly I think it was the, the expectations from that march were fairly, fairly limited.  Nobody expected it to achieve the success it did.  And that as the events that summer, Birmingham [Alabama] and all, began to cascade, again it was his ability to, to be flexible enough to feed on those changing events.  And also that the core of the, the building experience on the march on Washington, it was really the labor movement.  It was black trade unionists that really, you know, got behind it.  And with you know, the approval of their organizations.  But the buses and the money, the, the organizing, getting people to move, was really built around a number of local units, the labor movement in New York and Detroit and Chicago, sleeping car porters [Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters].  I mean it was--it again was what I think has been one of the problems for the Civil Rights Movement is not to show this as a, a system.  This was a building, building the case that the reason Bayard and them could be successful in '63 [1963] is that they had a trial run with [A. Philip] Randolph back in the '40's [1940's], the one that they threatened to do and, and didn't pull off.  But they knew enough that you had to locate you know, the core in Wash--in New York, in Detroit and LA [Los Angeles] and places where you had a heavy organizational base.  In fact, I think one of the, one of the things he said that they didn't get a big turnout in Washington because folks living in Washington weren't sure whether this was gone be you know, successful or not.  And they wanted to wait around to see how it came out before they, they, they jumped in it.  And again going back to the Little Rock [Arkansas] experience, that you got to be early and often.  If you're waiting for the, for the finger to go up and say now is the time to show up, it's probably too late.  So in a certain sense, I got more reinforcement again, from my Little Rock Experience to the experience with Bayard [Rustin], the experience at the Labor Department.  It all kind of came together and you could see a pattern.
Story_ID: 79202
Speaker 1: I have one other question I'll ask about James Farmer and CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] and their role with the labor movement.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I am, I'm probably not the person.
Speaker 1: Okay, don't worry.  So when you were--were you in--were you set--okay sorry I keep thinking, okay.  Was, was there--when you were at the--are there things that you accomplished in that three years at the Labor Department that you're proud of?  Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well I think the--I mean we instituted a huge training program.  In fact one of the things we made a joke about.  We had under the job training activity of the Carter Administration, more money than the entire Clinton Stimulus Program.  We had over 16 billion dollars, the CETA [Comprehensive Employment Training Act] Program, Job Corps.  And the thing that I'm proudest about now a number of years removed from that, is I bump into people through my contacts today who their first decent job was via the CETA Program.  Whether it was in the arts, in government.  And I always point out to my colleagues that in many ways, those relationships have been successful for me in my business as an investment banker because these individuals now are running airports, they're running the water system in the city, they're the City Manager.  They're the Finance Director for a university, they're the President of a university, they are the Board of Trustees of a school.  That all of this again has been another level of the building blocks, and it has worked as a terrific opportunity for me to expand another layer of business.
Story_ID: 79203
Speaker 1: Now when you, you know Carter [President Jimmy Carter] is sort of out.  You, you left when he left, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had to leave.
Speaker 1: But was that a time sort of introspection at all?  You know be--
Speaker 2: Well it was, it was a time in which I didn't know the outcome.  I didn't know where you were gonna end up.  I've always said that government has operated differently for blacks than for whites.  There's a--usually a connector, a job, a business, that a lot of the white appointees go into.  At least my experience was that we really had to make our own way.  And in fact--and created a consulting firm that I had jointly with Alexis Herman [HM].  She and I, we created a consulting firm for a few years and then we both sort of went our separate ways.  But it was, it was a big unknown.  I had to try to create opportunities, try to build on these contacts and relationships you had, had done over the four years with the Carter Administration.  But again, what I discovered is that, that Little Rock was a powerful calling card.  I could--the further I got away from 1958, the more I was surprised of the impact of Little Rock among other people.  And obviously people who had firsthand knowledge or saw our experience, saw television, watched us go into the school, for the most part had, had a very positive image about who we were.  And somewhere along the way, Alexis and I, we, we had a number of clients who we represented or were involved in training.  And I had decided that the financial services area was something that I wanted to try to do business with.  I mean it was a public sector, it was municipal bonds, there were a set of relationships, it was the increase of minority elected officials, mayors and city council members, etc.  And I knew most of these people.  I mean I said it's the same folks I bumped into every year at the Congressional Black Caucus [unclear].  This was my base of contacts.  Many of them were people I had worked with when I was in the Labor Department.  And so I did--I had a consulting relationship with Shearson Lehman [Brothers], '85 [1985], '86 [1986], and that relationship grew into--they decided to make an offer to me and I collapsed my consulting business and became full time banker with, with Shearson at that time.  And grew from there.
Story_ID: 79204
Speaker 1: Well you know not many sociologists end up as investment bankers.  But okay, but labor, right.
Speaker 2: But, but you know what?  The, the other thing that I've discovered from this, which is I [unclear] with the students is that the corporate community in many ways doesn't want people as narrowly defined as we define ourselves.  A good liberal arts background could take you a lot of different places, and some economics, you know some activity of markets.  But it turned out that that sociology experience, being able to figure people out, read tea leaves, is a, is a pretty good skill set to have.  And whether you're in banking or sales or marketing, it's transferrable to lots of different places.
Speaker 1: And now this--you've been here since, what, eight, '86 [1986]?
Speaker 2: Been here since '87 [1987].
Speaker 1: Eighty seven [1987], okay.  And did you--do I--how would you summarize your tie here?  Because there--it all--this is entrepreneurial in its sense of things.  You had been doing that, though, prior.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I think the--I would sum it up that again, go back to your base.  That those relationships that started in Little Rock have been the core of what has worked for me throughout all of my business life.  And that in many ways I had to catch up to the technical side, pass the licenses and all of that.  But at the end of the day it's about selling ideas.  Can you get somebody to both look at the idea and then finally buy it?  And we always say can you close the deal?  If you can't close the deal, you're gonna be fairly ineffective.  I've been successful with that and you know it's a, it's a continuous growth pattern, but I started as a Senior VP [Vice President] with the firm and they made me a Managing Director back in the early '90's [1990's].  And I figure that I'll probably wind up my career here as a banker with, with Lehman [Shearson Lehman Brothers].  But it's, it's, it's been a good, a good relationship.
Story_ID: 79205
Speaker 1: Now who--what other things were happening in this industry around that time, and the people?  'Cause this is, you know this whole focus on the financial industry.  There's, what, the National Association of--
Speaker 2: Securities Professionals.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.  That was--when was that started?  That was started--
Speaker 2: That was started with Maynard back in--yeah, around '81 [1981].  Then I chaired the last four, four years.  Just recently I stepped down as Chairman.  It was a recognition of I think a marriage of the political achievements, the role of the '64 [1964] Voting Rights Act, the large increase of, of municipal officials, the role, the business side of government, the purchasing of goods and services.  In fact the biggest purchaser of goods and services in this world is, is the United States government.  You know whether it's from airplanes to, to pencils.  Somebody's making them, somebody's selling them, and somebody's buying them.  For the most part, we'd been excluded from all of that.  And when you come to local and state governments, again going back to my CETA [Comprehensive Employment Training Act]  experience, but I'm talking now to the purchasing officer for the, for the Denver Airport.  I'm talking to the, to the mayor of Jackson, Mississippi.  I'm talking to the Water and Sewer Administrator for Los Angeles.  These are all people who either came through the Civil Rights Movement or somebody in their family had some role in getting them.  And so when I call them and say my name is Ernest Green.  They say I saw you last night on such-and-such a program and sure, I'd be happy to talk to you.  I don't know if we can do business, but you can come by and talk to me.  And that's worked for me.
Speaker 1: Relationships.
Speaker 2: Relationships.
Speaker 1: That's what's so--that's, that's life in many ways.
Speaker 2: And I think it is, it is a, it is a statement that we need to rein--reinforce for many young people that, that while we may not have been the first family off the Mayflower, that these relationships right now are very powerful.  And, and really helped shape economics of this country a lot more than we're given credit for.  In fact, my view--the Civil Rights Movement has done more for whites than it's done for blacks.  That the south would be a backwater--I say there are three things that made the south acceptable.  The Civil Rights laws, eradication of lennerts on mosquitoes, and the creation of air conditioning.  Those three together have made the, the former confederacy the economic engine of this country now.  There's more growth going on between Florida to Texas than almost any place else in the, in the country.  And, and we did that.
Story_ID: 79206
Speaker 1: When did you, when did you (unclear), when did you get to know Bill Clinton [President William "Bill" Clinton]?  Did you know him because he was a homeboy?  Did you start getting--
Speaker 2: Well I knew him in--when he was Attorney General.  I had just come into government.  In 1978 he ran for governor of Arkansas and won.  And we maintained a relationship.  I mean Clinton is gregarious enough of a person he, he has a file card on everybody in Arkansas that he ought to stay in touch with.  And of course again, only when he came to Washington did I really find out the impact that our story had on him.  But he was, as he said, ten years old at the time we went to Central [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas].  It was the biggest story in, in Little Rock [Arkansas].  And I always thought the amazing difference between he and Trent Lott that our story for him made a difference.  He wanted to try to make certain, you know, he never reverted back.  I, I think Clinton, President Clinton's other experience is that his grandfather ran a small country store in Hope, Arkansas.  And I would probably--98 percent of his customers were all black doing small purchases.  But he knew enough that this was his customer base.  You weren't gonna, you know, take your customer base for granted, and he passed on that trait to President Clinton, that you learn to deal with people no matter where they are and who they are.
Story_ID: 79207
Speaker 1: Well the, the, the relationship--he--when he was Governor in '87 [1987] we had our 30th anniversary of our attending Central [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas].  He held a reception at the Governor's Mansion.  Was very active and involved in that, and we spent a lot of time around him.  So between the time of '87 [1987] and when he finally--I, I always said that Arkansas was too small for [William] Bill Clinton.  And that even though he kept saying he wasn't gonna run for President, that he had a lot of talent, a lot of energy.  And at some point I figured he would make a move.  And I, I had told him a number of times.  And when he did I would, I would work with him.  Now it turned out the time that he--when he first announced was also the time that Doug [Douglas] Wilder [HM] announced.  And I made a commitment to Wilder that I was gonna help him.  Lo and behold Wilder dropped out early and I was able to stay with my commitment to, to Bill Clinton and to work with him.  And there were--you talk about connections.  Now this--Bill Clinton I think was able to propel himself as into the forefront mainly because of the Illinois primary.  Illinois primary was early on and some years earlier we had the 150th anniversary of the state of Arkansas.  Rodney Slater was a staff person working for Clinton, and I was privy in the early conversation to have some discussion about what do you do to recognize black accomplishments in the state of Arkansas?  And I said you hold a reunion.  You invite all of the outstanding Arkansans who've left Arkansas back to recognize their achievement.  Said they won't come back, people don't do that.  I said no, if you understand something about the psychology of people, people will come back and show you what they've achieved.  And I said--so they said--well we had roundtable discussion about who would be the most prominent Arkansan, black Arkansan to bring back.  I said John Johnson [HM].  They said John Johnson hates Arkansas.  Doesn't want anything to do with it; never came back; wouldn't come back on a bet.  I said I don't believe that.  I said if you invite--if the governor of the state of Arkansas invites Mr. Johnson to come back, I believe he would show up.  Well it turned out not only did Mr. Johnson show up, he brought his wife, he brought his daughter, he brought Lerone Bennett [HM], he brought two photographers.  And that was one of the first national stories that Bill Clinton had.  So when Bill Clinton started to run for President, the Illinois primary--one was half of Chicago is from Arkansas or from Mississippi.  So if you just got everybody at home to call up somebody in Chicago and say vote for this guy, he's all right, you'd be ahead of the game.  In addition to that, Johnson Publications provided a great editorial platform for Clinton.  I think he appeared in "Jet" a number of times before the Illinois primary.  So that that, again that relationship between somebody black in Arkansas and Bill Clinton's ambition to be President, was, was very helpful.  And he came out of the Illinois primary winning that.  That was really one of the important stepping stones for him to move on and secure other primaries as time, time went on.  And then the--when we got to the convention, again "Jet"--they were, were doing a, a story on, on African American advisors--
Story_ID: 79494
Speaker 1: The--so that, the Illinois primary was really the experience.  The other one was that again, the power of a black publication, "Jet" Magazine again, that they did a cover story of President [William] Clinton.  At that time he was the nominee.  And about five or six African Americans, Lottie Shackelford, Rodney Slater [HM], Bob Nash [HM], I forgot who else was on the picture.  But that again going into the, into the general election was another powerful piece.  And I'd bump into people who said you know, if, if, if you stand in--I mean we were the validators.  But if you--if he's standing next to you and you know, I'm, I'm gonna, I'm gonna support him.  And so once he came to town, the, you know relationships with Ron Brown and Alexis Herman [HM] and, and Rodney [Slater] and all of these people, President Clinton's just been smart enough to, to build on these relationships.  In fact I used to kid him.  We, we went to one of the first trips I took with him was to Atlanta for the Martin Luther King celebration of the--January after he had been in office.  And we were on the plane and he said he was one of the few white people who knew all three verses of "Lift Every Voice and Sing".  I said Mr. President I beg to differ with you, you're one of the few people who know all three verses.  But again I think you know, he knew enough to recognize that our community as offering substance, talent, and I think a lot of that flowed from the way he saw his childhood, and he saw Little Rock Central High School [Little Rock, Arkansas] again.  So here's--you know what we did in '57 [1957], '58 [1958], have an impact on this fellow who's President now in 1992.  But it's the same, it's the same string that goes from then to now.
Story_ID: 79495
Speaker 1: Now you know who also played a role with--just you've had role with Jesse Jackson [HM], right?  Can you talk about that too?
Speaker 2: Well I, I met Reverend Jackson when I was in government.  In fact there's a fella who was very close to him in college who's since deceased, Lamond Godwin, who worked in the Labor Department with me.  He was very close to Jesse.  And when we--all the election between [Jimmy] Carter and, and [Ronald] Reagan, Jesse was very involved in the campaign.  We got to know each other then and when he decided in '84 [1984] that he was gonna run for President, I thought it was the right thing and I wanted--I supported him.  In fact I, with the consulting business, went out on the road with Jesse.  We, we did--I was part of the campaign support.  Alexis [Herman, HM] was very involved with a lot of the logistics of the campaign.  And I believe that, that clearly in many ways, Jesse laid the groundwork in '84 [1984] and '88 [1988], one for the role that Ron played as Party Chair.  The acceptance of a, of a white southerner with a good Civil Rights record, Bill Clinton.  If he hadn't played that role I don't believe we would have been able to have gotten Bill Clinton in as President.  And I think--and again, the building block that Little Rock, the relationship that Jesse played as a student at A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], all of these [unclear].  I mean we're, we're around the same age.  That all of this was a set of relationships that stem from my going through that school door.
Story_ID: 79496
Speaker 1: Now when you got involved with Reverend [Jesse] Jackson [HM], what were you wanting to see happen?  I mean what was the--sort of the game plan?  What did--
Speaker 2: Well I wanted--you know I didn't know whether we could win the presidency, but I, I did think they underestimated Jesse's both personal ability and his political relationships.  And it turned out--I always tell this story that the--a lot of the news organizations attached journalists to Jesse's campaign 'cause they figured it was gonna blow up and go away.  Well it turned out that Jesse was the only one that went the distance.  In fact he had a lot to do with a lot of, of journalistic careers.  Jack White [HM], Boyd who's managing "New York Times".  A lot of them began their career covering Jesse's political campaign.  My expectation that he was gonna help democratize the Democratic party.  I thought that in many ways, and probably is still the case, the black vote doesn't get its proper due.  And that really it was--I was also interested in the mechanics of campaigning; the people who were running it.  And so now you look at Donna Brazile [HM], Charles Duncan, people who have become--built reputations on, on how to run a campaign.  Jesse was terribly important to create that and to create widening opportunities.  So what I saw was again, raising the bar, widening the door and I think Reverend Jackson achieved that.
Story_ID: 79497
Speaker 1: And at the--what did--what would you consider the turning point in his campaign?  Would you consider the "Hymie--" ["Hymietown" Remark], I mean the--
Speaker 2: No, I consider the--it was--well it was Michigan, the Michigan primary.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: The Michigan primary and his success there that really awakened people that this guy's serious.  Now the person who ran his--who was Chairman of the Michigan campaign was a guy I was in college with, Joel Ferguson.  So you know again, the connection.  Joel Ferguson was Chairman of the Board at Michigan State when I got the honorary doctorate.  He was one of the people important in selecting me.  So I don't think we have a real appreciation for these connections and what these relationships have achieved on their own, but collectively they have an opportunity to be even more powerful.
Story_ID: 79498
Speaker 1: And was there any time like around the time of you worked with Reverend [Jesse] Jackson [HM] or you know you worked with Bill Clinton [President William "Bill" Clinton].  Did, did politics get too close to business, or was there a pressure, you know, not to be as political?
Speaker 2: There's always pressure not to be political.  That somehow it's going to be a detriment.  But I think you know that's to forego your relationships.  And that at the, again going back to, to my Little Rock experience, that you have to be willing to take some risks.  If you're completely risk averse, maybe you might make it through life, but my sense is you're not likely to be very successful taking that as a route.
Story_ID: 79499
Speaker 1: Now how did the movie come about, the movie on your life?  How did that whole project come about?
Speaker 2: I had, I had resisted a number of offers to do a book, a movie.  And there were two producers who spent a lot of time, they spent a lot of time talking to my wife.  They finally convinced me and she that they were willing to, to treat the story in what I thought was a very way.  They were--I spent time with the writer.  A guy, Roman who was the writer assigned to do the script.  And I guess I thought once having seen the script treatment, that they would, they would do right by the film.  Now the problem with the film as opposed to book, you can't edit it out.  Once it shows up on the screen, that's--it's, it's gone.  The--although there was one other experience before that.  I did "Eyes on the Prize" with Henry Hampton.  And when they came to film, they didn't have much money.  I never thought "Eyes on the Prize" would ever see the light of day.  And one of the things "Eyes on the Prize" taught me is I guess the reason I'm here, is you do as many interviews as you can because you can't pick and choose which ones are gonna make it; which ones are not gonna make it.  And that the "Eyes" was powerful enough for me to know that every time it's shown, it's impacted people.  I mean I walk through--I can tell when it's running when I go through an airport by the number of people who come up and said they've seen it, and their view of it.  So the Disney movie, one was that at the time producers came to me they didn't have Walt Disney lined up as the production company.  And when they finally secured Disney, then I figured hey, if Disney does half of what he did for the mouse, they'd do for me--that they know how to promote something.  And I, I thought that it was, it was time to try to get a positive story about Central [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas].  And it turned out with the, the actors and actresses that they--I mean I'm really proud the number of people that the movie employed.  And it ended up being a four week project that they shot in Little Rock.  And having you know, a fairly wide impact at the time it was shown.  So I was pleased with it.
Story_ID: 79500
Speaker 1: It didn't--I think the, the thing now that we--there's a lot still to tell about Little Rock.  And we'd, we, we'd better do it soon.  We all won't be around.  But to do some sort of joint project that gets everybody's story out there.  I always say whenever we're all together, we've been together for the 40th anniversary we had down in Little Rock.  We've done a couple of TV appearances, did the "Today Show" and "Oprah Winfrey" and a few others, that we always revert back to be 15, 16.  I mean it's--you're a family you know.  We, we always--our spouses all clear the room and let us go back to being teenagers.  But I, I think we really are due, due some sort of joint project that we can all kind of get our, our story.  And our story is, is nine different stories.  It's--I think it's taken us--each of us in some way has kind of stumbled up on that, that conclusion.  I always said that I wanted to make certain that I did something else in my life besides going to Central High School [Little Rock, Arkansas].  Well all the things you do still what is going reign number one is the Central High experience I've had.  The--before President [William "Bill"] Clinton left office, he helped with the ceremony.  We received the Congressional Gold Medal, which is, you know, a very powerful, powerful achievement 'cause not a lot of citizens receive that and for nine of us to get it, I mean we were again like the Spingarn.  We're one of the few groups that has gotten the recognition that, that we've gotten.  But I hope on this project, when we, we get started soon and get focused on it.  We found it--put the foundation together.  And have had some modest success with that.  Little Rock now is a historic site.  There's a museum now in Little Rock.  All of that building up on I think us initially simply wanting to go to school.  And that we've all been presently surprised at how big the story has become.
Story_ID: 79501
Speaker 1: I would encourage that a great deal because there's not--and I, and I--well I'll deal with it later.  I wanna--the thing that I find interesting about you, you know your story and your sort of path, is that you have come through very whole, sort of.  It almost seems like you know, it was all--I'm sure that it hasn't been 'cause no life is all, you know, roses.
Speaker 2: That's for sure.
Speaker 1: But have there been, you know, sort of down periods or things that you know were learning experiences outside of things, sort of tested your mettle and you know I'd like you to address that just because a lot of people came out of the movement, they didn't come out whole, you know.  Or they weren't lucky.
Speaker 2: Well I, I think the--early on and I'll never forget graduation.  As I was receiving the diploma, I think it's Peggy Lee song "Is That All There Is To That?"  That I knew that I had--I mean I was 16 turning 17.  I was about to go to college and I couldn't rest my laurels on having received that diploma.  I had to do some other things.  So, so in, in many ways I was driven by the fact that this occurred very early in my life.  That I had to try to figure out what the second and third, fourth acts are gonna be.  I, I think I ben--obviously benefitted from having this, this strong force of family to concentrate on the education piece.  I got married early, was able to grow up with my, my children.  I got divorced when I was--I was divorced since seventy, '74 [1974].  But my--and then got remarried.  So that my, my, my wife Phyllis has been a real helpmate in trying to figure out how to navigate this Little Rock thing 'cause it's like everybody in the movement, and she said may die.  It's both a, a blessing and a curse.  I have a buddy who always stops me and says yeah, where's your medal?  Why don't you wear around it around your neck?  Well you know that medal is great and it's a great achievement, but you know you hang that medal around your neck, people will say--like Miles Davis' records, so what, what else can you do?  And, and I think you know, have been driven by you gotta do other things.  Certainly benefit from having been there, but you gotta build on it.  And that's one of the lessons that I learned from it.  I, I--that's why I tip my hat to somebody like Andy [Andrew] Young [HM] that you know, he's had second, third, fourth--a bunch of careers.  But you gotta be willing to try to explore different activities.  And I think, I mean when you look around at the nine of us, that the careers have been very rich.  I mean we all finished college.  Some of them went on for advanced degrees, raised I think last count was twenty-five, twenty-six children among us.  The children have achieved a lot.  Most of them have finished college.  So--and in a certain--I mean nine people from a small town in 1957 you know we didn't disintegrate.  We figured out how to build lives beyond that.  I think it's a pretty positive story.
Speaker 1: It's a very positive story.
Story_ID: 79502
Speaker 1: Now when you look at the, the state of the black community now; we were talking about this a little bit.  Your--what, what are your thoughts then?
Speaker 2: Well I, I have the luxury of seeing the state of the black community through the eyes of my children.  I have two adult children and I have a 14 year old.  Now the fourteen year old has got has got a view on everything.  And I guess I'm--you know one is having gone through the Little Rock experience you have to be an optimist in the beginning.  I mean optimism is maybe sometimes--I get too optimistic.  But I don't think when I look at it through what, what my, what my children have done.  I have a son who's a history prof, a daughter who's--we call her the Internet Tsar.  She's running BET's [Black Entertainment Television] Internet company in New York.  And then the 14 year old is really the high [unclear].  He's a swimmer, Equestrian, student and all of that.  Now her schedule sometimes makes me tired just trying to keep up with her.  But I think African American children by far get a bad rap that one I believe they're a lot more aware than they're given credit for.  Even the--with this hip hop generation.  I mean the thing that's fascinated me about the hip hop crowd is that they have figured out for the most part, the economics of that business.  I mean you go through our history about culture and arts, they have come closest to figuring out how to control the, the idea, the production and the outcome a lot better than they--I mean all we, we hear are the words.  But the, the product is non-industry.  They, they've--and some of them have transformed themselves from, from you know, rappers to movie moguls, to, to any number of people.  And, and I've always felt that the state of, of, of the black community--we have never seized the high ground enough.  We let other people define who we are, the symbolism, you know I mean just this flap over Affirmative Action.  We should have, you know I always say we ought to have--George Bush ought to be on everybody's mantel 'cause if [President] George Bush can make it in this society, every African American child can achieve it 'cause he's the poster boy for Affirmative Action.  I mean he got more Affirmative Action boosts than anybody black.  And that we let other people define this, use the symbols, take them away from us.
Story_ID: 79503
Speaker 1: I guess that's why I think a project like yours is important because all these rich stories of all these people who I don't know who they are.  But at the end of the day no matter what their bumps in the road, whether they were in jail, had problems, they were all achievers.  I mean they zigzagged how to get there, most of them wrote the book 'cause nobody else was, was ever there.  And where I think the Civil Rights Movement has to go is to be able to avoid having to write the book every time and not use you know, some of these folks who've gone before as role models, our building blocks.  And it's obvious that we got a lot more talent and power than we give ourselves credit for.  Where we end up?  Well I mean this is, this is still the most powerful country in the world.  We--I've always felt we've gotta figure out how to have young African Americans see the upside of an American citizenship.  I mean we got people dying to get into this country.  Will load up in a boxcar or you know, with no air in it, just to become--just to work in this country.  I am not sure--well I, I'm sure of one thing.  I'm sure that, that one of the keys to that is trying to raise the consciousness about the level--about education.  That no matter what the demeanors and naysayers say that, that educational achievement is still one of the keys to making it in this society.  And I think that's something we've gotten away from.  I think we have to contain or make an assault on the quality of education that our, our children get.  But also how much of it they're gonna take out and understanding it's a two-way street.
Story_ID: 79504
Speaker 1: So the Ernest Green of today, what does he still wanna do with his life?  You here--I'll be here until, you know--
Speaker 2: Well I wanna see my--I wanna see my youngest get, get out of high school and into college.  I wanna see her--hopefully she'll be an outstanding enough swimmer to get to the Olympics, if that was my--that's a dream of mine.  I wanna do this project with the nine of us, get that story out.  I, I think there's really something there; how we each approached it, what it's meant to, to each of us.  And I, I think after you, after you hear us all grumble mumble that there'll be pretty--a big agreement about the impact of it and, and, and the hope that we have for the future.
Story_ID: 79505
Speaker 1: And politically.  I mean I'm just--the state of black, black America.  You just generally feel positive about is what I hear you saying.
Speaker 2: Well I think the--I think there are a lot of subplots.  I mean I think we've clearly underutilized our political power even with what we've achieved.  I mean you look at participation, the numbers are going down.  We can't--we, we, we have this terrific problem of getting people to understand that collective action only occurs when individuals step forward.  And that this is still a period of activism.  You gotta have people involved.  That simply 'cause we went to the school and opened the doors, you don't flick on autopilot and fly.  I mean we, we're a long way from the autopilot stage.  And I think it's, it's, it's again, being able to, to highlight the achievers, wherever they are.  I mean--and how they did it, and why some of the stuff that they did is transferrable to somebody now.  And that I think is, is a big opportunity that you know we, we passed up.  We, we just--whether it's--whatever is going on in popular culture, whoever the hot, hot flavor is for the moment.  But even their stories--[Sean] Puffy Combs been working at it a long time.  It didn't just happen yesterday, you know.  We don't spend enough time looking at, at what he did.  Why Spike Lee has been successful, and how long he's been dreaming about that and that, you know he didn't just up and go to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and decide he wanted to be a filmmaker.  It, it, it is--I guess getting away from belief that people are overnight successes and, and not understanding the paths they take to whatever they achieve.
Story_ID: 79506
Speaker 1: But, but listen.  I mean you had to come ready to fight.  You know I mean no matter where you were in the--at least my view, it was no picnic.  And I thought that if you came ready to fight, you know put your armor on, which is what we did every day, it's like going to battle.  Then once you got home, I mean part of it also was we had different experiences with our friends.  And maybe because they were younger and just starting high school, they didn't have the set of relationships that I had.  And so I never felt--I mean I knew I was alone there during the day, but when I hung out with my friends, I, I didn't get the feeling that I was, that I was cut off from them.
Speaker 2: You had a social order already established.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You did--honestly, they did not--three years of no--I mean did they--was it three years that they couldn't participate at any of these things?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well-
Speaker 2: I mean that's not normal.  That's all she says is it's not normal, it was not normal.
Speaker 1: Well that's true, it was not a normal experience.  But when you stand up and get the Congressional Gold Medal, that ain't normal either.  I mean there are rewards and you know, there, there's punishment.  And the--I guess you know my view was hey look, whatever punishment they were meting out, I could handle, 'cause I've seen light at the end of the tunnel and the reward side is much greater than any punishment.
Story_ID: 79507
Speaker 1: You know I go back to Little Rock [Arkansas] right now, I can't find anybody who--they all my best friends.  You know, I'm the toast of the town, you know.  They all wanna be around.  And, and partly one--I got--I had an experience that I got involved with the, the Winthrop Rockefeller Foundation.  I was a Board member.  So I got back there during the [William "Bill"] Clinton period when he was governor, maybe a little bit before that.  And tried to keep my fingers in it a little bit.  The others didn't have--want anything to do with it.  They didn't wanna go near Arkansas.  And we--in fact the 30th anniversary, we had big debate about whether, whether to participate in that.  And I said hey, you crazy?  You know, I mean this--first off it is final recognition in most of these southern communities [unclear] Civil Rights community, they, they look up I said Arkansas, somebody's flying all the way from Tokyo to go visit Central High School [Little Rock, Arkansas].  People in Arkansas--what the hell is this?  Why does everybody wanna fly all the way from Tokyo to see this damn school?  We've been trying to get it out of our minds.  Well the damn school is [unclear] for the town.  And if that's--if the school is the reason for the town, the people who went there is also a very important part of it.
Speaker 2: But isn't this what we're talking about, about black people claiming, you know their role and you know and not sort of putting aside, minimizing it.
Story_ID: 79508
Speaker 1: But speaking of that--what do you, what do you want actually to be remembered for?  Do you want to be remembered for Little Rock for sure, but what do you want--when it's all said and done, what do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: I would--my--I laugh because my, my legacy, I think I've worked hard at wanting to be remembered for something other than having gone to Central High School.  The older I get, the more important I realize how going to Central High School [Little Rock, Arkansas] is connected to everything else I've done.  And I think you know I'd like to be remembered for somebody who tried to make a difference.  Who saw an opportunity and, and seized the moment, and in that seizure hopefully help some other young African American boy and girl much like myself, that if you had a chance to step forward, you would move forward.  And I, I think that's to me that's the, that's the black contribution to this country.  I had an opportunity during the Clinton campaign to go with Rodney Slater [HM] to Jamestown, Virginia.  We went to some area where the water comes up against the marsh.  They said it was one of the locations of the first slaves came into Virginia, I don't know.  Eventually we got the--that encounter--we got the Parks Department to finally put a monument there dedicated to the first Africans who landed.  But from that spot in Jamestown to Little Rock to, to my fourteen year old, is--I, I wanna believe that nothing can stop you, can turn you around, can deter you from trying to reach for your goals.  Now the one thing as you get older in life, you discover is that everything you wish for, you don't get.  But that shouldn't in any way deter you from trying to, trying to reach for it.  And you know, my legacy if I were to write it, is that I reached for it and hopefully I grabbed a few things.
Story_ID: 79509
Speaker 1: And you're, you're still an integrationist at heart.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I think that there should be no facet of this society where we don't appear uninvolved and can't play a direct role.  In my experience, again going back to 1941 when I was born, to '57 [1957] in Little Rock is that I don't want you to pigeonhole me in some closet or some box.  I wanna play on as big a stage as I can possibly play on.  And I think it was, to me never about sitting next to some white student.  It was about widening the door, having the options that were going to be better for my life and for the people immediately around me.
Speaker 1: And the issue of busing, would you have said it could have been done differently, integration?  Do you think--
Speaker 2: Well I think, I, I think busing is--it's overstretched.  I mean if it's a, if it's a difference between taking a bus to go to Harvard Business School, say a bus from Phoenix, Arizona to, to Boston, Massachusetts every day.  It's, it's, it's the quality of what's at the other end.  And the, the fight ought to be to make every school as good as people perceive the Harvard Business School.  So that at the end it's the, it's the outcome of the product.  And what's, what, what's its value?  How does the rest of society hold up its value?  I mean they--if a school is 90 percent black for the most part, they gone discount it.  If it's 90 percent white, they attach a premium to it.  And we gotta figure out between the discount and the premium, why we can't get more premium schools as opposed to discounted.
Story_ID: 79510
Speaker 1: So I want you to describe the picture.  If you can give the date, who, when and where, that's all, not long.
Speaker 2: The date would be sometime in the early '50's [1950's], late '40's [1940's].  This is in front of our house on 21st and Pulaski.  And that's me with my dog Spot.
Speaker 1: But you were about--this would be in the '40's [1940's], though, you were born in '40 [1940].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was born in '41 [1941].  So this would be--I would--this would be--
Speaker 1: You young.
Speaker 2: Forty five [1945] or six [1946], somewhere along in there.
Speaker 1: And that's a picture of my mother.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: We're getting ready to go to church.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my mother, my sister Treopia and my brother Scott, myself, so it had to be--I look to be four years old there, Scott's about two, so that would be 1945.  That's towards the end of World War I, II.
Speaker 2: I think that is, that's a picture during the crisis.  It may be graduation.  That's a picture of my mother, Lothaire Green and myself.  I'm obviously--this is high school.  May even be college.
Speaker 1: You think it might be?
Speaker 2: Might be.
Speaker 1: There's another one.
Speaker 2: And my mother.  So that would be around '57 [1957], '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: This is a picture of family and friends sitting down to dinner.  The two individuals on the left are neighbors and I'm not sure of their names, it's been some years.  My brother Scott and my mother at the head of the table.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of the--my brother and my sister and myself starting school.  So Treopia, Scott and me.  That would have to be 1946, somewhere, '47 [1947].
Speaker 1: That is the--one of the pictures of our famed New York experience.  Little Rock Nine minus two.
Speaker 2: Can you name them going up--
Speaker 1: Yeah, on the bottom row is Jeff Thomas, Terrence Roberts and myself.  Melba Beals, Minnijean Brown, Elizabeth Eckford, Gloria Ray and Carlotta Walls LaNier.  Or is that Thelma?  Yeah that's Thelma in the middle.
Speaker 2: Thelma [unclear], Elizabeth [Eckford], Minnijean [unclear].  Thelma, Elizabeth, Minnijean [Brown] [unclear], strange.  Is that you?
Speaker 1: No.  This picture is a picture of my brother Scott on the left, my mother, my son Adam, and my nephew Todd Washington on the very end.  And the person in the middle with the dark suit is Ambassador Andrew Young [HM].  This was when I was directing the Recruitment and Training Program.  We had a conference in New Orleans and this was about two days before my mother passed.  She attended the conference and, and then went back home and--in '76 [1976].
Speaker 2: When I was directing the Recruitment and Training Program, my--the fellow to the far left is Bill Ross who were staff people working with me, Lois Ricks.  And then the person on the far side again is Andy [Andrew] Young.
Speaker 1: Okay that is a picture of the night of graduation.  Picture me on the phone with my mother.
Speaker 2: Who was calling?
Speaker 1: Probably a relative from California.
Speaker 2: Wishing you congratulations.
Speaker 1: Wishing me congratulations.
Speaker 2: That is a picture of me at church and I think the one, two, three, third person from the left is Elizabeth Eckford.  The person nearest me is Dr. Wixom, the individual who was tutoring in physics.
Speaker 1: He's the one with the glasses.
Speaker 2: He's the one with the glasses.
Speaker 1: That's me with my head turned.
Speaker 2: Is that Doctor--
Speaker 1: That's Wixom again, and my mother in the white hat sitting with me.  That's a church service I think right before graduation.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother and aunt leaving the graduation ceremony.  And the, the person with the cigarette out of his mouth is, is Mr. Jackson the brick mason, yeah.
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: This was--I was a light photographer.
Speaker 1: That's the day of--
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: [unclear] night of graduation.  My brother helping me, Scott, with my cap and gown.
Speaker 2: That is a picture--I think I was returning to Little Rock when I was Assistant Secretary in '80 [1980].  And that's Reverend Jackson on the right side.
Speaker 1: That's the night of graduation, that's the diploma.  Those are neighbors, my mother to the left and--
Speaker 2: She's in the print dress.
Speaker 1: She's in the print dress with boutonniere.
Speaker 2: And that's a party at the house after graduation and--with a group of my friends.  You don't see the one with Dr. King?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Picture of the nine of us in '97 [1997].  We were back for the 40th anniversary.  Carlotta Walls LaNier, Melba Pattillo Beals, Terrence Roberts, Gloria Ray Carlsmart, Thelma Mothershed Wair, myself, Elizabeth Eckford, Minnijean Brown Trickey and Jefferson Thomas.
Speaker 1: Who did we--who were we missing before?  You called off the names so perfectly.
Speaker 2: I thought it was Thelma.
Speaker 1: This is a picture during the 40th anniversary celebration.  I make out Alexis Herman, Carlotta, Jeff, Terrence, Mrs. Bates, Elizabeth, Gloria, Melba, Rodney Slater [HM], Minnijean and P resident Clinton.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  What was the year of this?
Speaker 1: '97 [1997].
Speaker 2: This was, this was '96 [1996] I think, '95 [1995].  President Clinton and I attended a school on--celebrate the May 17th school Supreme Court decision.  There's Janet Reno, Attorney General.  Let's see, there's Thurgood Marshall, Jr. on the left, Secretary of Education Dick Riley, Paul Sorbane is the Senator from Maryland, Janet Reno, Attorney General, President Clinton.  The woman in the yellow, I'm not sure.  The gentleman next to me is Steny Hoyer, a congressman, and myself.
Speaker 1: Do you have anything with you as Assistant Secretary?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Well I was, I was--this was Alexis Herman [HM] who was running the Women's Bureau at that time.
Speaker 1: So that's form that period.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's from that period.  So that had to be '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: [Unclear].
Speaker 2: The only--the two other women I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, no problem.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: This is my daughter the swimmer when she was summer champion at the, at the club we belong to.  She was city-wide champion in the ten and under girls 25 meter backstroke.  So she was number one.
Speaker 2: The year I'm not sure of what year.  This would be I think in ninety, '93 [1993], '94 [1994].  President Clinton, I think he was making an appearance at the Congressional Black Caucus dinner and probably coming off of a political swing.  I'm not sure.  But we were greeting each other, old homies.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of myself with Maynard Jackson when he was mayor of Atlanta.  And the year, I--would have to be in the '70's [1970's] when I was in government.
Speaker 2: You were Assistant Secretary.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And this is Assistant Secretary [unclear].  I'm with Alexis Herman, with Ben Hooks and the person on the far right is Jim Dyke.  We were all--Dyke was in the Carter Administration, he worked for Walter Mondale.  And Ben Hooks was President of the NAACP at that time.
Speaker 1: Can you--Dyke, D-Y or D--
Speaker 2: D-Y-K-E.
Speaker 1: D-Y-K-E, okay.
Speaker 2: That was the time we were doing the movie at Little Rock.  That would have been '91 [1991].  That's Ossie Davis and that's, that's my wife Phyllis in the middle, on the end.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  He's autographing the script?
Speaker 2: I don't know what he's doing.
Speaker 1: What's your wife's name?
Speaker 2: Phyllis.  In fact we were both in cost--
Speaker 1: That's filming on location of the Ernest Green Story.  The person in the checkered shirt is Morris Chestnut.  The--Ossie Davis [HM] in the suit.  My wife Phyllis in the checkered dress, and I'm not sure of the other individuals.
Speaker 2: This one is the director of the movie, Eric Laneuville, who was prominent in "St. Elsewhere", he was an actor in "St. Elsewhere" and he's now directing movies.
Speaker 1: McKenzie and I before she learned to swim.  Now she's discarded the water wings.  She has to be about four on that, three or four, so that would be 1991, '92 [1992].
Speaker 2: That's a picture of--
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: That's a picture of myself and Mohammad Ali and my wife on the left in the back.  I'm not sure of the year.
Speaker 1: That's my wife Phyllis and Billy Dee Williams on the, on the far side.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Do you remember the occasion?
Speaker 1: The occasion was a art show of Billy Dee Williams' work.  The year I think was sometime in '94 [1994] or '95 [1995].
Speaker 2: --of my wife Phyllis, my son Adam, my daughter in the red hat, McKenzie and my daughter on the far side, Jessica.  And that was in New York I think around '94 [1994] or '95 [1995].
