Story_ID: 23363
Speaker 1: Alright, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Nancy Louise Glenn; N-A-N-C-Y, L-O-U-I-S-E, G-L-E-N-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 26, 1965, Charleston, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: What is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: I am an associate professor at Texas Southern University, Department of Mathematics.
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is August 16, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: At Texas Southern University campus in Houston, Texas.
Story_ID: 23364
Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask this kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No, I don't have a favorite food.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Christmastime is my favorite time of the year.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: They're several different quotes from the Bible that I like; but in general, quotes from the Bible.
Story_ID: 23365
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, now, I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but separately, so we can keep them straight.  And then we'll ask about how they got together.  Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Her name is Eugenia P. Deas; E-U-G-E-N-I-A, D-E-A-S.
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind the origin of the name, Deas?  I've never really seen it before.  Do you know where it comes from?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Deas is the name of the owners of my grandfather's family, the slave owners.  In that time the families--the African American families had the same names of their owners, and my family was owned by the Deas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know where they were from?
Speaker 2: France.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So it's a French name.  Okay.  And, what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in September, 1921; and in Charleston, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: What can you tell us about your family history?  Now, you've already said that the Deas were slaveowners of your family.  How far back can you trace your family on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side, I can go back to my great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Molsy Drayton.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: M-O-L-S-Y, D-R-A-Y-T-O-N.  And I'm not sure if Molsy was her name or her nickname.  Her first name may have been Eugenia, as well. I've heard both.
Speaker 1: And what was she doing?
Speaker 2: She was a maid.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She worked as a maid.
Speaker 1: In Charleston?
Speaker 2: In McClellanville--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: which is a--it is in Charleston County.
Speaker 1: Like a suburb of Charleston?
Speaker 2: Not a suburb.  It--it's about--it's in the country, so it's about forty miles away, north of Charleston.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The Deas name; that's the other side of the family, I guess.  Did they have like a plantation, or something, or were they in Charleston?  Did they live in town, or do you know?
Speaker 2: I believe the Deas--I don't know exactly where the Deas plantation was on my father's side.  That was my--
Speaker 1: That's on your father's side?  Okay.  Your mother's maiden name is Drayton?
Speaker 2: Powell.
Speaker 1: Powell.  Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Powell.  P-O-W-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And she uses Powell as her middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm not going to deal with the Deas yet.  So, are there any stories about slavery on your mother's side, or about African survivals, or anything?
Speaker 2: No.  I don't know a great deal about the slavery side of my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any stories passed down about the--about life in South Carolina?
Speaker 2: It was difficult for my mother's grandmother.  My mother was raised by her grandmother, and life was very difficult for them.  For my mother, my maternal grandmother died when my mother was very young, a baby.  So she never knew her mother.  But on my mother's side, my mom, had a very nice life; upper middle class.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm trying to get--your grandmother passed away, but your grandmother had a decent life you said, but her--but your mother didn't have it--
Speaker 2: My grandmother passed away.  My mom's mother passed away when my mother was a baby, very young.  So my mother was raised by her paternal grandmother, and her maternal grandmother had a difficult life.  She was a maid, and it was not easy in South Carolina at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But for my mother; her life was very nice, because of my maternal grandfather had a--had a nice life, so he lived well.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: And the reason why my maternal grandfather lived well is because he was raised by his mother's sister, not by his mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what's your maternal grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: Benjamin Powell.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Benjamin Powell.  And what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: He worked--to the best of my recollection, he worked with the--on the shipping--on the ship docks in Charleston.  It had something to do with shipping.
Story_ID: 23366
Speaker 1: Okay.  So are there any stories that are passed down on this side of the family about anything, from ghost stories to stories about, you know historical events, or, you know--
Speaker 2: Yes.  The things that was passed on that I don't find in a lot of the history books, and why my grandfather grew up so well in the late 1800s, early 1900s, and it was so unusual back then, especially for the South, is because his mother's sister, who took care of him, had a baby for a very wealthy man, the man that she worked for.  And at that time, I was told that it was not as uncommon as people think for women to--maids to get pregnant for people who were very wealthy so that their children would be taken care of.  So the man who took care of my grandfather's cousin, first cousin, also took care of my grandfather.  And that helped my grandfather to become very well to do in a time where it was very uncommon in the South.
Speaker 1: Now, is this a rich black man or white man?
Speaker 2: A rich white man.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, that happens more than I would imagine, you know.  But you know, when I first started doing this job--well since I've been doing this job, I've heard a lot of those kinds of stories about some--white paternal ancestor who makes things easier because they had a lot of money.
Speaker 2: Yes.  So my grandfather had a nice life because of that, and because of that, my mother had a nice life, because he had money and opportunities that other people didn't have.
Speaker 1: Now, was he able to go to school, or anything?
Speaker 2: My grandfather had a trade, so he didn't go to college.  He finished up high school.  My grandfather, my maternal grandfather again, he married a teacher; she had a college education, my step-grandmother.  And my mother's brother went to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  They were able to pay for his education.  And, also, they sent my mother to school, as well.  I don't know which university, but for some reason she didn't finish.  I'm not sure why.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your mother have an aspiration she shared with you, or something that she wanted to do, even, you know, whether or not she had a chance to do it?
Speaker 2: Well, in the 1940s, she said she--when she went to college, she said she wanted to be a teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But--
Speaker 2: And she was a teacher for a while.  She was a home ec [economics] teacher, but she didn't get the degree, so I think that interfered with the fact that she wasn't a fulltime teacher for her career, because she didn't have the--she didn't finish her degree.
Speaker 1: Did she have an associate's degree or a normal school degree?  You know, that's two years.  In those days, you could get a normal school degree and teach in a lot of places in the South.
Speaker 2: I'm not aware of that.  I don't believe so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause she said she only went to University for one year.
Story_ID: 23367
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  I'm going to go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Henry Deas.  H-E-N-R-Y, D-E-A-S.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My father was born at--29th of October, 1921.  Actually, my mother was born, (unclear), so my mother was born in 1924--1924, is my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So my father was born in Charleston, South Carolina, in October 29, 1921.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you can take at least his name back to this Deas plantation, right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so how many generations is that--that's back to before the [American] Civil War, I suppose, as we know, and how far back beyond, you know, 1865, can we go?
Speaker 2: With my paternal side of the family, it can go back to my father, my grandfather, my great-grandfather and my great-great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know your great-great-grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: Daniel Deas.
Speaker 1: Daniel Deas.  Okay, Deas.  Where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in McClellanville, South Carolina, which is in Charleston County.
Speaker 1: Okay.  About when was he born?  Do you have a date for him?
Speaker 2: I don't have the date for that.  I know when my great-grandfather was born.  And his name was Daniel Deas, as well.  And he was born in 18--1830.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that would put this Daniel Deas back to 1810, maybe, maybe far back as that, you know, depend on whether he was a teenage father or not.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Actually, my great grandfather, Daniel Deas, who was born in 1830, he was grandfather by marriage only.  His wife had a baby for another man, and that man--the baby was my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, instead of--even though my maiden name is Deas, it's really White.  W-H-I-T-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It should be White--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --or if it was the names following the biology? Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, so.  So what's the first name of Mr. White, do you know?
Speaker 1: I can't remember at this time, I do know--.
Speaker 2: Okay.  He was like born--he's a person that was born around the Civil War period, I guess?
Speaker 1: I think shortly after that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause my mother knew of him.  He was old but, my mother knew of him.
Story_ID: 23368
Speaker 1: Charleston [South Carolina] is like the center of a lot of activity before the [American] Civil War and after the Civil War, and just one of the, I guess, focal points of black life in this country is a port of entry for a lot of Africans before and during the slave trade and afterwards, I think.  What kind of stories are on your father's [Henry Deas] side?
Speaker 2: On my father's side, there are slaves that came in through the port in Charleston were most likely from Sierra Leone.  So my best guest is that my--the black side of my family is from Sierra Leone.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how do you know this?
Speaker 2: My sister is a historian, and she researched this years ago.
Speaker 1: Sierra Leone and what's now Liberia were known as the slave coast in those days.  A lot of the people on those coasts were captured and brought to the United States; that's the usual route.  So, are there any African survivors in your family from that side that you know of, in terms of beliefs or superstitions or practices or art or anything?
Speaker 2: Basket-making; the sweet grass baskets.  People actually still do that in the Charleston area.  And I learned it--that as a child as well.  And also, it's not as common today, but when my mother [Eugenia Powell Deas] was younger, growing rice.  That's why the slaves were brought from Sierra Leone to grow rice.  So my mother knows how to grow rice very well.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Now this is something that I actually found out in South Carolina, once, about the rice-growing; that was really intense work.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But the slaves actually knew how to do it.  They're the ones that actually knew how to cultivate it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Not just how to work it, but they knew how to cultivate it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So yeah.  So is your family associated with the rice industry then in--
Speaker 2: They, as slaves--
Speaker 1: Carolina?
Speaker 2: That's what they did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: A lot of people don't realize it, but the rice crop in South Carolina was more prosperous than the oil in Texas.  It was called "Carolina Gold."  There's still a lot of rice money in Charleston.
Speaker 1: I think the richest man in the South, Wade Hampton, was a rice grower.  So, did any members of your family still do anything with rice?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's probably a good thing.  I've heard that slaves on rice plantations lasted about seven years, and they would like calculate when they would have to bring new ones, because they would wear them out, basically, by keeping them in the malaria kind of infested places where the rice was grown.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 23369
Speaker 1: So, okay.  So that's a, you know--so your father [Henry Deas], did he grow up in McClellanville?
Speaker 2: My father grew up in McClellanville.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did he have a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: He finished high school, and after that, he went to the [United States] Army, which was unusual because at the time, my father was younger, and McClellanville--the school only went up to eighth grade for blacks.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was his father like a farmer?
Speaker 2: My grandfather--no, I believe he built houses.
Speaker 1: So this is Daniel Deas?
Speaker 2: My grandfather is John Deas.
Speaker 1: John Deas.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know exactly what my grandfather's trade was, but he had some type of trade.
Speaker 1: So he was some sort of a contractor?
Speaker 2: I believe so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did he own his own home?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Everyone owned their own home.  Practically everyone in my town, where I grew up, owned their own home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: And owned land; lots of it.
Speaker 1: So did they do like, you know, gardens and stuff, like for food?
Speaker 2: Well, we called them fields.  They grew practically everything.  They weren't farms, but they would--I remember even when I was a child, my mother [Eugenia Powell Deas] would grow things and can it.  So that was very common.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your father went to the Army.  This was like World War II, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He was in World War II.
Speaker 1: And, did he serve overseas?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.  I think he was in Germany, I'm not sure.  But he was in Europe, someplace.
Speaker 1: So, he didn't talk about it very much then?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if he talked about it a lot.  My father died when I was ten.  So I don't know him as well as I knew his mother.  I knew my grandmother very well, my paternal grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So she only, you know--so what you know about your father is from her and your mother, I guess, and other relatives?
Speaker 2: Right.  And I remember something--
Speaker 1: Yeah, something, a little bit; you were ten, so you know some things, but--
Speaker 2: Pretty young.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  Yeah, you were ten, not too, that's right--okay, I'm sorry.
Story_ID: 23370
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, is there--when did your parents meet?
Speaker 2: My mother [Eugenia Powell Deas] was married to another man when she--for a while--before my father.  And she lived in Georgia with her first husband.  And she said on the way back to South Carolina, she saw my father on a train.  I think my father was either on furlough or something like that from the Army.  And this was back in, let's see, my oldest--a couple of years before my oldest brother was born, or a year or so before my oldest brother was born.  And she knew--she remembered him from her childhood, because she had that grandmother who lived in that town, and she would visit the grandmother.  But they met sometime in the 1940s.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is before the war [World War II] or after the war?
Speaker 2: I--it was not before the war, either during or after.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because it had something to do with my dad either being on furlough or getting out of the Army.
Speaker 1: Probably getting out, I would think.  That's what I'm thinking.  So this would be about 1946 or so?
Speaker 2: Around then.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there a story that your mother tells, or that people tell about how they met?  They met when he was on furlough but was there more to the story?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  That was pretty much all that she said.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they met and just hit it off?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 23371
Speaker 1: All right.  So, well, when you think about your parents' talents, hobbies, the way they walked and talked, their dispositions, their trains of thought, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I'm definitely like my father.  I'm nothing at all like my mother.  My father is very quiet and reserved, but my mom is life-of-the-party-type person.  So I'm definitely like my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And, I'm like my father and also like his mother.
Speaker 1: So she's quiet too?
Speaker 2: Well.  She had this argumentative side, and I have that side too.
Story_ID: 23372
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well, you got a sister, I know.  Can you name them, and tell us where you fit in the order?
Speaker 2: My mother had nine children.  I'm the youngest of nine.  So, my oldest brother is Bernard Powell, and after that Curtis Powell, that's from the first marriage.  And then Henry Deas, Vinny Deas, John Deas, Willie Deas, Eugenia Deas, Sandra Deas, and I'm the last one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Big family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Yeah, nine is a pretty good-sized family.
Story_ID: 23373
Speaker 1: Now, did you grow up in--now, you were born in Charleston [South Carolina], right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Describe the home you were brought up in?  Other than your mother and father and eight brothers and sisters, who else lived with you?  Did your grandmother live with you, or anyone else in the family?
Speaker 2: Well, by the time I came along, it was mainly my mother, my dad and myself, because everyone else is so much older than I am.  The closest sibling to me is five years older.  She was there as well, but everyone else was gone.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: By the time I had some recollection of who was around.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  You were born in 1965?
Speaker 2: '65 (1965).
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And so, did you grow up in a large home or large house?
Speaker 2: The house was, I guess medium size.  It was a three bedroom, one bath house, an older house.  I believe the house was built sometime in the early 1900s or late 1800s.  So it was a much older house.  I did not grow up as privileged as my mother did.  So I grew up very poor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was the environment.
Speaker 1: Now, was there a name for the part of town you lived in?
Speaker 2: McClellanville [South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now McClellanville; I thought it was a separate town from Charleston.  You were born in Charleston but grew up in McClellanville.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Which is in Charleston County.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: It's M-C-C-L-E-L-L-A-N-V-I-L-L-E.
Speaker 1: Wait a minute; I'm lost here.
Speaker 2: M-C-C-L-E-L-L-A-N-V-I-L-L-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  McClellanville.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Charleston County.
Speaker 1: Okay. I know I was misspelling it along--I knew I was misspelling it, but I didn't know how badly until now.  What's the population ratio there; is it mostly black people in town, or is it--
Speaker 2: I don't know the ratio.  I don't really--and I don't really know if it was mostly black or what, because it was so segregated.  Even though I grew up in the 1970s, the schools were segregated.  There was the black part of town and the white part of town.  The population overall was under a thousand.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A few hundred.  I guess between 500 and a thousand.  And I really don't know how many white people were in the town.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was a different part of town.
Speaker 1: So there wasn't a lot of mixing between the black and white community?  Was there a downtown area where people would--
Speaker 2: Yes.  The whites mainly lived in that downtown type area.  The only whites that mixed with us is, what they called the poor whites, because the other whites would not associate with the poor whites.  So the friends that I had were poor whites.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now you were born in '65 [1965].  By the time, I guess, you were coming along, the signs and that sort of thing were, I guess, were not, you know, black and white fountains, and that sort of thing, did not exist, am I right?
Speaker 2: They did exist.  The law changed in South Carolina, but the attitudes didn't.  There were still separate rooms, and I went to a segregated school.  And I don't remember seeing the signs, but my mother said I would ask about them.  So they were around, but I just don't remember asking about them.  And the school that I went to was not forced to be desegregated until 1974.  That's when the federal government came in and said, "Okay, you have to follow the law."  So I didn't go to an integrated school until 1974.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  You were like nine years old by then?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  Considering, you know, where you grew up, now, did you have like--did you grow up on a street with neighbors side by side, or was it--or were you kind of got spread out?
Speaker 2: Neighbors side by side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 23374
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we always ask this question.  Considering the neighborhood [McClellanville, South Carolina] you grew up in and what you saw everyday and came in contact with, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Some of the sights and smells were associated with being in the country, because it was a very small town; so, the smell of pine trees.  The other thing that I remember was the--was how deeply segregated everything was.  Things just didn't feel right, even as a child.  That's all I knew, but it still didn't feel right.  It was so heavily segregated.  That's mainly what I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, were there any other sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: That's about it.
Speaker 1: About it?  And no--what about sounds?  Any particular sounds associated it where you grew up?
Speaker 2: Birds singing.  It was very quiet.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Smells?  Pine trees--you said--
Speaker 2: Just the pine trees.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what did it look like?
Speaker 2: Very green, very wooded, but there were homes all around.  We lived on one of the main streets when I was young, and so it was very heavily traveled for that area.  Some people lived way back in remote areas with dirt roads and things.  My road was paved.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not all the roads were paved when I was younger.  And the sound--also one of the sounds I remember is the sound of mosquitoes, because mosquitoes were still really bad; actually they still are bad, but malaria was not a problem anymore.  It was back in--during the slavery time, and after that, but the mosquito problems were still very heavy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Those are the swampy lands.
Speaker 1: Was there a waterways close by?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The biggest industry in my hometown is a seafood industry.  A lot of the men had ships--boats, fishing boats, and that's how they would make their living.
Speaker 1: Was it near the ocean, or the near the--
Speaker 2: (unclear) inland, but it's not too far from the ocean.  It's just that it wasn't the public beach.  It is on the ocean.
Story_ID: 23375
Speaker 1: Now, you had this feeling of segregation.  Did you--you didn't come in contact with white people that much except the poor whites that lived close by, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you have a lot of magazines come into the house or newspapers or, you know, TV, you know, I mean things that would remind you that the world was different from just your neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Well, the segregation that I experienced was when I did go to the city of Charleston [South Carolina], and that was about forty miles away; how I was treated differently, or how we were treated differently.  So I was around whites, I just didn't have whites as friends, except for the poor whites.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you give us an example of how you were treated differently?
Speaker 2: One example I can think of is when I was in middle school, I--my teacher entered us into a contest, and we had to write something, write a short story.  So she took it to the--I think it was sponsored by a group of nuns.  She took it to them, and--so the nuns were really surprised that the writing was so good, and they couldn't believe that a black girl could write that well.  Things like that.
Speaker 1: So did they accept it?
Speaker 2: They accepted it, but they just couldn't believe that a black girl did that.
Speaker 1: Did they actually say that?
Speaker 2: Yes.  They told my teacher that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So you found out that that's what they said?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: My teacher said, "No.  Nancy is white--Nancy's not white, she's black."
Story_ID: 23376
Speaker 1: All right, now, what was the name of your first school?  Where did you start school?
Speaker 2: I started school at Lincoln.
Speaker 1: Is this Lincoln Elementary School?
Speaker 2: Well, no, it was first grade through--I started to school in the first grade.   It was first grade through twelfth grade.  So that was the black school in the town [McClellanville, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Did they call it Lincoln High School then?
Speaker 2: No.  It's called Lincoln School--
Speaker 1: Lincoln School?
Speaker 2: --because it was the entire K-12.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you didn't have kindergarten or preschool?
Speaker 2: We did have kindergarten and preschool, but I didn't--at that time I think it was some type of governmental assistance for the preschool, and I didn't qualify--did not qualify for it because of my father's [Henry Deas] income.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you father was working.  You said he did--
Speaker 2: My father was--he worked at the Naval Shipyard--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Charleston [South Carolina].  So he worked for the federal government.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I liked math and English, equally.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have--was there a special--any special teachers in elementary school?
Speaker 2: All my teachers were really good.  I guess Miss Bucemi, was my fourth--who was my fourth grade teacher, and I still am in contact with her through my mother [Eugenia Powell Deas].  She was one that stuck out in my mind.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were just--that's just before you left Lincoln, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Right after.  Because I went to first, second and third grade at Lincoln, and then when I--when the government forced us to integrate, I went to fourth grade at McClellanville School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's where Miss Bucemi was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how do you spell--
Speaker 2: B-U-C-E-M-I.
Speaker 1: Her last name is--
Speaker 2: B-U-C-E-M-I.
Speaker 1: B-U-C-E--
Speaker 2: M-I--
Speaker 1: M-I.  Oh!  Bucemi.
Speaker 2: Bucemi.  And actually, she's since married again, and her name is Leland.  It's Leland.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, what did you--were you influenced by TV or the movies or--
Speaker 2: No.  I didn't go to movies as a child, maybe once or twice.  It just not--it wasn't something that we did.  I watched some TV, but I pretty much stopped watching TV in eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Why?  What happened?
Speaker 2: I just thought it was a waste of time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.   This is unusual.  I've heard of parents stopping children from watching TV, and that sort of thing, but, you know, children stopping themselves because it's a waste of time.  Now what did you spend your time doing?
Speaker 2: Studying.  I spent my time reading, doing math problems, things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did that make you unusual amongst your peers?
Speaker 2: Some.  My--I hung out with the male students in my class more so than the girls, because they weren't serious enough for me, they were more interested in boys, and I was more interested in studying.  So I was not unusual in the group that I was in, the group of male students that I was with.
Speaker 1: All right, now, this is a surprise to me that boys are more serious than girls, having been a boy, so.  But--
Speaker 2: I hung out with the serious boys.
Speaker 1: All right, so the boys you hung out with were serious fellows, and they into science and math?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And they are all, or almost all of them are doing something--one friend I just spoke to yesterday, he's a electrical engineer now.  And he's going to be retiring in about five years, so, they all stuck with it.
Speaker 1: Now did you--now having been born in '65 [1965], now you were four years old when the moon landing was made. Did you pay any attention to the space program growing up?
Speaker 2: I didn't know--I did not remember the moon landing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there any role model that you had for science, I mean did you know any scientist growing up, or did you know about any in the country, that you modeled after?
Speaker 2: No.  I really didn't have a recollection of what happened in the late '60s [1960s] regarding what was going on in science or technology.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your knowledge of, and your enthusiasm around science came directly from school, then, did it?
Speaker 2: Correct.  Directly from school, and teachers who motivated me to study math, in particular.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you have an idea of what you wanted to do with math once you--
Speaker 2: No.  I did not know, because I didn't--I was not exposed to a lot.  The environment that I grew up in was very sheltered in a way, and I did not see on TV or otherwise any images that would tell me that a little black girl from McClellanville could do anything related to science or math.  And that just wasn't available, this was years before the 'Cosby Show' and things like that.  So, all the motivation came from within, because I didn't have any outward images to focus on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Usually people see something that provides some kind of a goal for whatever, you know, whatever career path they go on there-I" want to be like this one" or "I want to do that."
Speaker 2: Well, that came later.  Not as a child, because as a child, I just--I didn't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, were you were one of the top students in class when you were--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In K-12?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, really K-8.  Now, I never got to high school yet.
Speaker 2: K-8, yes.  I was a good student.
Story_ID: 23377
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  Now, when the schools desegregated, was there a marked difference between Lincoln School and McClellanville [School]?
Speaker 2: No.  I did not notice that much of a difference between the two because they--no one was that rich (laughing).  Even the whites who were not--the poor whites they weren't that rich.  So it was pretty much the same, I thought.  And then that was at a time where segregation didn't necessarily mean things could have been worse.  Many times it did mean that.  But many blacks were, in the 1960s, were very self-sufficient, and if it was segregated, they made it--made it as good as they could be for what they had.  Actually, I have some colleagues here now who--who hated the fact that we integrated, because they said that when things were segregated, it was better for us, because we had our own hospitals, we had everything.  I don't agree with that one.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I've heard that sentiment too expressed, you know.  Now, in terms of the facility, did Lincoln School have the same resources that the McClellanville School had?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Neither was good.  They were--both were mediocre.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's often the state won't pour the same amount of money into a black school, even though it's a state-supported school, as they will with the white. You're saying in this case, they didn't have a lot--any money to pour in either one of them?
Speaker 2: Either one, that's right.
Speaker 1: So, they're both kind of mediocre facilities?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, what happened to--do you remember what happened to the black teachers in the-Lincoln [School]--did they go over--did they integrate too?
Speaker 2: Well, Lincoln didn't--they switched it where Lincoln was no longer first grade through twelfth.  Lincoln was then eighth grade through twelfth, no, sixth grade through twelfth.  So the school--McClellanville School, which was a white school, that became kindergarten through fifth grade, and then Lincoln became sixth through twelfth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you started at Lincoln, and went to McClellanville then went back to Lincoln.
Speaker 2: Went back to Lincoln.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I got it.  And did the black teachers stay employed?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes, to the best of my knowledge, the black teachers stayed employed, because some of them--a new school was formed.  There was somewhat of a riot when the government forced desegregation in 1974, and people were protesting (unclear) were going to this school, and there was something else for the first day of school to have parents there saying all sorts of awful things about us.  But, what they did was the one--the whites started a private school called Archibald Rutledge.  So, for Archibald Rutledge was from kindergarten through twelfth grade, and because there's this new school, there was an opportunity for people to work--the whites to work so that would create--I assume that created more opportunities for blacks, as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So a lot of white teachers went to Archibald Rutledge then?
Speaker 2: I think that's where they went, because I didn't keep up with the white teachers.  But that's just the logical thing to me.  Because there was this whole new school that started at the drop of a hat.
Speaker 1: Do you have any idea who Archibald Rutledge was?
Speaker 2: Well, the interesting twist of it, is Archibald Rutledge was my great-great-grandfather.  So my grandmother--Archibald Rutledge was a son of the constitution.  My grandmother's grandfather--was Archibald Rutledge or one of his brothers, and my grandmother grew up on the Rutledge plantation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is still a historic site in South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sorry, I'm writing.  I wanted to write this down.  Well, that's something.  That's very interesting.  So.  All right, so the new white school that was created, Archibald Rutledge School, a private school?
Speaker 2: A private school.
Speaker 1: Supported by the well-to-do whites, I guess.  Now the white students that remained in your school, I guess, were the ones that could not afford to pay to go to Rutledge?
Speaker 2: Either they couldn't afford or really didn't care.  Because not all--not all whites in South Carolina, even at that time were racist.  Some whites (unclear) it's ridiculous.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I'm sure that's always been true, probably.  But the majority--
Speaker 2: Majority--
Speaker 1: Support this--
Speaker 2: --is correct. And also, Archibald Rutledge Academy was worse than the public schools.
Speaker 1: So it's called "Academy"?
Speaker 2: Yes. Archibald Rutledge Academy.  And it's still there, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you say it was worse, what's the--
Speaker 2: They didn't have books that we had.  We had money from the state and some from the federal government, I assume.  But everything was private, and the school was created on the drop of a hat because of the forced desegregation and they didn't have the facilities.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  So they'd rather hurt themselves then go into a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 23378
Speaker 1: Okay, so you started high school then in--what year was--nineteen seventy--
Speaker 2: 1979.
Speaker 1: 1979.  Okay.  So you go back to Lincoln [School] for high school?
Speaker 2: I went back to Lincoln for sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I was at the white school, or McClellanville School for fourth grade and fifth grade, and Lincoln, for sixth grade through twelfth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So you're a good student.  Did you get a chance to do any special activities as a top student?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  My teachers worked very hard to get as many advantages for us as possible.  So if there were, for example, some type of program from the federal government for minority students, or for students in general, they would have us enter into different contests and things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you get involved in science fairs, or--
Speaker 2: Science fairs, yes.  I did that every year.  There was an engineering type fair where we had to build a bridge from toothpicks and that was from my science teachers.  My English teacher, Mr. Bell, would take us to different events, for example, he would take us to Columbia [South Carolina], at the capital to see Maya Angelou [author and poet], just anything to get us some exposure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 23379
Speaker 1: Now, what did you think of Maya Angelou?
Speaker 2: I loved her.  She's one of my favorite authors.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Had you read her work, you know, prior to--
Speaker 2: Yes.  I read all of her books.  My English teacher assigned the book.  So I read all three of her books that were written at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you spend a lot of time at the library?
Speaker 2: Well, that's [unclear] an interesting story.  The library was--you mean the school library?
Speaker 1: Well, I don't know if you go--yeah, you should be able to go to a public library by then, you know, I'm thinking.  I don't know what they did.
Speaker 2: Should, should.  Should be able to go.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So the public library--yeah, I did spend some time at the school library.  The public library was in the white part of town--we went there sometimes during the summer, but going to the library just at anytime in the white part of town, it's just--we were not welcomed there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, they just kind of made sure you knew that you weren't welcomed?  They didn't tell you couldn't--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was against the law at this time, but you know when you're not welcomed.
Speaker 1: This is a hazy part of, I guess, the Southern history, this period between segregation and desegregation.  How did you know when you weren't welcomed?  Did you kind of--
Speaker 2: There were looks; you can feel it.  Look around, making sure that we weren't stealing things, and things like that.
Speaker 1: Would they follow you through the library?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Things like that, yes.
Speaker 1: Would the same thing happen when you shopped downtown or in whatever part?
Speaker 2: In Charleston [South Carolina]?  Not downtown in my part of--well, actually, yes.  Things were so different then.  Even when we went downtown in my little neighborhood part of town, there were differences in the way people were treated.  For example, if a white person went to the store, the general store, the grocery store, they can choose whatever--the particular type of meat that they wanted.  But if a black person went there, the person who owned the store would give them what he wanted them to have.  They didn't have a choice.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So if you said, I don't want that cut, I want this, they wouldn't--
Speaker 2: No.  You have to get what--take what you get.  Now my aunt and my mom [Eugenia Powell Deas], they would argue.  Actually, they didn't shop there as much as other people.  Some people did not have means, they didn't have cars, some of the black people, so, they had to put up with it.  And I guess they didn't know any better.  They felt that they had to put up with it.
Story_ID: 23380
Speaker 1: Okay. Now was church a big factor in growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I've always been in the church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was the name of your family church in McClellanville [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't go to--my mother [Eugenia Powell Deas] said that we could go to any church we wanted to go to.  So when I was younger, in elementary school, I went to a Pentecostal church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then that church closed down.  And I started going--I went to Pentecostal church with my sister.  And when that church closed down, I started going to the Baptist church in the community.  I did not care for my mother's church.  It was an AME [African Methodist Episcopal] church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your mother was AME?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: What was wrong with an AME church?
Speaker 2: Actually, my mother was Presbyterian, but there was not--there was a black Presbyterian church in town, but there was a--I mean there was a white Presbyterian church, but there was not a black Presbyterian church in town, so she had to go to the AME church.
Speaker 1: Now, what did you dislike about it?
Speaker 2: Well, the people didn't--it seemed to be more of a social organization than anything else.  The Baptist were, to me, more serious about--about their faith.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting.  Okay.  So your mother was a member of the AME.  Now, was your grandmother a member of the same AME church?
Speaker 2: My grandmother--my maternal grandmother?
Speaker 1: Or your great-grandmother, I guess.  Was she around when you were growing up? No.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: She died before I was born; my great-grandmother.  But I believe she was in the AME church, my great-grandmother.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And what about your father [Henry Deas], when he was living?
Speaker 1: My father was not a church-goer.  Was only my mother.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Just your mother?  Okay, so, what was the name of your Baptist church?
Speaker 1: Saint John.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did you get involved in activities in the church and have responsibilities, youth activity?
Speaker 1: Yes.  I was a Sunday school teacher at Saint John Baptist.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did you do anything musically, or sing in the choir or play the piano or anything?
Speaker 1: No.  I didn't.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I didn't do any of that.
Speaker 2: Taught Sunday school and--
Speaker 1: Just mainly, I taught Sunday school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 23381
Speaker 1: All right. Now, in high school, back in Lincoln [School] for high school [McClellanville, South Carolina], did you run for any class offices or anything, or were you part of--
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was very active.  I did a lot of extra-curricular activity, activities.  I--let's see, I ran for student body president, or something like that once.  And I had a--student council is what it was called.  So I was president of the student council when I was in eleventh or twelfth grade.  I did a couple of sports as well.  I ran track for four years, and I played volley ball for about three, two or three years.
Speaker 1: Now, what event did you run in track?
Speaker 2: I ran the four hundred meter.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that's a tough race.
Speaker 2: It's a tough race. That's for people with a lot of heart, four hundred meters.  That's--if you can run the four hundred meters, if you can actually do it, that's one qualification.  So, you know, were you pretty good?
Speaker 1: Not at the time.  I was okay at the time.  I became better at the four hundred meter when I was older, in my twenties, early--late teens, early twenties.
Speaker 2: So did you continue to run in college?
Speaker 1: Not track.  I was--I was in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  And the field training and so forth, I was really good; I faster than--I was faster than the men.  I was really fast for that time.
Speaker 2: All right.  Anything else in high school?  Did you--you said you liked to write.  Did you write for the school paper?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.  I was in the journalism club.  I was also on the school newspaper board, so we'd have to--to compose a paper, the school newspaper every so often.  I was on the debate team.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In high school.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: I did a lot in high school.
Speaker 2: All right.  Now, you're a quiet person on the debate team?
Speaker 1: I can argue, though.  I can speak when I need to.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right, now, do you admire a logical argument?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  And so--
Speaker 1: That's where the math training comes in handy.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  Do you remember any of the subjects that you debated?
Speaker 1: One of the things that I debated, I remembered was about--and this was a time where putting the names on jeans was very popular.  So it was one of the things I debated is, "Does it benefit the company more than you to have the name on your pocket?"  And the other thing that I remember debating was have--whether or not girls should be able to take birth control pills without their parents' knowledge, and I debated for that at the time.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now was that a mass position--would that have been considered a popular position in those days?
Speaker 1: For a girl to be--well, it was definitely different than it is now.  I don't believe it was at that time.
Speaker 2: So you would had like a counter cultural--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --opinion?
Speaker 1: Yeah. My parents were very liberal.  So, I can just lean more in the liberal direction. I am conservative in some areas.
Speaker 2: Did your parents belong to any organizations that were considered liberal?
Speaker 1: Not to my knowledge?
Speaker 2: Okay.  House on non-American Activities.  I just thought about that, House for non-American Activities Committee, something, whether your parents had been involved in any organizations, you know?
Speaker 1: No.  No Black Panthers [Party; African American revolutionary organization, 1966-1982] or anything like that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 23382
Speaker 1: So, now, this is--you're in high school from '79 [1979] to '84 [1984], I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Eighty--I graduated in '82 [1982] or '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: '82 [1982] or '83 [1983]?  Okay, you were in high school.  Okay.  So they count ninth grade as middle school, right, so?
Speaker 2: No.  Middle school--high school was ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Did you do four years of high school?
Speaker 2: Four years, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, '79 (1979) and four--
Speaker 2: That's '83 (1983).
Speaker 1: '83 [1983], I guess, yeah.  Okay.  So, did you have good counseling in high school in terms of where you were going to go to--
Speaker 2: Yes.  My guidance counselor was excellent.  Mr. Thickland.  He's since died.  What he would do is, he would let us know, especially if we were about to go to college, let us know about various scholarship opportunities.  And one of the scholarships that I applied for, I actually got, was a four-year scholarship.  A very prestigious scholarship.  And he was extremely helpful, and unlike the guidance counselor that my sisters had, he always encouraged us to do as much as possible.  My sisters' guidance counselor was much older, and she would say, "Okay, remember where you're from, you shouldn't even try for this" type attitude, so I did not--so I was very fortunate that I didn't have her.  And the other thing that my guidance counselor, Mr. Thickland, did was he did not want the good students going to the military, because the military recruiters would come to my high school all of the time to try to recruit the best students to go to the military.  And he did not want us to do that.
Story_ID: 23383
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now.  High school graduation.  Now, were you valedictorian?
Speaker 2: Salutatorian.
Speaker 1: Salutatorian, okay.
Speaker 2: By fractions of points.
Speaker 1: All right.  I'm sure.  Now, you sound like you're a pretty good student.  Were you in the National Honor Society, or did they have that there?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Any other honors?
Speaker 2: There were other honors.  Who's, who among American students, things like that.
Speaker 1: Now, did your peers and the adults in your community, did they really recognize your, you know, status as a top student?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, it was a small community too.  I think I may have been voted most likely to succeed in my high school, somewhere along those lines.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you have a career goal in mind when you were on the verge of graduation?
Speaker 2: No.  I just knew that I wanted to go to college.  My first major was computer science.  And I think the reason why I did not have a career goal in mind is because of a lack of exposure.  I just didn't know.  And role models were not that prevalent, even in the early 1980s.
Story_ID: 23384
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, you went to the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina].  How did you end up choosing the University of South Carolina?
Speaker 2: I wanted to stay in state, and the University of South Carolina was one of the best schools in state, at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, the University of South Carolina is in--
Speaker 2: Columbia.
Speaker 1: Columbia.  Okay.  All right.  So, did you get a scholarship to attend?
Speaker 2: I didn't get a school scholarship.  The scholarship I received was through one of the organizations that my guidance counselor [Mr. Thickland] recommended.  It's James F. Burns.  And James F. Burns was a governor of South Carolina.  He created the scholarship foundation for orphans and half orphans.  So since my father was dead, I qualified for being a half orphan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the--It was a very competitive scholarship, not only did that have to be satisfied, but you also had to be a top student and had to have high SAT scores and things like that, and interview, and very, very long process.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So started at the University of South Carolina in 19--what was that 19--
Speaker 2: '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: '83 [1983].  Okay, 1983.  So, what was the University of South Carolina like, for you, I mean, what was your impression of the University of South Carolina?
Speaker 2: I liked part--some of it I liked.  I did not like the discrimination.  I got a break from the discrimination--the TAs [teaching assistants].  That's where I felt a lot of the discrimination from.  And also from the professors as well.  But my foreign professors--so initially, I majored in computer science.  I didn't particularly care for that.  Then I changed it to math.  My foreign professors, they were mainly from Asia, and my foreign TAs were from Asia.  They treated me like everyone else.  So that was really nice.  But there were a lot of white professors who did not treat me well.  They would--they would have lower expectations of me; there was a difference.  I can remember one time when I was in the computer room, and I had a question about something, and there were a whole group of students, and this was a TA.  We had a white TA.  And most of the students at the University of South Carolina were graduate students.  They were from South Carolina or from the South.  And so I was standing there in front waiting to ask my question, and he would ask every white student if he could help them.  And then finally this other TA, I think she was from the North, she sounded like she was from the North, she came up and said, "Okay, this girl's been standing here, you're just asking everyone except her. Let me ask to see if she has a question."  And she took me to the back to see what my question was.  So there was a lot of discrimination at the University of South Carolina.
Speaker 1: I can imagine.  I mean one of the bastions of segregation in the country and all that, and I guess it would be at the time you were in school.  I'm not surprised.  Did the black students have any sort of an organization on campus?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Black students had a organization, but I did not become involved with that.  I thought I didn't have time to do that.  I was involved with the Christian organization; Student Christian Fellowship, and I focused on my studies.  Because, even though I went to Lincoln, and making what's better than Archibald Rutledge, it was not a good high school.  Lincoln--actually Lincoln, when I graduated, was on probation, academic probation, and that's because Lincoln did not offer the courses that it needed to offer in order to prepare students.  So my first year at the University was very difficult because of my lack of preparation.  I did well with what I had, but I didn't have a lot coming into college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Let's see.  So you were in the Student Christian Fellowship.  What else did you say, you said--
Speaker 2: That's mainly all that I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you were really just focused on trying to finish and get out of school?
Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't focused on that.  I noticed that there is a focus on that with students these days, but my focus was on learning.  And at that particular time, when I was in college, that was the mentality of many of the students; learn as much as you can learn.  So that was my focus.
Speaker 1: Now, did you join a sorority or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No.  That would have been a total waste of time.
Speaker 1: I'm just asking.  Just asking.  Okay. Is there anything significant that happened when you were there outside of just go to school?
Speaker 2: Well, I joined ROTC [Reserved Officers' Training Corps] when I was a junior, and I went to field training as--between my sophomore and junior year in Kansas.  I joined Air Force ROTC.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what happened?  How did you come to join Air Force ROTC?  How was that--was it introduced to you?
Speaker 2: Well, my entire family, all the men were in the military, and one sister was in the military as well.  So the military was a part of my family.  So it's something I had considered to do after the first four years of college.  Kind of see the world and also think about what I wanted to do next.
Story_ID: 23385
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, in terms of your studies, who were the significant, I guess, figures, in terms of your development as a mathematician?
Speaker 2: As an undergraduate?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  At the University of South Carolina.  Was there anybody, you can say, that took any special, you know time with you or, you know, that you really felt as a mentor?
Speaker 2: No.  I did not have a mentor.  All of my motivation for my first four years came from within.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there was nobody.  I mean, when you said the foreign professors were at least were more fairer?
Speaker 2: Yes.  There was one professor, I think his name was Dr. Yang, he's no longer with us.  He would encourage me to--because I remember when I told one of my professors that I had planned on going to graduate school after graduating from the University of South Carolina, he tried to discourage that.  So I went to Dr. Yang, and he said, "Oh, no. You can at least try," because I went to one of my--a white professor, and he said, "Oh, no.  Don't go to grad school, get a job."  So, I did not receive encouragement in my first four years.
Speaker 1: Well, it sounds like you didn't necessarily expect it either, growing up in South Carolina.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I did expect it.
Speaker 1: Did you?  Okay.
Speaker 2: They called me an eternal optimist.  But, especially from my professors.  And because my teachers in high school and K-12, they were so encouraging.  But then I went to the University of South Carolina, it was just the opposite.  I saw other students, particularly white students, being encouraged, but black students were definitely treated differently.
Speaker 1: Were there very many other students in the math and sciences at the University?
Speaker 2: A few.  The University of South Carolina is for--the fact it's a predominantly white university has, and has had for quite some time, one of the largest black populations.  So I was not the only black student in the math department.  There were several; it wasn't half, maybe ten percent or something like that, so.
Speaker 1: I know it was true then, I don't know if it's true now, but I know there actually more black people in South Carolina than white people, I mean by count.  You know, that's one of the two states in the union, Mississippi and South Carolina, were the only two states in the union that had actually more black people in the state.  I think that was true in the '70s [1970s], I don't know if it's still true today.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Mississippi, I know still has more black people than white people.  But they're not represented in college though, necessarily.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's true.
Speaker 1: So back--what did Dr. Yang teach?
Speaker 2: He was also one of my math teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He taught real analysis.  He was an excellent teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there a--what was the toughest course, you know, for you?
Speaker 2: My toughest math course?  Real analysis.  That's the toughest math course for every mathematician.  The reason why it is, is because it's 100 percent doing proofs, theory and proofs.  Everything is about doing proofs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, do you think you were well prepared, you know, coming out of Lincoln?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  I was not prepared at all.  It was a fight, and that's why I concentrated most of my time on studying; I didn't do any extracurricular activities in college, because I was not prepared; knew I was not prepared based on the courses that I had had.  I--I did-- the highest math course that I had coming out of high school was algebra II.  That's because that was all that was offered.  I did very well in my courses, it's just that I didn't have enough of them to prepare me for college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you came at a, you know--other people--those who had a better, I guess, high school education, came better prepared than you.  But, did you find that--was your preparation level like so much different from the other students that were there?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I noticed that.  Actually, in the end, it turned out to be a good thing for me, because I had to start school; I had to start university with college algebra.  And the reason why it turned out to be a good thing for me was that all of my math courses were taught by math professors, so my background, and my way of looking at things is very different.  I noticed that it was very different from that of my peers because of all the rigor that I had, that they did not have from the high school courses.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the same ground covered in high school was a lot softer than--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --it was in college.
Speaker 2: College algebra is not high school algebra.  I had college algebra.  And I went from there, I worked all the way up to my real analysis courses.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, when you were on a verge of graduation, you were encouraged by Dr. Yang to pursue graduate school.  Now were you an honor student in college?
Speaker 2: I made the honors' role sometimes, but the first four years, I was--I think I graduated at three point something or another, but I needed to have a three point five in order to be a honor student.  I don't think--I don't believe I was a honor student except in '87 [1987].  And the reason why Dr. Yang--I talked to Dr. Yang about going to graduate school is because I--even though I was in the ROTC [Reserved Officers' Training Corps], I had some medical problems.  I was not able to go active duty after I passed my--I failed my last physical, so that--that was out of the question.  And Dr. Yang encouraged me to apply to graduate schools.
Story_ID: 23386
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, did you stay on campus at the University of South Carolina--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the entire time?
Speaker 2: All four years.
Speaker 1: Sorry I didn't ask you that.
Speaker 2: I stayed on campus all four years--
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: --which was a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in what sense?
Speaker 2: I wasn't part--just that I liked the facility, because I grew up in a very poor environment.  So they--okay--they grew up without running water pretty much when I was a kid.  So I get running water and AC and things like that.  It was great!  So I grew up like--pretty much like in a third-world nation, and then to become from that to go to a place where indoor plumbing, it was great.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I didn't realize, you didn't have indoor plumbing in McClellanville [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Not until I was ten or so, yeah.
Story_ID: 23387
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, all right, now.  So you applied--where did you apply for graduate school?
Speaker 2: I applied at San Diego State University in California.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was in '87 [1987].
Speaker 1: I've got a note here that you were in the Mu Sigma Rho National Statistics Honor Society in undergraduate school?
Speaker 2: That was my second undergraduate degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you got two undergraduate degrees.  I didn't realize that.  Okay.  And that was at--still at the University of South Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yes.  So I graduated in '87 [1987].  Went to San Diego [California].  I lived there.  I went to San Diego State [University], but I didn't finish.  And I lived in San Diego from '87 [1987] to--to '93 [1993], and then I went back to South Carolina to get my second undergraduate degree; that was '94 (1994).  I started in January of '94 [1994], and I graduated in December of '95 [1995] with my statistics degree, B.S. [Bachelor of Science].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then in between the time of graduating the University of South Carolina and going back the University of South Carolina and living in California, I worked as well, as a math instructor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you worked as an instructor in the public schools?
Speaker 2: The Southwestern College [San Diego, California].  Because of the graduate courses that I'd had, I was able to get a position as a mathematics instructor at Southwestern College.
Speaker 1: Near San Diego?
Speaker 2: In San Diego.
Speaker 1: In San Diego.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay, so you came back in--earned another--a B.S. in statistics.  Okay.  So, did you ever serve in the [United States] Air Force, at all.
Speaker 2: No.  I never served.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So it says here in '95 [1995], you were hired as a lab assistant for Introductory Statistics in Midlands Technical College [Columbia, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: That's after your graduation in statistics?
Speaker 2: '95 [1995]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No.  That was when I working on my degree in statistics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Because I had already had a--another bachelors degree, and that was the requirement to have at least a bachelors in math.
Speaker 1: Now, why did you pursue a second bachelor's degree?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was in San Diego, I decided to get my Ph.D.  And I thought about the best route in order to accomplish that.  I came up with a ten-year plan.  And in that plan, I said that, okay, in order to get my Ph.D. in statistics, I don't want to make the mistake that I had, or I didn't want to encounter the situation that I had as an undergrad in math.  I want my background to be as good as possible.  So I said, in order to do that, I'm going to start--even though I had had stat [statistics] classes as a math major, I wanted a stat degree because that would help me get a Ph.D. in statistics.  I wanted a very good background in statistics before I started a Ph.D.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: And that's why I decided on the second bachelor's, instead of the master's.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So when did you start working on--when did you go back to graduate school, I guess, to work on your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: I started that as soon as I finished my second bachelor's, so that was 1996.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where did you go?
Speaker 2: Rice University in Houston [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 23388
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so what was the experience like at Rice [University]?
Speaker 2: Rice was wonderful.  It was a very supportive environment.  Rice has always been very progressive, even when--even when women--years ago when women were not accepted in science and math institutes, Rice was one of the first universities to do that.  So it was a very open-minded liberal place.  Professors were supportive, I was in a great support group, it was a wonderful experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now, who was your advisor?
Speaker 2: David Scott.
Speaker 1: And is there anyone at Rice that you would consider like a mentor or someone that--
Speaker 2: My mentor--well, all of my professors were really mentors at Rice; Dave W. Scott, Dr. Scott, Dr. Catherine Ensor, Dr. Cox; they were all mentors, very supportive people, and they treated me like everyone else.  My--one of my--also one of my other mentors was Dr. Richard Tapia.  He, he headed the organization called 'AGEP' Advisors for Graduate Education and the Professoriate.  So I was supported through AGEP, which was a national foundation grant my entire time at Rice University.  And Dr. Richard Tapia was a computational and applied math [CAM] professor.  Many of my friends were in the, what we called the CAM Department.   Most of my friends were in the CAM Department.
Speaker 1: I've heard Dr. Richard Tapia's name before in these interviews.  I can't remember where now, but I've heard it before.
Speaker 2: He received a--several awards, not only for his profession, but also for outreach and adversity.  One of those rewards was from President Clinton for, for graduating the most African Americans in math and science in a particular year.  So Rice graduated four one year, and Rice is a small school of four in Ph.D.s, that is.  That's one of the awards that he got--rewards that he got.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when did you earn your Ph.D. from Rice?
Speaker 2: 2002.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  So you were like a TA [teaching assistant] there at Rice, I mean--
Speaker 2: I worked in the lab, a grader.  For the most part, Rice did not allow the students to be TAs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Parents did not like that.  But we could be graders and work in a lab, things like that, the computer lab.
Story_ID: 23389
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, it says here in 2001, you presented a paper entitled 'Probability Concepts in Secondary School' at the Annual Conference of the National Science Foundation, right?
Speaker 2: 2001?  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  (simultaneously)(unclear) Then you were at a conference for African American Researchers and Researchers in Mathematical Science at Duke in 2001, when you presented a paper entitled 'Robust Empirical Likelihood'.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, what is robust empirical likelihood?
Speaker 2: Empirical likelihood is based on my [Ph.D.] dissertation.  My area of expertise is empirical likelihood.  And that's in an area of statistics that's called non-parametric statistics.  And what non-parametric statistics is it's a field of statistics where distributional assumptions are relaxed.  For example, a lot of people have heard of the normal distribution, the T distribution, chi-squared distribution, and what my field of research does is it assumes that we do not know the underlying distribution of the data.  So, we're, we're working to, to come up with conclusions to make hypotheses and that based on not knowing what the underlying distribution is but just working with the data.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So, robust empirical likelihood [REL] is--the likelihood function, first it's a likelihood function. Likelihood function is a function of the data, and given a particular data set, say, okay, what is the most likely parameter to have to produce that data set.  For example, the mean is a parameter, the average is a parameter.  So if you have to say what is the most likely average to have produced that, that's the likelihood function.  Empirical likelihood is not a parametric likelihood, it's a non-parametric likelihood, so it's only based on the data, it's not based on, okay, I know this distribution is normal, therefore I can do the likelihood function, so it's just based on that data.  And the robust empirical likelihood is, okay, what do when we have data that, that may be unlike most of the data; to robustify is the concept.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I'm not going to pretend I understood all that, but I did take statistics in school, but I wasn't very good at it.  I got an A.  I actually got an A in statistics in undergraduate school, but I still don't think I really, you know, I don't consider myself much of a--a lot of people--I wasn't a mathematician now, but I could understand most of the concepts, you know.
Speaker 2: The likelihood function is not something that's covered--as people use it, is it's not covered that commonly and--in the introductory statistic courses.  It's one of the most like--widely used statistical methods of likelihood methods.  But it's not taught in--except to the statisticians, typically.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you give us, maybe, a narrative about how it would be--that concept could like--likelihood would be used.  For instance, I'm thinking that--well I'm not--well, it would be an assumption to think that this method of analysis would only be used in a social science or could be even.  But is it used in more scientific research or social science?
Speaker 2: It can be used in social sciences, it can be used in scientific research.  It's a--the likelihood functions, what is called a data reduction. So you have the data, and you want one number that you can use, for example, to describe the data.  What is the average, what is the mean, and then likelihood function gets to that.  So if you just have one representative of the data, what would that number be?
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: My dissertation is more foundational than applied.  It's more of a mathematical statistics, and that would--it's used in applications, but it's the theory behind the application.
Story_ID: 23390
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay, now, can you tell us like what was the thrust of the African American Researchers in Mathematical Sciences Conference?  I mean, was it just to gather all the African American researchers together of a certain age group, or was it to--so they can know each other, or was there a specific target projects that African American researchers had, or what?
Speaker 2: It's a conference of--it's called 'CARMS', Conference of African American Researchers in Mathematical Sciences.  And it's a group that was started by one of the professors at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey].  He was at Bell Labs.  And the group still meets once a year in June.  We give papers based on our research. It's not only applied math, it's pure math, it's statistics, anything in the mathematical sciences.  SO it's this group of African American researchers that I--I'm still in contact with some of them, because I still go to some of the conferences.  I have not gone recently, but--
Speaker 1: Okay. Was the purpose, though, to let the other black mathematicians know each other or to--
Speaker 2: That's part of the purpose to--
Speaker 1: --work on specific projects so that (simultaneously)
Speaker 2: And research and collaborate, things like that.  The last time I went was about three years ago.  It was here in Houston [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was--Bill Massey [William Massey, also a HistoryMaker] is the person who organized CARMS--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and he was at Bell Labs for a long time.  He's a famous mathematician.
Speaker 1: Bell Labs, right?  Okay.
Story_ID: 23391
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay, now, along with Art Owen in 2001, you edited--now this is an article called 'Empirical Likelihood'?
Speaker 2: A book.
Speaker 1: A book.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  A friend, my friend Beverly, one of my best friends, whom I met at Rice [University, Houston, Texas], went to Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] for a while for graduate school, and Art Owen is at--in Stanford.  So when I went to visit Beverly, I was working on my dissertation, and I told her that I wanted to meet Art Owen, because he is a person who--who initially came out with the phrase 'Empirical Likelihood'.  So, when I met Dr. Owen, I said, "I'm working on my dissertation, but I have not been able to find any books on empirical likelihood," and he says--and I said,  "Have there been any books written?"  And he said, "No, they haven't any, but I'm working on one right now.  Would you like to be one of the editors?"  And that's how I got involved with that.  So I was working on my dissertation and had obtained his book at the same time on empirical likelihood.
Story_ID: 23392
Speaker 1: All right.  So your dissertation was also about empirical likelihood, right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And was it any different from the paper you presented before, or was it, you know--
Speaker 2: From which paper?
Speaker 1: I don't know, well, I guess it's a continuation of the research you were doing on empirical likelihood.  You remember the title of your dissertation?
Speaker 2: 'Robust Empirical Likelihood'.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Exactly the same title.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when you say that you were, like, focused on statistics, basically, in terms of--
Speaker 2: Focus on statistics--
Speaker 1: --your career, I mean, you know, as a mathematician, your specialty would be statistics, or statistical analysis?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: When I actually--I thought about teaching or being involved in statistics while I was teaching math, I was doing one of the problems that was applied, and I said, I can sure remember the day that I was teaching at Southwestern College [San Diego, California], and I thought, maybe I should have majored in statistics because of the applications and the marketability of the field of statistics as opposed to pure math.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, that's one of the factors in contrib[uting]--that made you pursue it?  Okay.  So, you graduated with a Ph.D. in 2002, and so in 2002, also, you were appointed to a tenure track professorship in the Department of Mathematics at the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Department of Statistics.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.  The Department of Statistics.  Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: The Department of Statistics at the University of South Carolina.  So I applied to several different places.  One of the reasons why I wanted to go to South Carolina to be a professor was because I--by this time I had a son--my husband and I had a son in 1997, and my son has spent all of his time here in Houston.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, can you tell us how you met your husband?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I met him when we were both students at San Diego--well, he was about to go to San Diego State [University, California], and I was a student at San Diego State.  That was in 1989, I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In 1989, okay.  So when did you get married?
Speaker 2: We got married in San Diego.
Speaker 1: When?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: In '91 [1991].  1991.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you wanted to come back to South Carolina because of your son?
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted my son to have an opportunity to know my mother [Eugenia Powell Deas] and my side of the family, because he had not had that opportunity.  And, the reason why I, particularly, wanted him to know my mother is because my mother is forty years older than I am.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So.  You figured that if he didn't meet her when he was young, he might not--
Speaker 2: He may not have the opportunity.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: I did accomplish that at the University of South Carolina.
Story_ID: 23393
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, was it--your experiences at the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina] weren't that great from what you were telling me, you know, when you were in school.  Did things change when you came back as a professor?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I came back as a professor about twenty years later.  I think it's exactly twenty years later, and after twenty years--the generation, I had expected things to change.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Things had not changed at all.
Speaker 1: They had not changed at all?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: If anything, things got worse, because, now I was seen as competition because I was a professor.
Speaker 1: Were some of the same professors there?
Speaker 2: Some of the same, uh-huh.  But they were not in my department, because my professors were in the math department.  The ones who were in--because when I went back for my second degree, the statistics degree, they were nice professors, but most of them weren't around anymore.  They had moved--gone to other places.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Things were the same or worse?  Can you give an example of worse?
Speaker 2: Well, it was just--guess to sum total of it was, there was a set of rules for me and a set of rules for everyone else.  For example, when I would grade a test, if the student did not like what their grade was, or how a particular question was answered, they would go the chair of the department, Dr. Edwards, and they would say, "Oh, I think I should have gotten this many points for this question, but Dr. Glenn gave me this many points."  So then Dr. Edwards would call me into his office regarding things like that.  And since I'm a math--I teach statistics, which is math, it's not a subjective course, it's right or it's wrong.  So there was this constant interfering from the chair of the department when stu-always white students.  I was a very fair professor.  But if I didn't do exactly what they said, they would go to the chair, the chair would come there and come in my class, it was just constant harassment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was one part.  The other part was, the secretary didn't want to take--didn't want to do anything that I asked her to do.  So, the secretary was white, as well.  So I just, said okay, forget it, I'll ask ano--I went to the--my secretary was the secretary in the math department, not in the stat [statistics] department, my department, and that was because, I didn't want to headache myself.  I told--the secretary in the math department was black, so she would--whatever request I had, she'd do it for me.  So, the white secretary refused, in so many words.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, secretaries can really be key to success in a lot of situations.  Those who are ensconced in a job can really make life miserable for those who depend on them for information and schedules.
Speaker 2: Things like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So I dealt with her as little as possible.  The black secretary, after I explained the situation to her, she--"Oh, yeah, sure."  I mean, it was no surprise to her.  She said, "Okay, honey, I'll do whatever you ask.  I'll help.  I'll be your secretary."
Speaker 1: Now this is interesting.  Okay.  University of South Carolina.  So, how long did you stay there?
Speaker 2: Well, I stayed there until 19--2007.  And the last straw was when--I'm a fighter, so I stayed there much too long.  The last straw was when--it was a student in my class who failed the class.  He failed it miserably, zero on the final exam, things like that.  He didn't do anything in the class.  And the chair tried to get me to change the grade to a C.  So the student filed a grievance, they said I was racist.  That was totally baseless.  They did not know that my son's half white, so.  I told my friends that they said that I'm racist.  I don't even mention race in class, which is 100 percent baseless.  I said, "Give me some type of evidence to say that I'm--", they--oh, we don't have any evidence.  Okay.  So, I said, "Okay, so you're a racist, so let's change the grade to a C.  This is ridiculous."  So, I said, "No.  I'm not going to do that."  So, I later found out that that student was the son of the friend of the provost of the University of South Carolina.  So, what happened was the provost went in academic--in the registrar's office and changed the grade of the student to a C.  So that was the last straw; I left after that.  And keep in mind none of my white colleagues were treated like this at all, not even close to it.
Speaker 1: Do you suspect that they just would--they knew who to give a better grade to already upfront before--
Speaker 2: No.  I talked to my colleagues who were white.  My colleagues--most of my colleagues were not from the South, they were very open with me about things, and they said that they did--one of my colleagues said, "I can't believe how they're treating you," actually, a couple of my colleagues.  And I asked him, I said, "Okay, what's your experience with it?"  And they did not have those experiences.  It was clearly discrimination.
Speaker 1: Were you tempted to file a lawsuit, or something?
Speaker 2: I thought about it.  But I figured my best action was just to move on with--would be to move on with my life.  And that's why I came here, back to Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, were you still on a tenure track?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was still on tenure track.  Now, one thing I have to say too is that the dean of my college, Dr. Fitzgerald, I think is her name.  She was very supportive of me, and hated the way that my department treated me, and she would--she would call my chair into her office all of the time, because it was blatant to her, as well.  And it just was back and forth, and I--just really wasn't worth my time anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you lasted like five years?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 23394
Speaker 1: But while you were there [as a faculty member in the statistics department at the University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina], you served on the editorial board of the Journal of Computational and--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --and Graphical Statistics?  This is--you had helpers with this.  So this is a, I suppose a well-known journal about statisticians?
Speaker 2: That's right.  It's a statistical journal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the papers that are accepted by the Journal of Computational Graphical Statistics are papers--statistical papers that have--that deal with computational aspect of it, proving things, not only through theoretical proofs but also through simulations.  That's the computational part of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you were also in 2004 on the editorial board of the Biometric Journal?
Speaker 2: That's a biological journal.  It dealt with computational statistics or computational mathematics and also some with biology.  So I had to read a paper regarding the biological aspects of statistics, application, that is.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In 2005, the Annual Conference of the International Chinese Statistical Association, you presented a non-parametric analysis of phylogenetic tree data.
Speaker 2: Yes.  After I graduated from Rice [University, Houston, Texas], I should say, when I was at Rice, my training was very theoretical.  I didn't--I didn't even see data until I graduated.  So one of the things that I did was I went to--when I was at the University of South Carolina, I went to the dean, prior to the dean that was there when I left, and, I said--I told him about the situation in the department, and that dean was very supportive as well.  He said, "Okay, don't even bother working with these people in your department.  I know a professor in biology who is a good professor, he's a established researcher; work with him.  Contact Austin Hughes, a biologist."  And that's how I learned computational biology by working with Dr. Hughes on the recommendation of the dean.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's see.  Okay.  Did you publish anything in marine biology?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I published a paper with Renee Brodie.  It was regarding fiddler crabs.  And Renee used--we worked on a method, non-parametric method that I devised, and actually the following paper, the single authored paper that I did was based on the method that I talked about with Renee.  So we concentrated on the biology in the paper, but on the subsequent paper, I concentrated on the statistical methodology--missing data, because Renee had missing data in her data, and I said, "Okay, the classical methods are not going to work.  I have another method that we can--." There are other methods that could have worked, other classical methods, but I wanted to devise a new methodology.  And that's what I did in the subsequent paper.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you devised a new methodology of measuring the--
Speaker 2: The missing data.  And that methodology incorporated in empirical likelihood.  So I wrote a paper--the incomplete paper--incomplete data paper that I wrote is--it came out of that research that I'd done with Dr. Renee Brodie, who was a biologist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  2005 at the American Institute for Mathematics in Palo Alto, California, you presented a paper entitled 'A New Nonparametric Approach to Testing Internal Branches of Phylogenic Trees'?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: That's like building on the other paper, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's building on the work that I did with Dr. Austin Hughes, the biologist that the dean referred me to.  Actually, Dr. Hughes and I wrote quite a few papers together, because Dr. Hughes is a computational biologist and, instead having a wet lab, his lab was all computers.  And his interest was to use non-parametric methodologies, modern non-parametric methodologies in the analysis of biological data.  And that's not used that often.  That's what our niche was, and that's what we published, most of our papers in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you were on the editorial board in 2006 of the Journal of Probability and Statistical Science.  So how many journals--statistical journals--professional journals are there, then?  Well, not how many, but what are the important ones--the ones that you--there's two different ones that you--that I've see so far, well, three.
Speaker 2: The number or--.
Speaker 1: Well, just some kind of--yeah, general, idea of how many there are, anyway, that are considered--first in African American Studies, there are maybe four or five journals I can name, but, you know, with statistics?
Speaker 2: Okay.  The journals in statistics are grouped into various areas, because you have the pure theoretical journals then you have more of the applied journals and then you have the biological statistical-type journals.  So each category, and there may be other categories as well, because statistics is such a broad field, each category would have their top journals.  So for the pure statistics, that would be 'JASA', Journal of the American Statistical Association, but my research isn't focused on the pure statistics.  My research focuses more on the biological aspects of statistics and more of the applied, devising methodologies for the applied.  So Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics would be one of the top journals in that area.  But all totaled for each area, I would say there would be about at least ten different journals that would be very good journals for each subdivision of statistics.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That gives us an idea of what, you know.  I just want to know the lay of the land of that in terms of publishing.  All right in 2006, it says here that the findings from your collaborative research project with Austin Hughes are published in applied bioinformatics in an article entitled 'Contrasting Patterns of the Transcript Abundance in Tumor Tissue in Cancer Cell Lines'.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Want to explain that one?  Or try to give us an idea?
Speaker 2: That was another one of the papers where Dr. Hughes and I--Dr. Hughes came to me, and said, "Okay, the analysis that I'm doing is usually done with parametric methods, classical parametric methods.  Can you devise or can you recommend it not one of the modern non-parametric methods to analyze the data?"  So that's what we did in that paper as well.  It's actually--applying non-parametric statistics, applying modern non-parametric statistics to biological-type problems is pretty much an open field.  There aren't that many people who've done that, because they're not a lot of statisticians who focus on non-parametric statistics.  There are some, but most people don't focus on non-parametric statistics.
Speaker 1: Okay. There was another one of the papers where we did the analysis using a non-parametric method.
Speaker 2: Okay.  There quite a few.  You published quite a bit between 2002 and 2007.  So did this ingratiate you to the--your department at the University of South Carolina?
Speaker 1: Well.
Speaker 2: Did it ever--did this impress them any?
Speaker 1: Well, what they said was, "Oh, Nancy, you're publishing quite a bit.  We don't know if you can keep this up." (laughing) I said, "Okay, watch me."
Speaker 2: That was the official response?
Speaker 1: That was the response.
Speaker 2: You had (unclear) your publications here, so they said, well, how long can you keep this up, and that's what their--
Speaker 1: That was their response.
Speaker 2: I see.  Okay.
Story_ID: 23395
Speaker 1: Now is there any--of all these publications, which ones do you think are the most significant?  I can just keep reading these over and over, but what were the most significant publications to you?
Speaker 2: For the paper that was mostly significant in the applied statistics is the methodology type was the paper that I did with Yichuan Zhao.  'Weighted Empirical Likelihood Estimates and Their Robustness Properties'.  That was published in the Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics.
Speaker 1: That's 2007.
Speaker 2: 2007.  Now with the papers that were in the--with more of the biological side of things, the most significant paper was the paper that I did with Dr. Austin Hughes with the evolutionary--I don't remember the title of it, but it talked about the current state of analysis in evolutionary genomics.
Speaker 1: Oh, here it is.  'The Future of Data Analysis in Evolutionary Genomics'.
Speaker 2: Yes.  'The Future of Data Analysis'.  That was an important paper, because the reason why it was so important is that it focused on using the nonparametric methodologies in the biological setting; something that's relatively--was relatively new at the time.  And it's not focused on a lot.  And the reason why that is important is because when one uses parametric methods and make assumptions that are not satisfied, that could lead to erroneous conclusions.  Now, the advantage--there is an advantage of using a parametric method, otherwise people would use nonparametric all the time.  The advantage of the parametric method is that those methods are more powerful.  So it really is a tradeoff between power and relaxing assumptions, and not being able to relax assumptions.  In a way you can look--you can look at it like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And who is Yichuan Zhao?
Speaker 2: Yichuan?
Speaker 1: Yichuan.
Speaker 2: Yichuan.  He is a professor at Georgia State University [Atlanta, Georgia], and he's a contemporary of mine.  He may be a few years ahead of me as far as graduation date is concerned, and we met--we met at a joint statistical meeting.  The joint statistical meetings are the largest meetings for statisticians, one of the largest meetings for statisticians who meet once a year.
Story_ID: 23396
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in 2007--so you left the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina] in 2007.  Tell us about that.  How did you plan your exit?
Speaker 2: Oh.  My exit plan was to leave and be out of South Carolina before sun up. (laughing)  So I wrote a letter.  I remember the dean knew what was going on and also and all this other stuff, and she was always supportive.  So I wrote a letter to my chair saying that I officially resigned, and I wrote a letter to the dean, and she was not surprised, I assume.  And I did not speak to my chair.  The black secretary--the secretary--the black secretary that was my secretary, I said, "I'm leaving.  You're the only person that I'm telling.  On this date, give this letter to the chair of my department."  And that's what she did.
Speaker 1: So you typed it all up ahead of time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you knew you were, okay?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Cleaned my office.  So I left there during the summer.  At least I did them that.  I didn't leave during the semester, I was nice enough to leave during the summer.  They had time to get someone else if they wanted to.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So.
Speaker 2: I didn't look back.
Story_ID: 23397
Speaker 1: Now, was your mother [Eugenia Powell Deas] still alive?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She's still alive and well.
Speaker 1: Okay. That's good.  So your son did have a chance to interact with your mother?
Speaker 2: Oh. Yes.  See.  And that's why I was there for that five-year period.  My son knows my mother very well.  My mother, my brothers, my sisters-in-law, he knows them, because he would go back and forth.  They lived about two and a half hours away from where I lived at the University [of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina].  And my son has very fond memories.  And he established that relationship with them.  And he would go back even now, up until he became a teenager.  He would go back once a year.  So I accomplished what I wanted to accomplish.
Story_ID: 23398
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you stay married?
Speaker 2: No.  I got divorced in 2000, the year 2000.  Two years before I graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So your husband didn't have to deal with South Carolina?
Speaker 2: Well, he had to deal with South Carolina when we were married in 1993-'95 [1995].  We lived there when I was working on the second bachelor's degree.  Actually, life was--it's kind of ironic.  When I lived in South Carolina with my husband, life was very nice.  He was treated very well.  He's Scottish American.  He was treated very well.  I guess because I was with him, I was treated very well, as well, so, life with him was nice.
Speaker 1: So they gave you the pass?
Speaker 2: I got a pass.  I guess so.  (laughing)
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: I did not expect that.  I thought we'd encounter a lot of hatred, but we didn't, not as a couple.
Speaker 1: So it's like South Africa, or something, in that regard, maybe, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Some of the stories I hear from there.
Story_ID: 23399
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you resigned the summer of 2007 from the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina].  Now, did you know where you were going?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I--what happened was I had visited--because I visited Houston [Texas] often, and I had friends in the department, here [Houston].  One of the friends I had was Dr. Nate Dean, and he--he was at Rice University [Houston].  Actually, he was on my dissertation committee.  And he left Rice and came to Texas Southern University [Houston].  And I kept in touch with him through the CARMS [Conference of African American Researchers in Mathematical Sciences] conference that I mentioned before, and also this calling back and forth and that.  And, he had me visit the year prior.  And I called to find out if there were any openings in 2006, 2000--it probably was 2006.  And then I received a call back from the chair of the math department at Texas Southern from Dr. Bell, and said, "Are you still interested in working as a professor at Texas Southern University?"  I said, "Oh, yes, I am."  And I accepted that position.  I had interviewed at other places as well.  So I had to choose between Texas Southern University and Carnegie Mellon [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], because I was accepted there as well, and I chose--Carnegie Mellon was nice, but I chose Texas Southern University, because I figured it would be a more supportive environment than any place else.  I was right, it's a very supportive environment.
Story_ID: 23400
Speaker 1: Okay.  So things here--now are you an associate professor here or a full professor?
Speaker 2: Associate professor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I've been an associate professor for about two years now.  I had tenure and I became an associate professor at the same time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, now is your job teaching, more teaching-oriented, I mean, or do you get a chance to do research?
Speaker 2: Research as well as teaching.  One of the things that I like about Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas] is that not everyone is expected to do everything.  So my focus is research, and the way the annual evaluations are set up, is that if your focus is on research, there is a certain number of points that you get for papers that you publish and things related to research.  If your focus is on teaching, you get more of the points for teaching.  So there are there are the two options that we have.  Everyone has to do service.  So my focus is more research for the papers I publish, the presentations I give and things like that.  That factors in more heavily in my annual evaluations.  And there have been years where I did better with the teaching (unclear), so I would go back and forth sometime.
Story_ID: 23401
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in 2011, the findings from your collaborative research with Vanessa M. Brown are published in the Journal of Immigrant and Minority Health in an article entitled 'Nonparametric Spirometry Reference Values for Hispanic Americans'.  Now can you kind of explain what that's about.
Speaker 2: Before I did the research with spirometry reference values, it had been nothing specifically for Hispanic Americans.  No research done in that area.  Not on a national scale.  So the way that the reference values are used is to gage lung function, and the data that I received was from the National Institutes of Health [NIH].  And in order to get some type of reference, range reference value, the National Institutes of Health used healthy individuals.  But the individuals that this was based on was either white or black.  And since ethnicity is major factor in determining lung function, the readings that were given for Hispanic Americans for example a Mexican American went in and did some type of lung function test to check for breathing to see if they have asthma, something like that, it would have been typically based on other whites, which could give erroneous results.  So what I did was I used empirical likelihood function to devise a confidence interval for reference values, based just on data from Hispanic Americans.  And the reason why I used Hispanic Americans is that's the phrase that's used by the National Institutes of Health.  So in their data, they initially tried to sample all Hispanic Americans, Mexican Americans, Cubans and Puerto Ricans, and so forth, but because Mexicans were the large population, and the other populations were not large enough, the data is really based on the one function of Mexican Americans.  And the reason why it was a published paper is because of now there are confidence intervals to let--let others know--to let doctors know, or anybody who use lung-function data what would be a normal range for Hispanic Americans in certain age groups and certain heights and based on gender as well.  And that's what that paper focuses on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now does that--from the rear here, does that satisfy a--I mean is that good, you think? OFF CAMERA VOICE:  WHAT WERE THE FINDINGS AND WHAT'S THE APPLICATION USED?
Speaker 2: The finding was a--several different charts that one can use.  For example, I had the data divided into strata, based on prior research of what 20 to 30, 30 to 40 gender, and also stratified according to weight.  So the likelihood--this is where the likelihood function comes in.  What is the most plausible value for the parameter?  And, in this case, the parameter is the reference value.  So what is the most plausible value for the reference value for that particular strata.  That's what that research answered.  And not only, what is the most plausible value, what are the bounds that the--the confidence interval bounds; I did 90 and 95 percent confidence intervals for that particular age group and gender for lung function.  The way that it's used is when somebody goes into the doctor or (unclear).  Your lung function is this, you can tell whether or not they're in the normal range or not, if their--that person's Hispanic or Mexican American.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I guess the difference between, let's say, a Puerto Rican and a Mexican American would be, I guess the, I don't know whether it would be numerically, but I guess it would be very different because of the high altitude orientation of Mexican Americans and low altitude orientation of Puerto Ricans.  Is that true?
Speaker 2: Well, the National Institutes of Health look mainly at the body, how, the stature of the person more than anything else.  There were people who were different, but for the most part, when you look at a particular race, the other person, they're built differently, and that's what they were looking at.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I would just think off the cuff, that Mexicans and Puerto Ricans are built differently.  This is the ones I've seen.
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's at looking at the stature.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you had to add a note that this study is--applies more to Mexican Americans than to--
Speaker 2: That's why the title was--now that's one of the things that I said and it's--although the data from the NIH--it says Hispanic Americans, the--that was the target population, the population that they actually ended up with, because the sample size requirements was Mexican Americans.  I did say that in the paper.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, a doctor would really have to be aware that if he was looking at--for the--if he was really doing some fine tune to the lung capacity of a, you know, a Puerto Rican, he wouldn't be--this data wouldn't be of much use to him, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  But, I assume that it would be more use than to--it depends on that stature of the person--more use than a European American or to an African American.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it is focused just on Mexican Americans, and the way that this is different from other methods that the devise of spirometry reference values is that most of the other methods used parametric techniques.  So they make assumptions about the data, about normality of the data, the reference value data, and things like that, but I did not make those assumptions in the paper.  I based it all on the empirical aspects, the empirical data (unclear) data base.
Story_ID: 23402
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're here at Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas], in a historical black college.  Can you tell us something about the history, you know, I don't expect you to be the historian on the place, but what are some of the history of the Department of Math and Sciences here at Texas Southern?
Speaker 2: I don't know a lot about the history because I've only--I've been asked a lot about it in the few years I've been here.  But I know a little bit about the history of the university, and it was the--the purpose of it was that it's a university specifically for African Americans in this area, urban university.  So that was the focus to educate African Americans in urban area.  And that's still our mission, at Texas Southern University.  So the majority of all students are African Americans.  We also have Latinos, because this is Houston.  It's about 34 percent Latino in the city, and we have a large--a large population of Latinos at Texas Southern as well, and also Asians and also students from other states as well and other countries.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I guess I was trying to get at like some sort of the history of the department, I mean, how long has there been a, say a math department here and maybe who founded it, and maybe who are some of the progenitors of the department are?
Speaker 2: I don't know who founded the math department, but, from I've been told, is the Math Department has been here since the university has been here, because all of the students have to take math.  This is one of the requirements.
Speaker 1: That would take us back to the turn of the century or something in terms of--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Let's see, 19--I just don't remember exact founding date of Texas Southern University.  Sometime in the 1900s.
Speaker 1: Early part of the century?
Speaker 2: Yes. (unclear)
Story_ID: 23403
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what have been the highlights of your stay here [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], because you said off camera that you love it here?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I love it here.  The highlight of being here is that it is a very supportive environment.  One of the reasons why African American students come to predominantly HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities], predominantly black universities is because they want to be in a supportive environment.  What people don't realize is that it's also a supportive environment for professors as well.  And I like the fact that it's supportive, and I also like the fact that everything is spelled out.  There's no fuzzy lines about what I have to do regarding tenure and promotion.  Everything is spelled out.  I have to do X number of papers and certain types of journals, and if I do that, this is what I'll get.  These are the number of points.  It's very--it's very objective in what I need to do in order to become tenured--to become a full professor and so forth.  And I like things being spelled out.  That was not the case at the other university where I taught.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What are your future plans?  Do you plan to retire here, or do you have another goal in mind?
Speaker 2: I do plan to retire here.  I'm currently working on a four or five-year plan to become a full professor here in the math department.  And one of the things that we talked about during their faculty retreat was what does it take to become an associate professor to a full professor in the College of Science and Technology, where I am.  So, I'm working on that plan.  Now that it's--it's been more refined, so I can use that particular plan if I want to for the university.  I'm working on my personal plan for that.  And to continue publishing, continue with the teaching and some of the service.  But I do plan to stay here.  I like it.  I have no reason to leave.  When I came here initially, I noticed that there are many people who have been here thirty years and more, and I'd never been to a university where the professors had been there so long.  But now I see why, because it's more like a family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what about your students, are they coming to you prepared to, you know, to do their work, or do they need like help, or--
Speaker 2: Now, most students were in a situation that I was in, or even worse, because at least there was more of an emphasis on, I think was more of an emphasis, (unclear) on education back in the 1970s than there is now.  They have so many other distractions, so most students are not very well prepared.  And one of the things that we do in the math department here is that we--we give students the fundamentals on how to study, and how to--what you need to do  in order to succeed, not only in the math classes, but to graduate from the university, because many of the students, unlike I, their first time--the first person in their families to go to university, and that's very different for students, if you have no other role-models or individuals getting a college education within the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, is Texas Southern [University] in, or are you involved in any programs in high schools to boost the, you know, the math and science skills in high schools?
Speaker 2: For--no, I don't--I have colleagues who focus on the high school, actually, I have a couple of colleagues who focus on high school teaching and preparing teachers for high school and things like that.  I do--with the grant that I receive from NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], one of the things that I did, was I--I had students that--who worked with me and I would gear them towards finishing their degree, and getting jobs in science and technology.  But focusing on high school, that's not--that's not my area and the high school students and high school teachers.
Speaker 1: There are some schools they have like Upward Bound programs [U.S. Department of Education program] or something like that.
Speaker 2: We have that, but that's not what I do.  I have colleagues who do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And LSAMP, things like that.  Lou Stokes AMP, Alliance for Minority Participation.  But I think, from what I've been told by my colleagues, they have--Upward Bound feeds into LSAMP, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I figured it was something a lot like that here, and I was wondering.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We do have that here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 23404
Speaker 1: Now, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, some of my hopes and concerns are that they would realize the importance of education.  Unlike the time where I grew up was right after the Civil Rights movement and so forth.  People did not have opportunities.  So, when we finally got opportunities, we took advantage of them.  And I see too few African Americans students taking advantage of opportunities that are available now that were not available, say, forty years ago.  That's one thing.  The other thing is that I wished that people would be more involved with--in their church.  African Americans seems to be falling away from church and whites too.  People are just not going to church like they used to, but particularly, for the African American community that served in the 1960s and so forth and '70s [1970] that served as a solid anchor in the community to morally gear people.  Because one of the problems that I see a lot of the students having, especially the female students, they have children, and it is so common for them to have children, and it is very difficult.  I had my child in my thirties, but it's very difficult when you're in your teen or twenty-something to be going to school and raising two kids by yourself.  And I think if people were more involved in church like they were years and years ago, that wouldn't be as common as it is now.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you don't think that birth control is really the answer, but church?
Speaker 2: Well, birth control is the other--they know about birth control, but it's a moral issue, and many girls get pregnant on purpose, as a teenager.  And years ago that was a--that was not a blessed event when you got pregnant as a teenager.  Many girls, it's just no big deal now, "Okay, so I'm dating this guy I like, I'm might have a baby for him."  So it's not that they don't know about birth control, because they do, and it's available freely, it's just that there is a moral difference in the culture, in the society now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you see that manifest in other ways too, other than just the birth of a--of children out of wedlock?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Other ways, it's not--a lack of focus, just doing whatever suits you at the time is what I see from some of the younger children now.  And not focusing, " Okay, what is the long-term effect of my actions?"
Speaker 1: So, you don't think that--do you think that it's--you don't see any, or do you see any force in society other than church that pushes, like a healthy lifestyle for young people?
Speaker 2: Mentors help as well.  Positive role models help, and but to me having some type of religious stronghold, not just say it, but to truly believe it gives a young person a really good foundation to right their lives in a positive way.  Not just for blacks, for whites as well, but my focus is on the students here, which are mainly predominantly black.  I see the same thing of my own--female white students, as well.
Story_ID: 23405
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My son.  My son is fourteen now, and he's a joy.  He's gifted.  I spent a lot of time with him when he was young, because I was a graduate student, I was able to spend a lot of time with him when he was younger.  And so my legacy is rearing my son to be productive individual in society.  So, my greatest accomplishment is being a mom.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: But not just any mom.  I would not want to be a stay-at-home mom; fine for people who do that, but I wanted--I am more of a role-model, working and having my son see that, than I am otherwise.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you look back at everything you've done at this point, again, is there anything major that you would do differently, if you could?
Speaker 2: No.  I have no regrets in my life.  I have not had an easy life, but I have no regrets, because if something changes, everything else changes.
Story_ID: 23406
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your son is fourteen?
Speaker 2: He's fourteen now.
Speaker 1: He's going to school here in Houston [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He goes to a school--a private school for gifted children, and he really likes it there.  He's about to go to high school now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: His name is Paul.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What's his last name?
Speaker 2: Glenn.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I still have my--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --my ex-husband's name.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now--
Speaker 2: And he wants to be a physicist.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  Okay.  All right.  That makes sense.  He has a strong foundation of math, I would think?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He likes math, but it's not his favorite subject.  He does well at it, but he likes science more, he told me.  I said, "Oh, okay, whatever you like is fine with me."
Story_ID: 23407
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, let me ask this question.  This is an obvious question.  I didn't ask it in the beginning, on camera, but what is--can you explain your head scarf for us, because when I first met you, I assumed you were probably a Muslim, but when I saw, you said, "No, that's not the case."  So, what is the explanation?
Speaker 2: No.  I'm not a Muslim, I'm a Christian.  I'm Presbyterian, actually.  I wear a burka sometimes because I'm a cancer survivor.  So, the chemo took it's toll on my hair, and I like wearing a burka.  Actually, I like dressing conservatively.  So I finished my last round of chemo in November of last year.  So it has not been very long.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, is that piece from Ethiopia or from--what country is it from?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Well, there are a lot of Muslims in Houston [Texas], and I just ask them for advice.  I will go to a random Muslim, and they like it when other women want to dress like this.
Speaker 1: Does it ever start any confusion anywhere about, you know, with people who are Muslims?
Speaker 2: Actually, no, I'm treated very nicely by--by people in general.  I thought it would be just the opposite, wearing a burka, but I'm treated by, well, actually better than when I don't wear my burka, by Muslims and by people who are not Muslims, other people as well, other Americans as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well, I thought I'd ask.
Story_ID: 23408
Speaker 1: And, now, is there anything we haven't talked about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No.  I think we've covered just about everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  The last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as somebody who served others through either helping them achieve their goals or helping them with--through my church, just being someone who's focused on service.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Helping the community with math and science.  I want to serve the community.
Story_ID: 23409
Speaker 1: Okay.  Go ahead and tell us about what are we looking at?
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me, I was about sixteen in 1981 at that time, Nancy L. Glenn, well Nancy Louise Deas at the time.
Speaker 1: And which one are you?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  Don't do that (unclear) kid, that's just embarrassing; this one, in eighth grade, and graduation, too.
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, let's do all the great ones.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So if I ever run for office out of that fifth grade picture that--the republicans would go crazy over that.  "Oh, look she posed for 'Playboy' when she was in fifth grade."
Speaker 1: Probably would.  I'm trying to remember if I saw that picture in the middle of June. I'm going to get the dog, Sylvester, in it.
Speaker 2: Oh, my cat, Sylvester?
Speaker 1: A cat (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a photo of me.  I don't remember where I was.  I think I was seventeen there.  It was inside my church, St. John Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's not you, is it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Top one?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's my high school graduation photo.  I was eighteen.
Speaker 1: This is your mother, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother and my sister.  My mother looked like she was in her sixties then.
Speaker 1: Can you give your mother's name?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Eugenia.
Speaker 1: Which one?
Speaker 2: My mother is Eugenia Deas.  I believe she was--oh, no, she must have been in her fifties then.  She looks pretty young.  And this photo on my, I mean the person on the right is my sister Eugenia, as well.  She has the same name as my mother, Eugenia Deas, but now it's Eugenia Deas-Young.
Speaker 1: The Eugenias.
Speaker 2: The Eugenias.
Speaker 1: How did you did they deal with it when somebody calls and asked to speak to Eugenia?
Speaker 2: My mother--my sister's name is Genie. And my mother uses her nickname.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Which ones?
Speaker 2: This and this.  Actually, I got the dates here, so this is good.  So these two.   So, I mentioned that I taught Sunday school.  That first picture was when I--it was 1982, I was seventeen, and that was a Sunday school Christmas program that I--I was the MC [master of ceremonies] for that.  And that second photo was--it's also 1982.  The little girl in the middle is my niece, Andrea, and the girl to the right is my niece, Pam.  They're both in their thirties and forties now.  That's a photo of--from my leadership foundation.  One of the contest my teacher told me about; I was fifteen then, 1980.  And I don't know the person to the right.  I think it was the person--
Speaker 1: Hugh O'Brien?
Speaker 2: No. He was the person over that conference, the seminar.
Speaker 1: Hugh O'Brien from the--not from the TV show?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, it was.
Speaker 1: From Wyatt Earp.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I believe that's who it was.
Speaker 1: Was he a South Carolinian?
Speaker 2: I don't know why it was named after Hugh O'Brien.  I really (unclear) same person.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Which ones.
Speaker 2: That's a photo of me.  I was, I believe about ten there, then the person to the right of me is Pam, she would have been five, and then to her right is my nephew Derrick.  And I must not have been ten.  I think maybe I was twelve or so, and Derrick was eight years younger than I am.  And the person in the front is my other nephew, Cushmere.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Who are Debra and Pam?
Speaker 1: Debra and Pam are my nieces.  I was ten in that photo; Pam was five and Debra was four.  My nieces and I grew up like sister and brother, I mean sisters.
Speaker 2: What's their last names?
Speaker 1: Deas.  My brother's children.  Because I was closer to him in age than my siblings.
Speaker 2: Okay.  How old are you here?
Speaker 1: Seventeen.  I was a senior in high school.  Seventeen, eighteen. I think that's it.  That's at the end.
Speaker 2: So we're back at the--.
Speaker 1: Okay.
