Story_ID: 71889
Speaker 1: --[Larry] Crowe.  I'm interviewer for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am could you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My name is Bonita Gooch, B-O-N-I-T-A, G-O-O-C-H.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Eight fifteen fifty-five [August 15, 1955].
Speaker 1: And where were you born?
Speaker 2: Wichita, Kansas.
Speaker 1: And what's your occupation?
Speaker 2: I wear many hats.  I have a title per se, but I think Publisher and Editor of a couple of local community papers, and owner of the publications or the corporation, which is TCB Publishing, Inc.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: August 30th of 2002.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in a conference room at our offices in Wichita, Kansas, which is located at 2924 East Douglas.
Story_ID: 71890
Speaker 1: Okay.  Before we ask any in-depth questions, there are five "People" Magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Gosh.  I'm not a really big eater.  Well I like lots of food, but can I say then--gosh depends on the season too.  If it's cold or if it's hot.  Since it's summer, I'm, I'm gonna say the one nobody wants to hear me say, watermelon, okay.  I love watermelon in the summer, you know--that's, that's great.  I just love fruit, I like fruit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, of all sorts.
Speaker 1: All right, do you have a, a favorite color?
Speaker 2: No, but I like to wear a beautiful royal blue.  That's my favorite color to wear.  But I like, I love vivid, bright colors, bright, beautiful bright colors.  I just like those a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring, I love Spring.  I love the, the growth, the newness, just not too hot, not too cold.  I don't like Winter, and I prefer Summer definitely over Winter.  But I fall is starting to remind me that it's about to start getting cold again, so I'm not as excited about it, but I love Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, but I love to get into my home and in my bed and read a book, that's a getaway for me.  Just time to set and read a book, now that's good.  But let's say a favorite vacation destination, I tend to spend most of my holidays visiting family and friends and getting together with people who I again, don't have much time to spend time with, and so that's always fun.  Just to be able to get visit family and friends.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: There's so many.  Gosh I--one.  Okay, one that I kind of live my life by is "believing is seeing".  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's the opposite of seeing is believing.
Speaker 2: No, believing is seeing, okay.  I very much want to--and, and positive thinking and, and faith and belief.  And so I believe that you--if you believe you can do it, you can do it.  But if you don't believe you can do it, you definitely won't do it.  So believing is seeing.  And that's kind of a motto.  And I try to--I, I do a lot of public speaking and I speak on that topic a lot to kids.  Now what you believe, you can do.  You can do versus--and I try to convince them in this, in the speech that it's not seeing, it's believing.  But it's--it's not the "Show Me State".  You know you don't have to see it first.  But if you don't believe it, it'll never be.
Story_ID: 71891
Speaker 1: Okay, okay now let's talk about your background now.  Can you give us the names of your parents and their birth dates and can you spell their names for us please?
Speaker 2: Okay, my mother who is deceased, was Dora Augusta Gooch, her maiden name was Fields.  And she was born July, I believe it was 9th, 1927.  And somewhere in the country around Summerville, Tennessee.  I think Fayetteville County, Tennessee, okay and she lived to be just about seventy.  Yeah, she made it to her seventieth birthday.  And my father is Ulysess Lee, known as "Rip" Gooch.  And he was born September 13th, 1923.  And somewhere around the, the town of Ripley, Tennessee.  And he is still alive and celebrating his seventy-ninth birthday in a few weeks.
Speaker 1: Okay now, how do you spell your mother's name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Augusta, A-U-G-U-S-T-A Gooch and Ulysess is U-L-Y-S-E-S-S, but hardly anyone knows him as Ulysess, they just call him Rip.
Speaker 1: So does he, is he called Rip because he comes from Ripley, Tennessee?
Speaker 2: That's exactly it, that's where the Rip comes from.
Speaker 1: Ripley's Believe it or Not.
Speaker 2: Ripley, Tennessee, okay.  A lot of people don't know where that comes from.  They just know him as Rip.
Speaker 1: Did your parents pass on a story to you about how they met?
Speaker 2: I don't remember, no I don't know a story about how they met.  I, I've heard lots of stories about their younger days, but I'm not--I don't remember the story about exactly how they met.  But I'm gonna go find that out now that you told--asked me about it.  But Dad--Mother was a college student.  Both of them were students at Tennessee State [University] when they met.  And Dad was a little bit older student cause he had been in the military and back.  And I remember he worked at a little bicycle shop, bicycle repair shop.  And Mom was majoring in home economics, and she was just a lovely homemaker.  My mother was an excellent homemaker.  The kind I would be lucky to be half of.  But I don't know exactly the story about how they met.
Story_ID: 71892
Speaker 1: So they were in college at Tennessee State in Nashville [Tennessee].  Okay, all right.  Did either one of them or your grandparents pass down any stories about your ancestors and what they were doing during slavery or Reconstruction?
Speaker 2: It's pretty hard for me to get--I can't get back to our family so far many stories beyond my father's father.  And that's kind of where we kind of work our family from, which is the Gooch family, the side of my father's father.  And then there were like eight children, all of that, and then my father was that next generation.  And at this point, my father is the oldest of that generation that's still alive.  But no, and that, and that was still--that would have been after, after slavery.  So--and that's about as far back as we can get other than, you know, I was told by my father that his, I think his mother was like part Indian and his father was obviously a black man, and I, I know he died at a very young age in a accident when his wagon turned over.  So--and that's, that's about as much as I know of, of that generation.  Now I did get to know my father's father and several of his siblings that were still alive before he died.  And my father was raised by his father's sister, who--because his mother died when he was only about two years old, of what they think probably would have been tuberculosis.  It's kind of hard to--we don't know for sure, but she died when he was about two years old.  So he barely remembers his mother, but his father lived to a ripe old age, to be a nice ornery old man.  And--but he was raised and after began--being a sin--a single man at that point, in, in those days, he was not one to raise a young child.  And my father again was about two years old.  So he took him with his little belongings in a box and took him over to his sister's house who was our Aunt Lula, who raised him along with his Uncle Fred.  And they actually was a better life cause she was probably in what would have been considered part of the Depression, in fairly good financial situation for a black family.  But the Depression kind of hurt them pretty bad like it hurt everybody else.  But still I mean they were, they survived a lot better, they were farmers and farm owners and did fairly well.
Speaker 1: Now, now is Ripley Tennessee near Nashville [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: I'm not, I'm not very good on logistics and I know--I think it's closer to Memphis [Tennessee].  I know it doesn't take us long to get there from Memphis and we fly out of Memphis when we go there.  Okay so we go to Memphis.  And Summerville is just--where my mother's from, is just outside, it's almost more of aTennessee, a Memphis suburb, it's so close.
Speaker 1: Okay, so but they're both around Memphis.
Speaker 2: Yeah, closer to Memphis than, than Nashville.
Speaker 1: Okay
Story_ID: 71893
Speaker 1: All right.  And what about your mother's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Again I--that was kind of a confused family.  And we've explored a lot of my father's side only because they've had family reunions and--but my mother's side, I really haven't been able to--I haven't done a family tree on our-I've done the tree on my mother's--on my father's side, but not on my mother's.  But again a similar situation.  A child who was raised by a grandparent, okay.  And, and, and favorably so because again, the grandparents were in a better situation than the mother.  Her mother--my mother was born out of wedlock and to her mother at a very young age.  And so what, what was the natural thing to do was take him and the grandmother, or mother raised them.  And so she was raised by her grandmother who was Davella [ph.] Fields.  And again--and I remember her saying how she didn't like to go visit.  And her mother eventually did marry and raise--had two other sisters.  And I remember my mother saying how she didn't like to go cause they lived in the country and, and in lesser conditions and she didn't even like to go out there to visit because she had become fairly snobby and there was--being raised by grandparents and then basically an only child because all of the--of their children were gone.  And was given nice things and afforded an education where--while her sisters were working the cotton fields and doing things of this sort.  My mother was a very bright young lady.  And not that her sisters couldn't have been, but again, she was just afforded that opportunity to develop her skills and went on and I think she was like second in her class graduating from high school, and went on to college.  And you know an opportunity that the sisters weren't given.  And that was all again, just because she was raised by her, her grandparents.
Story_ID: 71894
Speaker 1: But again, even though I was saying things for my father were pretty good.  After the Depression I told you things got a little bit hard for all of them.  And so he ended up about fifteen or sixteen, leaving home just so he could continue his education.  And he went and lived in--and worked for people and lived in--I mean basically little shacks and garages and rooms, wherever he could to have a home.  So he was on his own from about fourteen, fifteen, somewhere in that age.  You know just trying to get his own college and working for people and putting himself out as a, you know a servant or a worker to a lot of families.  But he managed to get through--his self on through high school that way.  Because other than that where he was, there was no more education for black kids.  And so he had to go to a larger city to--and I mean we're not talking a much larger--I think he went to Henning, Tennessee.  And--but it was a little bit bigger town where he could live and get--finish his education and get his high school diploma.
Speaker 2: Okay.  How did your father and your mother get to Wichita [Kansas]?
Speaker 1: Well like I said my father was--interest in flying.  After he joined the military, he came out of the military, didn't learn to fly in the military, but learned to fly after the military and always had a big interest in flying.  And he learned to fly at Tuskegee, although he was not a Tuskegee Airman.  And so coming out of--
Speaker 2: Was he in the service there?
Speaker 1: No, he wasn't in the service there.  He just--I don't know how he made it to Tuskegee [Alabama] to learn to fly, but that's where he learned to fly.  I guess he--the reputation must obviously be that's where black people go to learn to fly.  So he went to Tuskegee and he learned to fly.  Actually he started flying in Nashville [Tennessee], come to think about it.  But somehow he just migrated to Tuskegee.  And he was a pilot, but really he came here not as a pilot as much as he just came here because the aviation industry was calling people, you know.  They called them out and they said here there's jobs, the aviation's industry booming and he and another good friend of his, George Jones, moved to Wichita [Kansas] to get jobs in the, in the aircraft industry.  And neither of them stayed there very long.  There wasn't--it wasn't the type of job for either of these two very independent minded individuals.  So they didn't last in the aviation industry very long.
Speaker 2: Okay, so they, they--he moved out and brought, and brought your mother with him.
Speaker 1: My mother and I--by that time my sister, I had one sister who was born in Nashville [Tennessee].  And so they--she came out with them.  I was born here, though.  They came out here, I think it was '52 [1952] or '53 [1953], somewhere in that, that time frame.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, how, how many siblings do you have and where do you fall in the--
Speaker 1: Okay there, there were three of us.  My sister who was born in 1950, and I guess she was born in Nashville [Tennessee].  Then I was born in 1955.  My sister's name is Camilla, although she's abbreviated her name to be called Camille.  Her name is Camilla Gooch, and she married and became a Lee.  And then myself, and then under myself was a brother, Kerry Lee, who we called Skip, kind of like the Rip Gooch, but he is now deceased.  And he was born in 1965.
Speaker 2: Okay, so there was three of you, okay.
Speaker 1: Mm hm.
Story_ID: 71895
Speaker 1: Can you now kind of think back and reflect and give us a sense of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in, in Wichita?  What, what, what was the name of your neighborhood that you lived in?  Or did it have a name?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't have a name of the neighborhood.  We lived on 16th and Pennsylvania is where I was, I came home from the hospital.  I was born in St. Francis Hospital, came from the hospital home to 16th and Pennsylvania.  And it's a house that I still own.  I don't live in it, but I still own it.  It's been in our family ever since it was first bought by my parents shortly before they--shortly after they came here.  But it was, it was a--I only lived in that neighborhood till I was about two or three years old.
Speaker 1: Is it the west side of Wichita, east side?
Speaker 2: Well it was part of the first expansion, you know.  We--Wichita was a very segregated city.  I mean up until very, very recently, it was a very heavily segregated city.  The first part of the black community was the Water Street area.  I don't know if you've interviewed there, many people and you've heard them talk about the, yeah, the Water Street area.  And my parents ran a restaurant next door to the Water Street Cafe when they first--shortly after they got here.  My mom went into the, to the restaurant business and Dad kind of helped support it while he was at Boeing.  Again, Mother could cook.  Okay she was a cook.  And so that was the area where all the, the black people, you know kind of stayed and congregated.  You couldn't stay in the other hotel.  And so then things started migrating eastward from there.  And so this was part of that--a new community.  When they bought this house, it was brand new on Pennsylvania [Avenue] that--it was being built.  Very much how these cookie cutter house in a row they were building for a kind of--we were coming out of wars and everything and the economy started to boom.  And where are we gonna put these people?  And it was one of those neighborhoods.  Lots of very young families with lots of children in, in the neighborhood.  Not far from a park again, that was a park for black people, McAdams Park.  At that time it was called McKinley Park and it was later named, renamed McAdams after a long time recreation director.  So it was a, a fun neighborhood; lots and lots of kids.  Then we moved--and so there was kind of always these little barriers of what black people couldn't live across.  We couldn't live across this street and we couldn't even--and finally someone would move over to another area and we had the massive white flight, okay.  So we moved into an area next which was 20th and Belusha [ph.], which is where we lived from the time I was about three till my parents left there after I graduated from high school.  And it was when we moved into that house, we bought it from a white family and the neighborhood was very basically mixed --
Story_ID: 71896
Speaker 1: And then there was an Iseley Elementary School nearby and a Mathewson Junior High School.  And, and that very quickly became very black schools even though the school district worked very hard at trying to keep our schools segregated.  I mean they really did not want to let us go to neighborhood schools, even to the point where they made us stay in areas where we--just to keep the schools from being integrated.  But Mathewson and--then we moved onto another area, which would have taken us very close to Brooks Middle School, but they wouldn't let the black kids go to Brooks Junior High School at that time, so--but our neighborhood was again, same thing.  Very quickly I don't--the white people got out of there so fast, I don't even remember any of them.  I mean if there were some of them there, we moved there by the time I was five and started elementary school.  I can't tell you that there were any black people--white people left in that neighborhood.  So they, they just--the white flight.  They flew out of the neighborhood.  But again, fun.  I mean it was lots of, lots of young kids, lots of young families that we played together, you know rode the bicycles.  And it was as I imagined it when I was a little child, it was built kind of on what would be called a hill.  I mean but this was, you know to me it was a major hill.  But it wasn't, it wasn't.  I remember we used to like to take our bikes up to the top and just ride down.  Oh, that was the big fun.  And, and I used to always--I, I remember my dream always was if I went fast enough down that hill, that I could fly.  That was just always my dream, that I mean at night I would dream that I could get down that hill fast enough to start flying.  And at the bottom of the hill they went to a T.  There was a street called Shady Brook.  And Shady Brook was--in fact you had--it was a shady street.  And when it would rain, it would become a brook because it didn't have good drainage.  And so as soon as you'd get two inches of rain, it would just flood up.  And I remember whenever it would rain and if it was a summer day, all the kids as soon as the rain would stop, we would--everybody'd beg their parents and we'd put on our swimming suits and we'd run down to Shady Brook and we'd play in the water until it would finally drain away.  So it, it was a fun--it was really a fun neighborhood.  It was a lot, again, a lots of children.  And it was the kind that I hope and wish that my daughter could enjoy.  I'm in a neighborhood now with a lot of children and, and for that reason because I really wanted her to have that same kind of experience that we had.
Story_ID: 71897
Speaker 1: What kind of a little girl were you?  Were you, were you--did you have a lot of friends or did you--you seem to really enjoy the social life in the neighborhood.  What were you interested in?  What kind of things did you have questions about?
Speaker 2: I was a--well we went to Iseley Elementary, which was again, you'd walk up that hill that was so big and across an open field.  At the bottom of this open field was Iseley Elementary School.  And I just remembered as I was even coming here today--I had just dropped my daughter off at school, about how I used to every day manage to get up--cause my mother was a teacher.  So she had to leave before I did.  And so I always managed to get myself dressed and to school on time.  And I just think that that was a lot of responsibility for a, a child of my age that, you know that I think now I have to push mine out the door.  But still it was a--just amazing.  I never thought back that that was a lot--the level of that responsibility I was given to get myself to school in the morning.  Although Mom would get us breakfast and get our clothes ready, but she had to leave and just assume that every day I was gonna go ahead and pack up and go to school, which I did.  But no, I liked, I liked learning, that was one thing.  I was really big on, on learning and being the best student that I could be.  I really enjoyed that.  But also I loved dancing, I took dance lessons.  I wanted to be a dancer.  I mean that was--girls wanted to be dancers then.  I mean you saw ballerinas and, and you'd see them on TV and they were so beautiful and I wanted to learn to do that.  So I remember I kept asking my mother about being a dancer and taking dance lessons.  And so she never got around to it, so I got in the phone book and called all of the dance studios on my own and found out all about them.  And, and, and wrote all the details down and presented it to my mother and said now this is where I want to go to take dance lessons.  And she was like well wait a minute, hold up.  And so I remember she ended up calling the people and they came out to our house and visited and sat in our living room and talked to us.  And, and then I started taking dance lessons.  So I--and a cousin of mine, Loma Landrum, we took dance lessons from, probably, I don't know, seven or eight years old, probably up through middle school or something like that.  We did--and did a lot of performing around at nursing homes and things like that.  We were the little duo.
Speaker 1: Modern dance, or--
Speaker 2: Modern, tap, ballet, all of those.  We did a lot of dancing.  And, and so when we have school projects, I was always one to want to organize a stage production.  And so I'd have stage productions and usually there would be some dances in it that I would choreograph.  So, you know at, at any opportunity.  If we were studying Bolivia or something--I mean I would come up with a dance.  I'd go to the library and find, and check out from--you could check out music and records at that time, and come back and I would develop a dance on Bolivia or whatever and I'd teach it to all of the--and we'd make costumes and--I remember even doing a production in our basement.  We put up a curtain and a stage and invited all of our family members.  So--and we had, we had fun.  We did kid stuff.  I mean we just did kid stuff.  I mean nothing outrageous, just kid stuff.
Speaker 1: It sounds like real creative, organized kind of stuff, you know.
Speaker 2: My mother would call it Bossy.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's what they used to say, yeah.  They, they always--and I never thought of it as that way.  I just, just thought it was my God given right to push other people around.  Just, I just thought I was--I just--
Speaker 1: Now did people think that you were pushing them around?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  They never complained.  No one ever complained.  I didn't think I was, but my mother would always--I'd have little kids over and we'd be in my room playing and my mother would yell "Bonita".  Oh no, they didn't call me Bonita, it was Bonnie.  "Bonnie stop that".  And I, I know what it meant, that I was to her being bossy.  But I, I never recognized it.  And what's so terrible is my daughter is the exact way.  And before my mother died, it was just like, you know, the nut doesn't fall, the apple doesn't fall far from the tree, is that it.  I mean and she's naturally that way and I find myself doing the very same thing to her.  But I just--I don't know.  It was in me somewhere.  I bet you I got it from my mother.  She just didn't wanna let on to it.
Story_ID: 71898
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Did she organize things?
Speaker 1: Mom was a, was a club member.  My mother was in every club there was in town, she was a clubber.  You know there's the women's MA Ember Chapter of the OES [Order of the Eastern Star], or the Eastern Star.  And she was in the 20th Century Mother's Club, and she was a member of Delta Sigma Theta, and she was a member of the--there was a board or two in the church she was members of.  So she was a very much a go to meeting person and we were always having meetings at our house with these groups where we would get out the fine china and that little stuff and fancies, and serve little goodies.  And, and then we'd always go to teas.  The ladies would have their--the women's group, that was a big fundraiser for them at the time was to have a tea.  And you'd have cakes and tea.  But I, I never quite understood that, but that was the big thing, the teas.  So--
Speaker 2: That was reminded me cause people, you know a lot of people--you know when we talk about unity in the community, that sort of thing.  A lot of times people don't have a model of how to organize activities and so forth.  And that's, that's something too, you know, [unclear].  You did have a model of somebody actually involved in organized activities.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she was very much involved.  I mean it was just like we--our house was a very busy house cause it would always be well what's on everyone's schedule tonight, you know.  And Mother'd have a meeting or I'd have something or my sister--it was always a very, very busy household of, of activities going on, okay.
Story_ID: 71899
Speaker 1: Now your father, you know, got involved in politics and you said earlier that he didn't, didn't really fit into Boeing as a factory worker.  I don't know if that's--did he--did, did he go there to work as a factory worker?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He didn't stay long, okay.  My father was really a, a man before his time.  I mean he truly was just a man before his time.  You know he had enough flying hours to really have been an airline pilot.  But at that time, you know there was no opportunity for black men to become pilots on airlines.  So he could not become one of those.  Even though he went on to get--I mean pretty much all of his instruments ratings and pilot's credits and became an, an instructor and began teaching people to fly here in Wichita.  And many, many white, black, any race people will tell you that--who were flyers, who have been flyers here for a long time, that they have passed the way of Rip Gooch.  You know he taught them or licensed them or flown them or something, around here.  He started--again a man before his time.  He with some white investors, began a business called Aero Services, which was a big space operation on a little, small airport here called Watton Field [ph.].  And so what it was--an FBO [Fixed Base Operator] as they call them is where you come in and you, you put up a hangar and you can tie your private plane.  You can come in if you wanna land on a field your private plan and gas up and tie it down for the night.  And they sold supplies for pilots and along with the gas.  And they taught lessons.  And he also sold airplanes.  He got a franchise agreement just like a car dealership franchise, for a, a line of aircraft which was really a sports type aircraft of its time.  It was a low wing aircraft versus a high wing aircraft called Mooney, they were out of Kerrville, Tennessee [sic, Texas].  And I mean this is back in the '60s [1960's], that this black man got this franchise rights for this area to sell Mooney aircraft.  And, and we used to go down to Texas, that's Kerrville, Texas, I don't know if I said Tennessee, Kerrville, Texas.  We'd go down to Texas every summer for their, for like their dealer's conference.  And this is when, you know, we weren't supposed to be going somewhere integrated in Kerrville, Texas, but we'd always go and stay at--were able to stay at the hotel with lights and swimming, swimming pool and things of that sort.  I always took that kind of strangely.  And because of this, every summer we took vacations in private airplanes. Because Father always had access to all these aircraft.  So we'd fly somewhere every summer for vacation and then you know we'd come flying in and he'd be on the radio just talking.  And we'd land and, and these black people would get out of these planes and every--I mean it was always you know--what's this?  Who and where did these people come from, coming out of these airplanes?
Story_ID: 71900
Speaker 1: So, every summer you always would go on vacation in a plane.
Speaker 2: In a plane, yeah.
Speaker 1: And your father--was, was that his major occupation, dealer?
Speaker 2: No, that was his full time business.  He ran that business for fourteen or fifteen years.  Aero Services, and all of us as we became teenagers went out there and worked the business and work on weekends, you know and, and help him answer phones and things of that sort.  But--and I--and he taught each of us to fly.  He taught each of us to fly.  We all soloed on our 16th birthday, and which is the earliest you did so on a private plane.  Now I never pursued it much beyond that.  I mean a little later on in life I decided I'd go back and I'd fly one more time to really get my license.  But I just--it just wasn't an interest that I could just quite appreciate after I learned the airlines could just take me somewhere and I could sit back, you know.  Although it, it's a joy.  I love going up there and just going around in circles, or just, just the feeling and just--it, it is a beautiful feeling just to--if you're not trying to get somewhere, okay.  Just to go and fly and just, you know, it is.  Cause remember I was the one who wanted to fly.  That part, I just love the being up there and just, just soaring and turning the plane.  But I just--when I wanna get somewhere, I just wanna get somewhere, you know.  I don't wanna have to work to get there.  If I'm going on a vacation, just let me get there.  That's not my idea of a vacation.  But just to go up and, and that was it.  I remember my last instructor said but Bonita you have to go somewhere.  You just can't stay around the airport.  And the last thing--I finally did my last instructor--I was living in Florida then.  And I took off on a, what they call a cross-country and I left going from the airport in Boca Raton, Florida to Belle Glade, Florida.  I think that's the name of it, I've been away from it now, yeah Belle Glade.  And started on the way and I came to this big [unclear] clouds coming down like this and down like this, and I'm like I don't know if I'm gonna make it.  I don't know how to make it around those clouds.  I hit the first could, the plane bounced.  I turned around, went back, landed the plane and that was the last I've ever flown.  So--and I didn't get all the way--I mean Belle Glade to Boca is not an hour drive, not even half an hour drive.  So it's probably a ten minute flight, but just let me stay near the airport, that works for me.
Story_ID: 71901
Speaker 1: Okay.  And tell me about school.  Now by the time you got to high school, did you have any idea of what you wanted to do for--
Speaker 2: Not a clue.  Didn't, didn't have a clue.  Just did learn, like I said, loved, loved education.  Always wanted to do well in school.  Did fairly well in school, and very active in organizations in school.  But no idea what I wanted to be.
Speaker 1: Did your father--now when did your father launch his political career?
Speaker 2: Very late in life.  My father really was a very quiet man all of these years.  And it was very surprising to all of us when he became a politician.  Now my mother was a person that everyone in town knew.  She was a teacher, you know and so a lot of people knew the teachers and there were a lot--that was the, you know, society of the black community of the time were teachers.  And so Father was just a quiet person.  I mean you know--very few people knew anything about him or what he was doing out there at Aero Services.  And he wasn't involved in any clubs or organizations or anything socially interactive.  He worked.  He went to work every day at nine and he worked--well Monday through Saturday he worked from nine in the morning till nine at night.  It was--every morning he'd leave the house at nine, would go by the post office, head there, and he'd come home about nine.  If he got home before nine, we were very surprised, and, and the earliest would probably be seven.  And then he'd always go out on Sunday too.  And he'd go after church on Sunday and stay till about 6:00.  So he did not have time for this community activism.  He did not start that until late, late, late in life.  I mean he was in his sixties.
Speaker 1: Yeah, were you out of school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was--I was gone, I was adult, I was, I was an old woman before he became involved in politics.  So that--there was not a lot of political--I mean although again, he--there was this group of guys, these young entrepreneurs, that he was involved with and supportive of.  He was on a Kansas Office Business Enterprise Board, a state appointment.  He was also on state Civil Rights Board.  So he did have some of those kind of appointments, but again, he wasn't active here around in the city.  But he was very--these, these young entrepreneurs.  There was some group, I don't know if you've heard anyone speak about Chester Lewis yet.  Have you heard the name Chester Lewis?  Chester Lewis was the President of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] for so many years.  He was very much a rabble-rouser and he was a pilot.  Rip had taught him to fly.  So they had a, a lot in common.  So they, they kept a lot of undertone, aggressive things going, but very quietly you know.  Rip was kind of in the background.  He wasn't the fore--you know Chester Lewis is where the [unclear] were in the forefront.  But Rip and these guys were really--you know.  I remember him telling me a few weeks ago, he said there used to be days when you know, he'd name a few of these guys that, you know if you ever needed a, you know, a few thousand dollars.  Boy, you know and they were all in business together.  And one called the other and, and quickly get a couple thousand dollars, you know.  You knew who you could call cause that was the kind of support system they gave each other.  But he wasn't out visibly in the community.
Story_ID: 71902
Speaker 1: Now what--who else may have influenced you?  What, what teachers, schoolteachers or other people in the community did, did you look up to or, or, or what people served as mentors or guiding you?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I--well first you know I am a journalist as I'll call it I guess.  And in high school I did get involved in journalism.  I don't know why, what took me to the school newspaper.  But I did work on the school newspaper, and on the school yearbook staff.  And after taking a couple of journalism classes during high school, I found a job in the summer work--well not even the summer, I worked during the school year even--working for the local black newspaper, the weekly newspaper, which is the "Wichita Times" at the time.  And Jack--gosh I can't think of Jack's last name right now.  If I wasn't trying to say it'll come to me.  Well anyway I used to work for him on--and I would lay out his newspaper for him every week.  And I'd write some stories for him.  But that was back in the days when you had, you know--you'd--people would send your text over to a, a layout person and they'd come out and they'd put these long strips and you'd get these long strips out and then you'd have to come and glue them and you'd cut them with the x-acto knife and you'd paste them down on the board.  And that was a job called the Stripper.  That's what you were called, cause you'd strip in the lines of text.  And so what I was, was his Stripper for the newspaper.  And I'd go in and I'd lay out his whole newspaper for him every week, and he paid me I think twenty dollars a week for that job, for doing that.  And I mean that was--I was cheap, good labor for Jack, Jack Hudson.  See I knew it'd come to me, Jack Hudson.  And so I guess--but he was kind of a role model I would say obviously since I ended up in the newspaper business for me, that would be one.  But no, everybody was a role model.  Obviously, my parents were role models for me and just every--most of their friends.  These people were all, I mean doing great things as far as I could see in the community.  I mean I, I would be able--it was just a circle of these people around me always.  So I had all sorts of wonderful role models around me.
Speaker 1: Any particular teachers in school?
Speaker 2: Well again, I was a product of segregated schools up to sixth grade.  And then after we went to junior high and high school you started having, you know, so many teachers first of all, because you changed classes.  And then most of them were white and, and didn't really develop a very close rapport with many of them since that was just the start of integration in the school system.  But back in fifth and sixth grade, I mean those teachers--our elementary school teachers back in the day, those were the ones who really made a difference in your life and im--impressed upon you the importance of learning and accomplishing and going on to college and making something of yourself.  And I could name people like Mr. Wells, Jonathan Wells and, and Frank Wooten, those were my fifth and sixth grade teachers, who you know, made a considerable impression on my life as far as teachers go, yeah.
Story_ID: 71903
Speaker 1: Now in--what, what other things did you do in high school besides newspapering?
Speaker 2: I did newspaper, did yearbook.  I was Student Body Vice President.  And I was what you call a pompom girl.  That was one of the things we started.  In fact, I was one of the people who forced that to be started.  They always just had cheerleaders, and it was only not very much for other girls to do.  So then we started the, the beginning of--actually in Wichita, we pushed and got the first group of, of pompom girls or dancing girls or whatever, at our high school, at North High [School].  And since then it's expanded to become--but ours was the very first group of them cause we wanted more options for people to do something cause at that time, you know it was a big fight because that was back when you were fighting to get a black cheerleader.  You may not know if you went to segregated schools, but you know it was, it was the big fight was, you know, can we get one black cheerleader, you know?  Can we get more than one black cheerleader after that, you know.  So it wasn't a lot of opportunities for us.  And there really-for all girls.  I mean what were there--five or six cheerleaders when I mean it's fifty guys on the football team.  So this was another option made available, for, for the girls to get actively involved in.  Cause you know girls sports weren't nearly as strong as they are now either.  So that was one thing to push for and again, now that's something that has expanded very quickly to all the schools and still exists in the system around here today.
Speaker 1: Did you provide the choreography?
Speaker 2: We did, yeah, we did most of our own choreography, yeah, we did all of it.  And the first year I guess I probably contributed some.  The second year I probably contributed a lot more because I think I was captain or something of that, that--whatever the title was that year.  And I went on to KU [Kansas University] and was a, a cheerleader there, which--and, and chose--hate to say--made a decision--kind of chose KU because that was--they had the, the--they had the dancing type cheerleaders.  And so and I wanted to be one of those.  So went on to KU and did that there.
Story_ID: 71904
Speaker 1: Okay, so high school graduation, did you have any idea of what you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: No, but I got to give my high school graduation speech, I was one speaker at our high school graduation.  And, and ran across that speech not so long ago.  I still can't remember what it was about.  It was something about some monkeys, though I can't remember about the monkeys.  Tells you how impressive it was that I can't even remember it.  But it was--I was one of the speakers during the high school graduation.  But what was your question?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: The question was what were you thinking about when you--well at high school graduation did you have a career in mind?
Speaker 2: No I told you.  I, I did about two or three years of college before I could figure out.  It was like boy if you don't hurry up and declare a major, you're gonna be in trouble.  All I knew--I, I had some things I didn't want to do.  One thing I didn't want to do is I didn't want to sit in an office all day long.  I just--whatever the job was, I knew I couldn't sit behind a desk from eight to five.  And that was the first thing.  And I just--and I didn't want to do the same thing every day.  And other than that, I didn't know what I wanted to be.  I, I was smart enough probably to have gone to med school, but I knew I couldn't take blood or dissecting anything.  So I, I really considered law school, and I even considered that very strongly even late in life, but had a professor I must say, who talked me out of that.  And I'm, and I'm sorry that I let him do that.  He convinced me that there were already too many lawyers in the world.  And I--they didn't need another one and I wasn't gonna make any money and lawyers weren't making any money anymore.  And--
Speaker 1: What in the world was he talking about?
Speaker 2: I won't call his name, not on this tape.  But he, he talked me out of becoming an, an attorney.  And so I majored, I got my bachelor's degree in journalism.  I ended up going into journalism.  So, so again--and but never did anything with it and yet it, it was a natural fit considering I had taken, you know, done journalism in high school and--but even after I finished my degree in journalism, I didn't--I went to work for--in journalism for about three weeks.  And said oh no, they're not paying enough money.  I think I'll go back to school.  And I did, I went back and got a master's degree in public administration.  Don't know how, other than I had a friend who was in public administration and said this is a great master's, a quick way to get a master's and they're paying great money.  So I said okay.  So I went, I got a master's degree in public administration.  It's amazing how we make these major decisions in our life, isn't it?  But you know the difference between now and then is the lack of exposure to opportunities.  You know we didn't, we didn't have examples to see.  So many of the positions black people weren't doing them or we didn't even know they existed.  I mean I didn't know there was a career, for example in, in journalism, that there was a career that I could become a production person.  That was something to do, become a producer.  I mean everyone at that time, they were starting to get on-air personalities.  You wanna be a reporter, you know, and you wanna be the--or you wanna be an anchor.  But you never thought that the production and the administration side.  I mean we weren't exposed to those kind of things and it--and so much so in one of the things I hope--although my daughter's just turned nine.  I want to make sure she's exposed to and truly understands what opportunities are out there for her because I mean at that point, those people were teachers.  You know and I was--and that's what I grew up around, you know.  You were a teacher and that was about the option for black people to make money.  You weren't managers hardly in corporations and, and you know and so it was hard because you didn't know you did--to decide what you wanted to be because you didn't even know what you could be.  And that was the hard--you, you know, there were a few doctors, there were a few attorneys.  But god, there's so many options of careers that we need to know about them and be exposed to them and as a black person even in my life, you know I--we were exposed to a lot of things I thought.  For black people of our time, we were.  But nothing compared to the exposure that children are getting today and--some are, they take advantage of.  But there are still so many who don't, and don't have a clue.  And since-again, that seeing is believing.  You know but believing is seeing, I'm sorry.  If you don't--but if you don't have a vision for yourself of what you can be, you know, you, you'll never be it.  And they can't have the vision cause they don't know what the vis--you know, they don't know anything about what's out there.
Story_ID: 71905
Speaker 1: Okay, what, what road led to the "Community Voice"?
Speaker 2: Oh, boy. My father again.  The father, the father, the father.  Again, I had done nothing with my journalism degree.  I'd gone back and gotten master's in public administration and worked in city management.  And, and had tried my hand in several entrepreneurial ventures along the way.  And after I told you that I had a brother who's deceased.  My brother died--he, he was one that became a pilot.  Okay he was the one who from the--my father's kneecap wanted to be a pilot and loved planes.  And he went on and learned to fly and really was on his way to become really, I'm sure living my father's dream of becoming an airline pilot.  But he was killed in a private plane crash not as the pilot, but as a passenger.  And, and, and that, that ended that.  And that was--I'm trying to remember what year--that would have been '90 [1990], 1990.  And so after he had--was here in Wichita and my sister was in Texas and I was living in Florida.  And so we kind of had this vision that my brother would kind of be the one who would always be here.  And as my parents began to age, he would be the person who would be here and there would always be someone left at home.  And cause he didn't seem to have this desire to just move and so it was a wonderful plan.  He would be the one at home.  But after he died, it was clear that somebody needed to come back home.  And my sister was of the mindset that she was never leaving Dallas [Texas].  And so I said well you know, I can be the one to do that.  You know I'll, I'll, I'll come back home.  So I told my parents then, you know, that I, I'm coming home.  Not that they would force me to or you know it was just my mindset that, you know, someone needs to come back here.  And so I told them that and I started this I'm coming, I'm coming, I'm coming.  And they kept saying well when are you coming?  And it took me six years, but I made it.  And so I got here in 1996 and kind of just--they kind of almost twisted my arm by then to get me back here.  And at that time my sister had a business in, in Dallas [Texas] called Zero Graphics Solutions, which is a Xerox agency.  And somehow she convinced my father that they wanted to do the similar business here.  So I came back to run that.
Story_ID: 71906
Speaker 1: But shortly after I got here to run that in May, Billy McCray, I don't know if you've met him, who had started the black newspaper.  Wichita [Kansas] has a long history of you know, of black newspapers in and out, in and out.
Speaker 2: He was a State Representative too.
Speaker 1: Right, Billy McCray was a State Representative.  But he started the "Community Voice".  Again he was--had been a--there was a void there where there wasn't a black paper.  Again, although--historically there have been black papers here, you know since the early 1900's.  Some of them had good lives, you know long term.  Some as long as thirty, thirty-five years.  But some of them, you know, six months, a year or two years.  But we were--remember I had worked for the "Wichita Times" back in the early '70s [1970's] and, and there had been several others, "Enlightener" and, and different ones.  But at the point a couple of years before I got here, there wasn't one.  And Billy had started one.  Billy had been a State Representative, State Senator.  Then he had moved--run for the County Commission.  Well Billy wanted to get off the County Commission, he was ready to retire.  But he wanted to get his seat to go to his daughter Melanie.  Melody, she's Melody, Melody Miller.  And so I think part of his plot--and, and Billy was pretty active in the Democratic Party.  But I think part of his plot with starting this newspaper is that he needed a vehicle to get the word out about Melody and help get her elected.  So he started this newspaper and he pushed it and he flooded the community with it during Melody's campaign.  And, and got her elected and basically was a very much mouthpiece for her.  And, and she won.  But shortly after that her mother became ill with cancer, Billy's wife became ill with cancer and died.  And I think his thought was that I--his heart was no longer in it.  He and the wife had really been doing it together and he felt like his heart wasn't in it.  I mean you just have a change of life after your life partner--and so he wanted to get out of the newspaper, but he felt it was too important to just let it go.  That it was something that he wanted to find somebody to take it over.  So Billy went around to everybody in town, almost, and asked them would you buy the paper, would you buy the paper, will you buy the paper?  And I mean it's so funny.  Several years afterwards, the first couple of years after we bought the paper, people said I almost bought that paper.  Everywhere I go, someone would say I almost bought that paper.  And--but my father came to me and says Bonita, you know you have this journalism degree and, and Billy wants to sell this paper and I think it'd be a great thing for us to do.  And we don't want to put all of our eggs in one basket with this, with this Zero Graphics Solutions, it'd be another something.  You know so if one of them doesn't go, we have something else to fall back on.  So you know, why don't you look at this one?  Go over and talk to Billy and just see what he has to say.  My hands are full.  I'm too busy with this other business, I don't have time, no way.  I had a three or four year old daughter at the time and, and I said, you know, three years old.  I said I, I just can't do anymore.  I'm not--no way, forget it.  And he would come back in a week or two and kind of suggest to me, you know, you know this really is a good idea and I've been thinking about it and you really should.  I mean just, just set up an appointment and I'll go with you and we'll talk about it.  And just--let's just hear what he has to say.  So finally he made me make the appointment and come time for the appointment and he doesn't even go.  So I just went and, and I listened to what Billy had to say.  And basically Rip had his mind made up that this is something we're gonna do.  You have to understand the father, you know, that this is something we're gonna do.  And so it was something that was going to happen.  And so he kind of convinced me that he would do it, that he would help me.  He says I will help you.  I will sell the advertisement.  And see he doesn't want this to be archived for history, but this is the truth.  Cause I always bring this up to him.  Every--this is the standing, he knows what I'm going to say.  Because I'm gonna tell you about how many ads Rip Gooch has sold over the years.  Oh, I'm gonna sell the ads, you just do the writing.  Well no he hasn't sold any advertising, very little advertising.  So you know, but that's how he convinced me, that he was gonna sell the ads and I just had to write it.  I said okay Rip, here we go.  So we went into the newspaper business.  And that was in--our first issue was November of '96 [1996].  And again, I always tell that story jokingly, but it was something I probably would have never done on my own without his pushing or coercing.  But it is something that I am just pleased as punch that I've done.  I mean it was--never in my wildest dream would I have thought of doing it.  But it's, it's just been the perfect fit and just, just a wonderful expression, way of expressing and getting involved and making changes for me, so--
Story_ID: 71907
Speaker 1: Okay, what's your--what's the philosophy of the paper?  And, and what are you trying to do that--I mean it's been like--every town's got a black newspaper, or maybe several, most of them do that have a sizeable black population.  Chicago [Illinois], we got about ten of them, you know.  What--but they all you know have slightly different philosophies.  Some of them are politically motivated, some of them are community motivated and some of them are [unclear] lines against business.  I mean and others--they have a different, you know, focus.  What's the philosophy of your paper?
Speaker 2: I don't know that we have a great philosophy.  But we're about making positive changes.  I think that would be if there was anything.  It's not an official statement, but it would be about making positive changes in our community, you know.  And getting our community information that it would not otherwise get.  So we, we don't focus a lot on negative news.  We, we, we don't cover crime, you know, or anything of that sort.
Speaker 1: The St. Louis [Missouri] paper that covers all the Saturday night shootings and all that stuff.
Speaker 2: No.  We carry no crime.  We figure there are several things that the major papers do very well covering about our community.  And one for sure is crime.  So they've got that covered, we don't need to do it here.  I mean every shooting and everything they have.  But we, we want to bring the positive news about our community.  And then, and again, definitely one about educating and informing our community and making them better.  And so we spend a lot of time on, again, the things we think are important for us to know to make our lives better.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you all agitate around issues of--supposedly there was--so you don't cover crime, but suppose there was an issue of say police brutality or something in the community.  Would you cover that, or an issue of someone who didn't get a fair shake from the justice system or something.  You know would--would you get involved in something like that?
Speaker 2: Now we don't shy away from issues.  We're very much issues driven.  We definitely work issues, but we don't work a crime incident.  Now issues we will work--I mean yeah we've written stories about racial profiling in the community.  Now issues we'll do, but I don't go this one shot that one, okay.  But no, if there is an issue in the community, we're on it.  And there's enough issues.  We will never run out of issues cause we got a lot of issues in our community.  So we're, we're never short of issues that we need to be working on.  I mean and so we'll cover--typical paper will have national news and we're gonna cover, you know, because I mean it's very difficult to get national black news out of our local, daily paper.  So we cover national black news, then we'll cover state news.  We'll cover the legislature and what, what's going on and what new policies are being made in the state capitol that are affecting us.  So that's--now pretty much during the legislative session, we're writing about issues that are important to our community.  You can--if it's about farming or something, we're not interested in, it's not in here.  Our issues are ours and I always tell our writers if we write something, and we wrote the same article the "Eagle" wrote, and we wrote it the same way the "Eagle" wrote it, why did we write it?  So it needs to be--everything is written from our perspective.  What does it mean to our community?  Okay cause we, we--you know okay we know they're re-districting the city right now, and for the City Council and the School Board seats.  But, but what does that mean to us, you know?  Now they know they can get that same story from the "Eagle".  But now we want to tell you that story and okay now this is what it means to us.  Okay it means we probably are losing this many black--this district is not gonna have but this many black people in it, and this one's this one.  And here's the possibility if they realign this way that we might get some minority representation over here.  So that's exactly the perspective it's gonna be written from, for my paper.  We are not trying any way to represent the majority.  We are trying to represent our issues, and we make no qualms about that, that this is an African American paper and it's about African American issues.  So from that stance, it's a little biased I guess.  But I am not trying to fairly represent the masses.  I am biased towards what's good for my readers and what's important for my readers.
Story_ID: 71908
Speaker 1: Besides I said national and state, we do, we do editorials.  Of course we do editorials and we run "The Boondocks" cartoon because the local paper wouldn't pick it up.  So we run the "The Boondocks".  And then we--in our local section--then we have a local--that's kind of our front section.  The back section which is our more local oriented stuff.  And in the front section we always run health.  We always--every issue pretty much.  It's a rarity that we don't run health because we've got enough health issues to fill up buckets and buckets and buckets.  So we're always writing health issues and writing health stories.  Like free prostate cancer screenings, you know things of that sort.  This, this issue we have one on early puberty in black girls and the fact that they're just--what's behind this.  Why are our young girls going into puberty so much quicker and earlier than, than white girls?  So then we'll write some--that, that--so our health issues are about our health issues when they're in health.  And locally, usually on our front local page we're doing front, you know, local type issues, issues of the masses.  Things--a lot of times that covers a lot of education, school board or, or city council issues.  And, and probably more education than not because education is just such an important issue with our children doing so poorly in the school system.  So we write about--a lot about that.  And then we starting to do things like faces in the news, people who are getting--who are getting promotions and, and doing good things in the community.  So those are faces.  This is something you might have seen in the "Eagle", you might not have.  Then we do the social, the weddings, the birthday parties, the dinners, the dances, you know.  We, we do all that.  We do the funerals, okay.  So now if you missed it in the "Eagle" cause you had to go every day, we got a summary of every black person that died for the month, or for the last two weeks.  You can come back and get your two--see who died.  And--or what else is in that one.  And just usually community oriented news.  That's very, you know, this little event is going on in the community, those kind of things.  That's a, a pretty gist of our paper.
Story_ID: 71909
Speaker 1: Now you--now you're pretty forthright about having a black perspective, you know that's something that you know some people are afraid they have for some reason, even people that run black newspapers, which has always surprised me.  But, but you're very--you're forthright about it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So you believe there's a black view, I mean there's a view of, of issues that, that affect the overall city that, that black people have cause their particular, cause their particular concerns.  And--
Speaker 2: But you know, but there isn't, isn't always one black perspective either, though, we need to take that into consideration.  So maybe our black community may feel I'm biased sometimes too.  Because they may not like the position I take.  And more and more and more over the years now I'm starting to see more and more divisiveness amongst our community on issues.  And so sometimes what we'll do is we'll do face-offs on an issue, you know.  Like for example remember the big Ebonics debate.  Yes the Ebonics no--I mean we faced off on Ebonics, what do you think?  Like face off on reparations.  We have a face off coming in the next issue on this reparations debate.  Another one that's a big divisive one now is the school vouchers you know.  We're, we're coming down both sides on those and so it, it--even though I, I think sometimes we're very unified and sometimes we're not, and sometimes I probably maybe overwhelm people with my perspective and that other people may not want to say is the black perspective.  But when I felt there's a lot of divisiveness about things in the community, I try to present both sides of the issues.
Speaker 1: So you see education as a major responsibility of the paper, educate people about the issues and discuss them and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, otherwise we--a lot of us don't even know there is an issue, you know.  That's the first thing.  We gotta let you know there's an issue.  And so--and, and that's the first thing we do is this is an issue, folks.  I mean more so than that, we, we're basically explaining the issue to people because--and, and really I think we've done a very good job of I think of, of winning our community's trust.  I mean they trust us to present fairly, honestly to them what's going on in a situation.  And again, they may have read about it in the, in the "Wichita Eagle", but they turn to us to understand.  Okay that's fine, that's what's going on.  But where do we fit in this?  What does it mean to us?  Cause they're not quite sure comfortably from the others what--how they should feel about an issue.  And so we try to say okay now this is what it means.  Now as factual as we can, you know, not necessarily you know this is the only way.  But these are the facts.  And so here's--maybe you might wanna be thinking that this might affect you in this way or the other and make your own de--I mean conclusion.  I mean but then on the editorial page we do obviously draw some major conclusions and positions.
Story_ID: 71910
Speaker 1: What have been some of your major conclusions and positions on some key issues in the community?  And what--do you see yourself as a--I mean a, I don't how to say--do you see yourself as a, as a radical or conservative or, or, or liberal about things, or you know?  I mean in terms of the black community, I'm not talking about the larger community.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I think I, I go all different perspectives on all different issues.  So I don't think personally that I would like to classify myself as one or the other.  I mean cause I, I can often be very critical of us in our paper too.  Cause I think sometimes we need to, we need some reality checks too.  So I mean so I don't--don't wanna jump over here and say that all things black are right, you know, or wonderful and, and support all things.  Sometimes we're, we're just wrong.  And I think if we need to make sure we clearly understand that we're not doing some things right sometimes.  And so sometimes I feel like I'm one that can say that to us better than the "Eagle".  I mean it would never be accepted coming from a mainstream paper, where I could come and say those things.  For example, a couple of issues.  I mean we have a weak ministerial league.  And I wrote an article, you know I, I had put up with these ministers for just years.  And you know--maybe in that okay we can win them over, you know.  I, I don't wanna win these ministers over.  I mean we're gonna get them with honey.  We're not gonna, we're not gonna just stab them.  But finally at some point I just got tired and I said you know it's time.  You know I'm, I'm gonna write this story.  And of course they weren't necessarily very happy about it.  And so--and of course I--you know they came to me why would you put our laundry out for the, the general public to read?  Because I thought not only it's a black community reading my paper, the white community reads my paper because they wanna know what the black community thinks or is doing.  So you know to them that was putting it out, not necessarily for the black community.  They, they knew the black community probably knew the reality.  But the problem is now the white community knows the reality too.  So immediately after this then, weeks months, and this is nothing uncommon.  In fact, I do this to people, I will tell people I said you know bring me your story first.  Let me write about it.  I mean you know I know we're a small paper, but let us write about it first.  Typically what happens after I write about it, all the other media gets your paper and then they--and they steal stories from each other.  I mean that's just common, you know, this--not a whole bunch of original ideas you know.  Somebody has it and then everybody else wants to write the same story.  So you know typically if I write something, a few weeks later or a few days later, you're gonna see something about it in, in the--ten, three, twelve, the TV stations or in "The Eagle".  And, and I tell people that's great; I'm glad because otherwise you're--you never would have--they would never have looked at your issue.  I mean I brought attention to it and you got some attention from the greater community.  And so I, I see that happening and some of those people from the other media who come to me and say well you know we, we took it from you.  And I tell them very honestly I--that's fine with me.  I, I, I like that our issues are getting exposure, so I have no problem with you doing a story.  I write the story first.  Now I figure if it's a story about my community, I should have it first.  But I don't mind them having it second.  So back to the ministers.  But the same thing happened.  Now after I wrote about the ministers, now "The Eagle" has a black reporter who's writing religion, who feels that okay, well you know I should feel very comfortable in writing that same story or a similar story.  But it was felt that he stepped beyond his bounds.  You know, you know it was in the black paper and it's bad enough, but you shouldn't have done that for sure to his brother I mean I thought he, he caught hell, you know.  He should not have done that.  So again, I, I can pick on us from some perspective that they can't.  Another issue.
Speaker 1: It's because you--is it because you belong to us?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or belong to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, belong to the community and-again, I, I work hard at keeping the community's trust, I really do.  I try not to in any way you know, disavow their trust in any way.  They--if somebody tells me something and, and you know, and it's not supposed to be out, I'm not gonna put it, you know--people can know that they can say things to me and sometimes I'm around people and they start running and they start--their mouths just--you know emotion.  And I'll go, god that's starting to sound like a story.  But the first thing I say to them is that okay to print?  Is that--that's a story, is that okay with you?  So they'll know that now I, I'm in my reporter mode.  And if they say no, then that's it, you know.  But you have to keep their trust at all times.  And so because of that, I think I can say things and they accept it.
Story_ID: 71911
Speaker 1: But now from the--another issue that I just, you know, that I just continue to beat on our community about is organ donating.  You know we, we've got a problem with donating our organs.  And I--I mean I wrote an art--and sometimes I can hit them kind of hard.  I think the lead-to in story was like if you knew there was a cure for a disease but it was dis--being disproportionately held, withheld from you, from us because of our color, you know what would you think?  And that's the situation with organ donating.  We will not donate our organs for some reason.  And then our--and black people are dying because they can't get organs and are best matchd within race groups.  But you know all of us, you know, feel like we have to take our organs--somehow our ministers convinced us--I, I--my standing line is that people really didn't realize that rain is black people peeing down from heaven.  Yeah, cause obviously they needed a kidney so they could go there and  make rain and pee.  Cause I--you know somehow they have been convinced that they have to keep their organs, you know.  I mean no, save some lives, you know we won't--we will not sign up to give them, you know, some--
Speaker 2: [Unclear].
Speaker 1: I know, that there's gonna--that they're gonna kill me so they can get my organs, you know.  And all of these kind of things.  So, so--
Speaker 2: Is that--you know where that comes from.  I mean our history of--
Speaker 1: The Tuskegee--
Speaker 2: Exploitation in the United States.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know.
Speaker 2: People have a lot of fears.
Speaker 1: But sometimes you've gotta come past that.  We're going to have to come and try to help save some lives, we really are.  We just gotta come past that.  Okay somewhere we gotta trust somebody sometime, okay.  So that's, that's a few--yeah some of those issues that I just kind of like to beat up on us about sometimes.
Story_ID: 71912
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you have a radio show too.  You have a, a FM radio show perspective.  Is it like weekly or--
Speaker 2: Weekly.  It's a community voice radio show.  By the way, did we say the name of the paper is "The Community Voice" newspaper if I haven't said that.  And we do a, a supplement to the paper called "The Scene".  And that's that second section I was telling you about.  And "The Scene" we give away free.  And, and because we understand there are people who will never buy a newspaper.  But I also understand there are issues that are so important that we just have to get them out there.  And somehow so we just give them, we give those out.  And so that's part of that.  But the radio show is "The Community Voice" radio show.  And it usually goes and coincides with what we're writing about in the newspaper.  We'll just take a, a better look at an issue or a deeper look at an issue and, and in a sense.  A lot of our community has problems with reading.  Sometimes we just have to tell them.  You know so the same thing, how do we get the issues out there.  We just tell you, you don't even have to pick up the newspaper and read it.
Speaker 1: Now is there, is there any, any other community oriented radio show?  Or is yours the only one?
Speaker 2: No, there is now.  There's one more that started since ours--there's a--[unclear] on 93.9 which is more of a hip hop station.  And they approached me.  At that point that was the only real option we had for a radio station.  And so but shortly after that we had a, a black couple buy a radio station and they started a, an old R and B format.  And it's a very community oriented.  But I was already aligned with this hip hop station.  And, and I'm kind of pleased to be there, you know because I'm reaching a, a younger market you know that typically I know won't want to read newspapers and don't know issues and, and just I'm like good.  Let me get some information to them.  They need it.  So let me keep it over there where they really need it.  Somebody needs to keep trying to get to them.
Speaker 1: Okay, and it's a weekly show and the paper comes out once--
Speaker 2: The paper's bi-weekly.
Speaker 1: Bi-weekly.
Speaker 2: Okay we're a bi-weekly paper.  We were--originally the paper was a monthly.  And then we took it to a weekly, and just were not able to sustain it as a weekly.  So we had to step it back to a bi-weekly.
Story_ID: 71913
Speaker 1: Now you sponsor--I noticed looking through some photos earlier that you Cornel West was here.  Is this a--does your, your paper sponsor forums, community events and forums and lectures and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Cornel West was not one of ours, but we do community events.  And, and we've had times we've done more and we've had times we've done less in putting our staff in.  Our financial situation--but we continue to always try to be oriented towards, you know giving back and, and, and sponsoring things with the community.  We've even done mixers, we've done light networking things.  And we've done a thing called "Sisters in Power".  We've done sis--women's forums, sisters--we, we did "Sisters in Power" for two years.  And one was the very big--it covered lots and lots of different areas.  And the second year--out of the first year we kind of thought there was a really heavy interest in economics.  And so we've done--we've kind of focused on economics.  We've done genealogy workshops.  We've run a black history quiz pretty much every year.  We do I love my spouse contests, contest.  We've done bachelor, bachelorettes of the year and come out meet the bachelor/bachelorettes at parties.  Let me think of some other things we've done.  Two things we have coming up in this next year, two of our newest projects coming on board.  We're going to be doing--starting one called this January with the Martin Luther King holiday is called NEW Awards.  And NEW stands for Northeast Wichita, and that's the general area that we--generally when you say northeast Wichita, you mean the black part of Wichita [Kansas].  And then now that it's--we've kind of grown outside of that area, they started calling it near Northeast Wichita, but we're just, we're just Northeast Wichita.  So we, we're doing--so that's what it stands for.  The NEW Awards are the Northeast Wichita Awards.  And what they are is recognizing the best in Northeast Wichita.  Obviously just like any other city's south side of Chicago [Illinois] or whatever, people who do not live in those areas have this perception that these are just terrible areas.  And there's nothing good in them, you know.  It's just a bunch of crime and, and drugs and, and bad things.  Nothing could possibly be good in them and, and these awards were designed to change that perspective and viewpoint.  You know so what it is, is about recognizing the best in Northeast Wichita.  So very similar to probably what you've seen in other areas, the best pizza and the best hamburgers, the best whatever, we're the same thing.  We're gonna--the best beauty shop, the best barber, the best disc jockey, the best DJ [disc jockey], the best soul food restaurant, and those type of awards.  And what's so nice about them unlike many awards that are given in our community, and we are award giving type people.  But typically when you win an award, you want it.  And so then they're going back trying to find somebody else to win the award the next year so we can have another dinner.  But with these awards, you can win them over and over and over again, same thing.  So you can come up best soul food restaurant ten years in a row.  And our idea is to recognize the best, but to also to encourage people to want to continue to be the best, to strive to give good service and do something positive in our community.  So it's about recognizing what's good in our community, but also hoping that the greater community then through the publicity of it picks up on it, and also understands that there are good things in our community.  There are some wonderful things in our community.  You know otherwise they--there was a survey done by the Urban League and Wichita State University many years, not so many years ago, during the last four or five years.  And, and they asked people, you know, where they wanted to live.  Would they, if they could, would they wanna live outside of our community, this core community.  And most of them said no.  You know, this is where we wanna live.  And so these--we feel good about our community.  This is our home, this is where our friends are and our church and family.  And people, you know, they don't wanna go too far from here.  You know they may go a little bit, but there's always something to come back for.  And most of them have good feelings about the community and we just want to put that out to other people.
Speaker 1: Okay, that sounds good.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that's one project.
Story_ID: 71914
Speaker 1: There's a--there's something that I wanted to ask you about in terms of that, and that's busing.  It seems as though I've heard other people here in Wichita talk about the effects of, of busing, you know black students out to other neighborhoods and how, how, how has that affected the community--the community's cohesion?
Speaker 2: Well I mean I can only compare it--even most recently as yesterday to, you know, my daughter's life and my life, you know, and the differences.  We were--I was talking to the school social worker and the principal and the psychologist in a little meeting we were having.  You know it's--and we were talking about my child's social development.  I mean it's so very difficult for these children to develop long term friendships when you're in a--you know we used to walk to school together and we were right in the same neighborhood and you can go and play with each other, you know, after school or on weekends.  And it was close enough and our families knew each other.  And you know with these kids coming from every which way and they're going back to these communities, there's not that evening, there's not that walking to school.  And they're missing it.  And it's a--I really see it I think really in their--really in the children's social development.  You have to struggle to find and work with your children to find these relationships and develop these long, core relationships.  The teacher and I were talking about you know she said one, one of her best friends still to this day was a friend of hers from the sixth grade.  Well that's the same way with me.  Kids I went to elementary school with today are still some of my best friends, you know.  But it's hard for these children to develop those kind of relationships and, and that's the sad part about busing.  And you know even though the other--you know the other mix of the busing is I mean it upsets me--that's a nice word I can say--to no end that our children, and I don't know if you understand this, but the Wich--in Wichita black children bear the brunt of busing.  You know we are the ones who are bused.  You know Hispanic kids aren't bused, white kids aren't bused, black kids are bused, okay.  And I just think it's terribly unfair that our children, six, you know from the time they're kindergarten have to go get up in the morning and in the winter it gets cold here.  And stand on the street corner and have to wait on a bus to go to school.  And you're talking kindergarteners waiting on the corner to get a bus.  But you know little Johnny over on the other side you know, walks a few blocks to school or whatever, Mommy just brings him the few blocks to school or whatever.  And I just think it's terribly unfair that our children are the ones that have to bear it.  Now see now I refuse, I just you know I'm--I will not--my daughter is like Mommy why can't I ride the bus?  No.  I won't--I just won't let her get on the bus.  It just makes me too mad, you know, it just does.  I, I want--you know it just does.  And, and I know probably it is hurting no one but me, but I just--as a kindergartener, I would not let her stand on those street corners.  It's, it's dark sometime out there.  I just wouldn't.  I, I just--it just makes me mad and it hasn't changed anything, but you know the, the white kids, they have what they call a birthday lottery.  So that one year your name could be drawn based on your birthday and you might get bused.  And that's one year, and that's just during elementary school.  Now when you start getting into middle school and high school, you know pretty much everybody's bused because of--for several reasons.  One because the schools are just that far apart.  I think the policy is you have to be two and a half miles from school and you, you get a bus.  If you have to maybe pass, cross a major street or something, you can get bused.  So a lot of busing if you talk to the people in the school district, and it's true, the majority of the busing because of that in the district is not done for integration, it's done for those reasons, distance reasons.  But unfairly those particularly for our elementary school children.  It's, it's--our children bear it and I just think that's a terrible age for them to have to do that for--to such young children.
Speaker 1: Are there any elemen--elementary schools in the black community?
Speaker 2: They are, but you have to beg to go to them.  You gotta--you, you just can't go to them.  You have to ask and get special permission to go to them.  Same thing, my daughter's school was, you know, five miles or something.  I don't know how far away it was, but it was a freeway and it took us ten or 15 minutes on a freeway to get her there, okay.  Now--but you know less than a mile away from our house was a community based school that she could not go to because it was--but, but I got her in it.  But I had to ask special permission together into it, you know.  And so, you know please Mr. School Board Member, or Mr. School Board, you know, can, can my daughter come to this school?  When you have to ask to get your kids--even though if your child lived across the street from that school, they couldn't go cause they were black, yeah, no can't.  And so that's pretty much the way all of our schools are in our community.  Now most recently we added two community--kind of community oriented schools that you--a little bit better.  Your choices are of getting into them.  They started up what they call a neighborhood magnet.  Which means certain percentage of the seats are reserved for neighborhood children.  And that's two of the schools in the--and it's only two schools in our black community.
Story_ID: 71915
Speaker 1: Is there a, a question that we haven't asked that you'd like to--or issue that we haven't raised that you--
Speaker 2: I could talk all day long on so many issues.  You need to ask me.  I don't know.  I mean I, I tell people I, I have plenty of opinions on every issue.  So--and I, and I know people get tired of hearing what I have to say between the newspaper and the radio show.  So I'm like you know, don't ask me, ask somebody else.  Let's, let's get someone else's opinion, expose other people to things.
Speaker 1: Well here's a question here.  How much time does this take?  You said you do--you a person who wears many hats and does a lot of things.  How much time do you actually devote to the newspaper and does it require you to attend a lot of community meetings and events and, and you know--circulate around a lot?
Speaker 2: Yes to all the above.  No, no, it's, it's a, it's a very time consuming task.  Hats off to, you know, people in the newspaper business all over.  You know the black press is just struggling.  I mean we, we are struggling.  You know I mean to, to [unclear] I mean lots of the papers or most of them across the country are small and underfunded, you know.  Our circulations are dwindling.  But most of the people who are there are there because they believe in what they're doing, you know, and the importance of what they're doing to our communities.  And most of us aren't getting rich off of it, you know.  It, it's kind of just one of those loves of service, it has to be, you know that you're doing it because the hours are very long and just very long.  And just, you just--you never rest, you know.  Everybody wants to call you and tell you about a story.
Speaker 1: What kind of staff do you have?  I mean full time and part time.  What, what do you have?
Speaker 2: We've gone up and down over time.  We were a weekly, so we had a, a little bit larger staff than we do now and it's been times where it's just been even as a bi-weekly, just myself and a, and an office manager.  I mean that's how small we've been with this paper at times.  Because sometimes I have a hard time you know, keeping qualified people.  Use a lot of independent contractor type people to do jobs because again, it's not enough to keep people full time employed.  I've got graphic artists and layout person and she's been with me for six years.  So--but she's just--she works from my home and she's a contract employee.  The delivery people are all contract.  Photographers you contract.  So when you--staff people pretty much besides someone help keeping the invoicing and accounting and booking and things, I typically try to keep one writer on staff.  And right now I'm working with two part time writers and myself and a full time bookkeeper on staff.  Now we also do another paper too, though.  We do "Contrails", which is the McConnell Air Force Base paper under a contract with the U.S. government.  And that's a weekly paper.  Now that's a little bit easier function because we don't write it, we're the publishers of that paper.  Our role is the financial well-being, so we sell the advertising, print and distribute that publication.  And I give them some support from a graphics and writing support.  So I keep one person out there on base.  And then my delivery people for that are contract.  Again, we don't run presses, so the press people are all obviously outside.  And, and then sales people, right now I'm just using contract sales people even.  So again just--don't keep a lot of people on staff.
Speaker 1: Okay now, a lot of the black newspapers around the country organized as part of a national organization.  Do you participate in that?
Speaker 2: That's a National Newspaper Publishers Association.  And no I'm not an active member.  I have gone to their conventions.  At first I was a monthly--and I wasn't--you had to be a weekly to qualify for membership.  And so then for the short time we were weekly, I was so busy, I couldn't go to their conventions, trying to keep a weekly.  And now we're back to bi-weekly and I can go to their conventions, but I really don't qualify for full membership.  It's--that's one of the policies that need to push somebody to change.  You can be kind of an associate member or something of that, but it's--you're supposed to be a weekly publication.  But again it, it's, a, it's a good organization to, to participate in though, it really is.
Story_ID: 71916
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what are your hopes and concerns for the black community around 2002?
Speaker 2: Boy like I said our, our community is just such a community of so many issues.  I mean I'd be interested--you know I'd like to say some of them because it would be interesting when somebody's listening to this whatever, 100 years from now or whenever are these, you know, many of the same issues that are still going on.  But I mean I think one of the things--gosh there's so many.  I mean obviously we have some of these just major issues, health and education and obviously our--we have such, you know, such major health issues.  Our health is not nearly as--every, every disease hits us harder and we die from it more and younger.  And so we have a lot of health issues.  We have education issues, you know we have prison--you know where we're just, you know, not doing as well in educationally as, as the whites are.  And then we have issues you know with prisons now and I mean I think there's a report that came out recently that there's more black men in prison than there are in colleges.  And so we, you know we've got to do something about changing the prison issues.  But I think many--it gets to the core of our issues, it tends to be value issues.  I mean I think we have to start putting more value on the right things.  You know and I think it's just when we start changing what's important to us, then we'll start addressing our issues.  And until we start addressing the core values of our community, we will never change.  And until we start valuing health, valuing education, valuing family, valuing you know, clinging to upstanding life, valuing economics.  I mean, I mean every step of the way we're behind.  And just again, another study in this past week that says you know how we're lagging.  Not only are we lagging in income in our community, we're, we're lagging in net worth and how poor our net worth of our families is.  You know, what our assets are in our community are compared to those of the white community.  That we just, we just don't accumulate, we don't save.  But we don't value the importance.  You know we value spending and the bling bling and the cars and the houses and the clothes--and not houses cause if we valued houses, we'd have some net worth because we'd have some assets.  But you know we don't, you know again, we, we just got to get to changing our core values and our internal thought processes and then we can address the rest of the issues.
Story_ID: 71917
Speaker 1: The first question is what do you see at this particular time as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I guess this newspaper.  I mean I, I hope it doesn't go away.  I mean I hope it will stay here for a long time and continue to make a difference in our community.  And if it doesn't, I mean I hope I could feel positive that we've made some difference.  And then I think what I try to say to people is you know that you know if they don't know that--if we don't--if they didn't--if, if the greater community doesn't think we have a way of knowing, you know, they--then they don't have to worry about us, well they'll never find out.  We do what we want to.  But as long as they know that they have a paper here, that someone's who's aware could find out and will write, inform, I think it changes the greater community's consciousness about dealing with our community.  You know that in the past, you know well they'll never know.  And so we, we don't have to worry.  And I think it's so important to just continue to have--just be here, be a presence here that, that keeps--helps keeps other people on their toes.  We've made other people more aware.  And I really feel like we have.  I really feel like you know just--for example with the school district.  I mean just the difference in the efforts that's being made with educational issues for our children.  And again, maybe it was the just the time.  You know maybe it was finally the time that we just--and it's--yes it's a course that's going on in America, you know the, the people are starting to recognize the failing schools and how our children are being failed.  But I would seem to think and hope that some of the level at which it's being addressed here is because they know--cause we stay on education.  We stay on the school district, okay.  I mean personally, you know--can, can walk in and talk, you know, to the superintendent and, and express our issues and concerns and, and, and I know I wrote an editorial about--we had our--we had one black assistant superintendent, deputy superintendent who died of cancer.  And so it was one of those kind of things that okay well you know, very easily they could have made a decision that they wanted to have a, you know a Hispanic or a female or, or maybe it just wasn't even important, you know to have a black superintendent, assistant superintendent.  But we made the point and wrote an editorial that you know, don't--you know it's important to have one at the table.  I mean we need to have somebody that looks like us in the decision and upper level decision making authority at that school district cause there's too many of our children involved.  And don't come back, basically the editorial said don't tell us you can't find one, okay.  You know there aren't any.  Well no, there's one and you gonna find one.  But don't come back and tell me we, you know well we would love to have one, but we just couldn't find one.  No, find one.  And they found one, you know.  I mean those are--and I remember I went to the school board meeting shortly after I wrote that editorial and the superintendent--next thing I know, he had come from where he was sitting and was sitting next to me in the audience.  And said to me, he says I read your editorial and, and, and I want you to know that's exactly how I feel, you know.  But it was obvious that they were reading it and aware that--and, and, and it was--it concerned him enough to, to come to say to me we hear you.  And so that's it.  I think, I hope as much as we're impacting to the legacy, to our community, that we're making a difference to the greater community too and how they approach our issues.
Story_ID: 71918
Speaker 1: Just to, just to riff off of that for a second.  Can, can you mobilize a lot of people through the paper and the radio show?
Speaker 2: It is hard to mobilize these people.  I'm not kidding.  I mean it--you know it is hard.
Speaker 1: [Unclear] easy, but I want--have you been able in the past to mobilize people?
Speaker 2: On some things, yeah, but I mean in this community, if you can mobilize twenty people, you've done something.  For anything other than a free concert, you've done something.  I mean I'm just--I'm not--we had a white supremacist rally last week in, in Topeka [Kansas], the white supremacists, the World Church of the Creator and the White Socialist Movement rallied on the state capitol.  And I wrote about it in the paper.  I had the NAACP President on the radio show, who was putting together a free bus for people.  All you had to do was show up and get on the bus.  And you know getting all this information out to people.  Do you know how many people were on the free bus?  Six.  Now this is for a--the, the Ku Klux Klan basically is up the, up the road rallying and we couldn't get anybody to go.  And I, and again I--it's just--I--we tend to--that's why I say I, I force things on people sometimes cause our people just seem to not even want to--they don't, they just don't care you know.  They don't know there's an issue.  And if there's an issue, they don't care.  But I keep trying to make them understand this is what--you need to care because this is what it means to you.  Do you understand what this--what can happen here?  You know obviously I must not have done a well enough job of letting them understand why you know, what that, what that could mean.  And maybe they felt like they were just harmless, and they probably are somewhat harmless people.  But you know to me my thought was soon as I heard, I'm like I'll be there, you know, it was no thought.  But you know obviously it didn't move other people that way.  But if--it's very hard to get our community.  Now there was a--and I'd like to give the example.  There was a, a piece of terrible gossip that was written about a group of ladies.  Have you heard the Links, you've heard the Links organization.  There was this gossip letter that was written about the Links in this city several years ago, maybe nine, six, seven [1978], eight [1978].  So you know and somebody wrote this just atrocious letter and said all sorts of nasty things about each--different members of the Links.  Mailed it to all the beauty salons, okay.  And do you know that was the talk of the town.  I mean that letter--everybody was talking.  I mean you tell some beauticians and, and get it in--okay it was the talk of the town.  Somebody came to me and says Bonita what did you think of the letter?  You know what do you--and I said I, I could tell you this.  I wish the news in "The Community Voice" got around town the way that news did.  But see that was what interested, you know, catty, gossipy, tear down stuff was of more interest than, you know, these important things that we should be knowing about uplifting our community.  And that's why I say you know, it's, it's--it has to come from our values.  It has to come from us--internal changes more so than anything else.  But I mean that's all my response was.  I just wish the important things that we say in "The Community Voice" got around our community as fast as the--everybody was talking about it.  But you know, nobody was talking about whatever we were talking about in "The Community Voice".  And so it's, it's--you can try, but it's--and I think we do a good job of, of getting people to respond.  But it's just hard to get our community to respond.
Story_ID: 71919
Speaker 1: Well how would you like to be remembered personally?
Speaker 2: That's interesting, okay I don't know.  Because I really think the person that I really am, most people don't know.  Although I'm the person I am all the time.  But no--people really just don't know me, you know.  And so I, I, I--everybody knows me, you know.  They know me, they think they know me, they go "that's Bonita", you know that kind of know, they know me.  And I--and they know to speak to me and that I always have nice, friendly conversations for everybody, but they don't really know the internal me.  And, and, and that may be sad to say is cause I, I, I feel like the best way to be friends with everybody is just to know them.  Not, you know--you can get inside them personally.  Cause I, I like to like everybody.  I try and strive, strive hard to find good in people and like everybody.  And it's easier for me to like you when I know just enough about you that's good and I don't have to get into the bad of you.  Cause I know we all have bad in us, you know, everybody--no one's perfect.  But let's, let's keep very positive relationships going with people in the community.  But I--probably if I was to get out to know people, I really wish they'd--the legacy--I wish they really knew the real Bonita and, and the--and my heart.  And I think the core of me is really such a good person, you know and just a, a spiritual person, a positive person, a good person.  I just wish they--I mean I wish that was a legacy that would be remembered, but I don't think anybody really knows me as that kind of person.  I just think they know me as that reporter who's busy doing stuff in the community.  And, and that's okay.  I mean it's, it's not negative, so if they remember me as somebody who tried hard to put out a good paper and, and, and make some differences and changes in the community, that, that would be good.  But that's not, that's not all I am.
Story_ID: 71920
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about the future?  I mean you're, you're so young.  I mean for the people that we've interviewed.  What do you--what, what do you plan for the future?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Retirement soon.  No, I'm not gonna do this long.  I mean honest, my daughter is nine.  I'm counting down till she's in college and probably as soon as she gets in college, I will be retiring.  That's my plan.  My plan, and that will take me to about my mid-50's and I will let somebody else handle this.  That's it.
Speaker 1: Is there a plan to--is there a plan refine what you all are doing or to expand it into some other--
Speaker 2: Okay, in, in what will I do in those nine years.
Speaker 1: Yeah, is there--you know what refinements or improvements would you make?  Would you give it some [unclear]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're constantly trying to make the paper better.  And I don't think if you're not constantly trying to make it better, you know you're not responding to people, you know, their needs and their--what's important to people now.  We're constantly trying to make it the best we can make it.  We'll never be satisfied with any of the product that we have if there's not a way to make it better.  I look at lots of other options and I'm gonna have to do some more things.  I mean there has to be--do more things to, to, to--because again, this--it's a struggling--black newspapers are struggling.  We started with "The Contrails", that's one addition.  And--but I probably look and consider long term that any additions I have probably wouldn't be centered around the African American community.  Because we have such a small community.  I mean it's fairly--you know I think I've done what I can with it.  I mean I can keep this product and make it better, but as far as the local Wichita [Kansas] community, I mean I think if you continue to focus on just this community, you'll starve.  And I mean I've got to get outside of our--this community and start looking at the greater community.  Or either I've got to get outside of the Wichita black community because of its size.  It's just very hard to make a living off of it.  I mean either you have to start looking at a national objective, or I have to look at a larger market within this arena.
Speaker 1: Have you ever thought about politics in the future?  Your father's been in politics.  And you're in a position to have met everybody in town as a representative of the black community.  You know [unclear] their interest with the paper.  I'm sure there's people call you up with tips and people call up for information and see you as some kind of a resource right now.
Speaker 2: We are the resource.  This is whenever you don't know something, this is the number you call.  It's amazing what people call in and ask us and expect us to know the answer to.  We're the paper, we're supposed to know, it just tickles us when people will call here and ask us things.  It's just amazing.  But no, I mean that's been the rumor ever since I got here.  The rumor was of course I only moved back here to take Rip's [Gooch] position when he retired.  And everyone just--no one would believe me.  I don't care how many times I would tell people I am not here to run for politics.  I am not, I'm not.  And they just don't want to seem to listen to me.  And I'm, I'm not that excited about politics yet.  I mean I'm not saying no, but I'm just--it's not my motivation and that's gearing up for a lot more work.  And right now I don't need any more work than I have.  And, and my priorities tend to be my, my daughter.  I'm a single mom and I'm doing this with just my, with just me and working these hours.  And I mean my priorities are her and my family and then--and, and I feel like this community has enough of me already.  And, and but that's not to say I, I can't rule it out.  I must mean somewhere back here it's in my, it's in my thought process, but I just--I'm just not moved to it yet.  And that doesn't mean, it doesn't mean never.  But it means almost never.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you very much.  It's been a pleasure.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay thank you.
