Story_ID: 127391
Speaker 1: My name is Jacques Lesure and I'm the interviewer.  Matthew Hickey is the video--videographer, and sir, could you state your name and spell your whole name for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is, pardon me, my name is Ghalib Ghallab.  It's, Ghalib is G-H-A-L-I-B, and Ghallab is G-H-A-L-L-A-B.
Speaker 1: And could you please give us your date of birth and location of birth.
Speaker 2: Seven [July] 25, 1950, Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: And today's date.
Speaker 2: Eleven, three, eleven, four, what is it (laughter)?  Eleven, three, yeah, okay, eleven, three 2008, 2007, [11/3/2007] I'm ahead of the game.
Speaker 1: And the location of our interview today?
Speaker 2: Here at my home, 6984 Stone Meadows, Las Vegas, Nevada 89142.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a jazz musician, pianist, I'm a musician, yes.
Story_ID: 127392
Speaker 1: Now I would like to ask a few, what we call, People magazine-type questions and this gives us a real feel of who Ghalib is.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Fried chicken.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: It rotates during the month of Ramadan 'cause I'm still, I'm a Muslim and it rotates throughout the year and it's a great time of the year for us at the end of the, we do a fast for thirty days and at the end of the fast, it's a total cleansing, it's a, what we have which is called Eid, which is a holiday, and it's a huge celebration for us as Muslims and we celebrate the fact that we completed a month of solid fasting, yes.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Well I have two, blue, red, simultaneously.
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: You know that's really hard to say.  I've traveled so many places but more for work and not for play and I guess from being from Las Vegas [Nevada] it would be going back home to Chicago [Illinois] would be my, my favorite destination.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying that you like to go by?
Speaker 2: Yes I do.  "Information is raw materials for new ideas."  That was by Eldridge Cleaver, nineteen, bada blah, blah, blah, probably in the '60s [1960s].
Story_ID: 127393
Speaker 1: Okay, what we want to do now is go back a bit in your background, your family life.  Tell me about your mother.  What was her name?
Speaker 2: My mom's name was Juanita.  Juanita Elizabeth--
Speaker 1: Her full name.
Speaker 2: Juanita Elizabeth Thomas.  She's a very beautiful lady, very intelligent lady.
Speaker 1: Where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Detroit, Michigan, no, St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: And where did she grow up?
Speaker 2: She grew up in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: What do you know about her background growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, I know it all.  I grew up with my mom.
Speaker 1: Her background growing up?
Speaker 2: Initially my mom, she, well during my formative years, and me just getting started, she used to work for the Board of Trade and then the Board of Education, I believe she worked for.  Of course she worked for Cook County Hospital for many years as an administrator, as well.
Speaker 1: How about her early years as a child?  Do you know much about her life growing up as a child?
Speaker 2: My mother was a, she enjoyed dancing and she enjoyed singing and that was her, that's what she wanted to do.  If anything, my mother would have wanted to be a singer during her time, entertainer.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother from your perspective as a child?
Speaker 2: Oh, she was lovely, man.  Very strict but very loving and she only wanted the best for us and she gave us the best.  She never, she voided all the negatives in life.  She made us see life as an open perspective, life as it really is from a human perspective, and then the other things came after we became adults, but as a child, she then didn't limit us to any type of growth, any type of development.  She would take us everywhere, I mean, downtown Chicago to the, to the zoos, to the movies, to the museums.  She exposed us to so much, art, that's the creative side of me because she kept us involved with so many cultural things and she's such an intelligent lady, very positive lady, and very resourceful and very wise.  A lot of people come to her for a lot of information.
Speaker 1: Did she share any particular stories with you that you can recall?  Anything in particular you'd like to share with us?
Speaker 2: You know, she may have, but mom was the type of lady, she dealt with things as they were and if she didn't want you to know things about her, she wouldn't tell you and a lot of things I probably missed because she was such a person of trying to get us to come out, to grow out, and she didn't want us to see the hardships of her life, and which was a good thing on her part.  Sometimes, and I can't say that to some extent, because some things had happened to us later in life sort of, we probably could have avoided had she given us a little bit more information but the fact that she kept that light, that beauty in front of us, knew that, made us come through whatever, you know, turmoil that we were having during that time.
Story_ID: 127394
Speaker 1: Tell us about your father.
Speaker 2: Oh, my dad--
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: --my stepdad, he's cool, man, he's just--
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: Kay, Kay Thomas, III.  My father's very cool.  His dad died when he was three years old so he never really knew his father so his mother, my grandmother, grew him up.  All I know him as "Dad."
Speaker 1: Where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Detroit, Michigan, and they migrated to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: That's where he grew up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's my--
Speaker 1: Now what was his background like?
Speaker 2: My father was a hard worker.  In the beginning he was a, he worked for the railroad.  He was a switchman on the railroad, the Rock Island Railroad.  Hard job.  I remember his hands being hard like rock, man, you know, working out there in the cold in twenty, thirty degrees below zero, and switching track in Chicago, 'cause you know it's transportation capital of the world, and he had a real tough job but dad was always cool, you know.  He was a jazz lover.  He brought jazz in the house.  I mean, we went from Miles Davis, Frank Sinatra, Eddie "Lockjaw" Davis, Ella Fitzgerald, Perez Prado, the Vienna Symphony Orchestra, I mean he had such an eclectic taste of music and he, it was all intellectual, very intelligent sound, from avant-garde to straight-ahead, to contemporary, Lou Donaldson, to Jimmy, oh, Jimmy Smith, Jack McDuff, man, he had a library of so many musicians, Grant Green.
Speaker 1: Did he share any stories with you at all that you can relate, anything he told you in particular, any stories about his childhood or--
Speaker 2: You know my dad was very, he was a very quiet guy but a very, what's the word, comedian somewhat, you know.  He would, my father in many ways remind me of Bill Cosby, okay, that's, with his humor, you know, but dad was a, he was one, and him and mom [Juanita Thomas], they kept a lot of things to themselves about problems or things like that so we never really was exposed to any bad things, you know, as children.  We never saw them argue.  If they did, they did it somewhere where we couldn't hear it, you know, in the car probably, but never saw them argue or fight, never in front of us.  He was such a, he's a, and he still is, a very strong individual, very, a man of, kept us aware of the political things.  He would ask us different questions.  I mean, it's three of us coming up together in the same household and we all had our opinions and we were able to voice our opinions about whatever it was that was going on in life during that time and with us personally, and he was very receptive to those, to those questions, and he answered them the best way that he could.
Story_ID: 127395
Speaker 1: So how far back in your ancestry can you go?  Can you go to your grandparents and, and do you know anything about, on either side, your, your stepfather [Kay Thomas, III]--
Speaker 2: I can go pretty much back to the, how we got here.
Speaker 1: Okay, well let's go back as, tell us, tell us as far back and then bring us up, up through your grandmother, on your mother's [Juanita Thomas] side.  Start with her side.
Speaker 2: Well on the, that's the side that I know, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My grandmother's grandfather--
Speaker 1: So that'd be your great, great, great--
Speaker 2: Great, great, well, let's put it like this.  My great, great grandfather was French and he came here from France and he and his brothers, they developed a manufacturing company, where they manufactured pianos in America, and on the plantation in New Orleans, or Louisiana, and, so it would have been my great, great grandfather, that's what it is, double great, his name was Frank whatever, but they never pronounced his last name and so they called him Frank French, Frank the Frenchman.  So he ended up with the name Frank French and he had relations with one of the slaves and, which would have been, my great, great grandmother, and her name was Patsy Boone, and in that relationship that they had, they had one child and they named him after the slave master whose name was Frank, and he worked on that plantation and whatever other things that they did there but they were manufacturers of pianos and as we know it, it's the spinet piano company, they manufacture spinet pianos, which was the style of piano.  He left when he was thirteen or fourteen years old.  He ran from the plantation seeking his freedom and ended up in Clarksdale, Mississippi, and there he settled and he had eight children, and of those eight children, he took them and he moved from there to Oklahoma, Tulsa, Oklahoma.  I forget the name of the city, the city that they bombed in--
Speaker 1: Oklahoma City.
Speaker 2: Oklahoma City that they, no not, not the recent bombing but back in the day when all the African Americans were living on that, in that city.  I forget the name of the city [Tulsa, Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: A black wall street was there.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he lived in that city and he had a grocery, general, general food store.  This man, Frank, was obviously my grandfather, was a very intelligent and very smart man and, but when all of that disruption happened, he left and went back to Clarksdale, Mississippi, and during that time his grand, his father had died and he wanted to go back and claim, in fact his father left everything to him, the company and everything, and he wanted to go back and retrieve his inheritance.  Upon him going back there, he was confronted by his brothers, his uncles, and they threatened him and told him, don't you ever bring your, your butt back here to this, to this property, and he ran for his life back to Clarksdale, Mississippi.  So later on in years, the claim was still there and he decided that he was going to send his grandson to go back and one of his daughter's children, to try and claim the inheritance.  Well at that time, the company had really grown and became a very big company, music company.  I'm not gonna say the name of the company because I don't want to start no stink (laughter), but he went back to try and the same thing, they ran him off as well.  The company ended up moving to Tennessee in which it's sort of surprising to me, too, because a lot of our people, family, the French family, moved to Tennessee also.  Anybody that you know that's named French, that's from that area, they're probably all related.
Speaker 1: Which part of Tennessee?
Speaker 2: I think it was Nashville, around Nashville.  My sister's [Darryl Young] got the whole tree and she could sit here and tell you the whole story.  She's done a lot of research.  In addition to that, there was some family that was left in Oklahoma and there's a lot of Frenches that are distant relatives that are living there that comes from the same family, the Moss family.  He married, the lady that my grandfather married, my great grandfather married, great, great grandfather married, his name was, her name was Patsy Moss from the Moss family, and their family is still up there in, in Oklahoma and very, they're doing very well.  I met some near relatives since then.  A couple of 'em were bankers, retired bankers, very, very bright, very, very intelligent community of people and they have a, reunions once a year.  I've not make one, made one, but God willing, my sister's made quite a few but God willing, one day I'll get an opportunity to do that and research some more but everything that I'm telling you is just from information I've read and word of mouth from my sister and things that my mom has told me prior to her passing, the information that I have that my grandmother [Marie Elizabeth Henry] and, on and on and aunts and uncles, you know.
Story_ID: 127396
Speaker 1: Now tell me about your maternal grandmother.  Tell me about her.  What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Marie, Marie Elizabeth Henry.
Speaker 1: What kind of lady was she?
Speaker 2: She was beautiful, man.  Momma was the best.  I remember, as a kid, you, boy, where we lived in Chicago [Illinois], we all lived in the same house.  It was like seven of us and it's four girls, four boys and three girls and including myself, my sister [Darryl Young] and my mother [Juanita Thomas], we were all living in the same house.  I remember them Sunday mornings, man, waking up to them scrambled eggs, that bacon smell, you know, pancakes on the table, man.  She was a devout, religious lady.  We all went to church.  Very intelligent lady, too.  She's very bright.  She was a mother.  She was like her mother was.  She was a, she took in everybody.  If you had a problem, if you didn't have food, and see, my grandfather was a butcher, she would make sure that their food was there, you know, that she would lend, give money, she would do, she was just a giver.  She was a very warm lady and all the women used to meet at the house on Sundays and I remember like being two, two years old or, hanging around 'em and listening to all them ladies talkin' and what have you, you know, but she was a good lady.  A very warm, very original Southern, good Southern woman, born in Clarksdale, Mississippi, and she's just a very, very good lady, very good lady.  She had a lot of love and, you know, for her whole entire family and God bless her, she died very young.  She died very young.  I think she was fifty-seven when she passed away.
Story_ID: 127397
Speaker 1: Now how about your grandfather?
Speaker 2: My granddad, my step-grandfather, I was his baby.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Louis Henry, and he was from Oklahoma.  He was half Indian and half African American and he was a stud, dude (laughter).  Man, daddy was something else.  He was a, he was a hard, he went to school and learned how to be a butcher and he was the only butcher in our community and he would cut up meat for everybody.  He would bring the extra meat home.  I remember as a baby, he would take me into the, the butcher shop and show me off to all the fellas.  I'd get balloons and candies and what have you.  I can remember that, being as I was his baby, and you couldn't bother me.  He wouldn't let you bother me.  I would sit down at the, we had an old upright, a grand upright, in the living room and I can remember as two years old, him sitting me at this piano while everybody else was sitting around the old, little round screen television, you know, black and white, watching TV and me banging on this piano and I used to bang on it.  I would just bang.  I wouldn't, you know, just bang, just hit on the thing, you know, and every time somebody would come to try to stop me, daddy said, don't bother him.  If you bother him, you gotta deal with me.  And I used to bang myself to sleep on this.  I almost, whenever I felt like it, you know.  In fact, I knew this was my, my instrument and so when they watched TV, I would intentionally, I would think, go and play on it just to disrupt them and to gather attention.  I used to dance around the house.  I used to do a lot of things and, you know, entertainment-wise, and that was my first remembrance of that, me playing piano, was banging on that piano.  Although it was stated when I came out of the room, that he was going to be a piano player 'cause I was flinging my fingers, you know, and, but he was a very warm man, hardworking man, and he died early too in his life.  He was a very young man, you know.  No one wanted to go to the doctors, you know, during that time and I think he died finally of cirrhosis of the liver.  I think that's what took my grandfather out, but he was such a, a good man and everybody loved Louis Henry.  Everybody loved him.  He was a, he was a gangster.  He was a gangster.  He took no stuff.  You came over there, you had to deal with us, you know.  If you brought some problems over that were not, man, you know, that were out of control, he would not take any stuff from you, his children, nobody.  He had no problem, you know, disciplining whoever.
Story_ID: 127398
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned a few memories about your early childhood.  What's the earliest memory you have growing up that you can recall?
Speaker 2: Oh, man, I can, you know, I remember riding tricycles, you know, the neighborhood, the community that I grew up in on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois] and the Robert Brooks [Homes] community was a very warm community.  Everybody knew each other, it was a brotherhood--
Story_ID: 127399
Speaker 1: Let's talk about that.
Speaker 2: Major Lance lived right down the street from me [in Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: What street was that on?
Speaker 2: That would have been on 14th and Loomis.  Major Lance lived right down the street.  [HM] Redd Holt, [HM] Eldee Young, they all lived in the, in the same area.  They went to McKinley High School [Chicago, Illinois] with my uncles.  I can remember Redd, specifically, because he played drums with [HM] Ramsey Lewis and my mother [Juanita Thomas] used to take me here.  His wife and my mother were the best of friends growing up, Marylean [Holt] and mom, and I can remember being around watching him play and practice and my mother, you know, just enjoying it.  You know, they used to always sneak in and, but she had that privilege because of the fact that she was related, her and Marilyn were the best of friends.
Speaker 1: You mentioned some warm times and the family growing up in the household, the scrambled eggs and all the warm feelings, and the community, you also mentioned, now you're in Chicago, excuse me, you're born in the '50 [1950], in '50s [1950s]--
Speaker 2: In the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: --so you're growing up, you're growing up into your formative years, between '50 [1950] and '60 [1960].  What was Chicago like in the '50s [1950s] that you can recall?
Speaker 2: Man, it was a good time, hustle and bustle city, you know.  I can, it was nothing bad about Chicago, particularly where I lived.
Speaker 1: How about racially?
Speaker 2: Not at all, not at all.  In the community we lived in, it was a very mixed community and mind you, my grandfather worked for a lot of Jewish people and my uncles, who also went into the business of butchering, and, you know, we, we just were very close to everybody.  It was just a mixed community and there was no black and white for me during that time.  That didn't become conscious to me till the Civil Rights Movement came along but--
Speaker 1: But we'll discuss--
Speaker 2: --prior to that, I was just a good kid and just growing up in Chicago and observing everything that was going on and for me it was a fun time and I miss those times even to this day.
Story_ID: 127400
Speaker 1: You mentioned the eggs and bacon smells and waking up to that.  What were some of the other sights and sounds and smells in your neighborhood, growing up?
Speaker 2: You know, you remember the watermelon man?  Okay, we had the watermelon man, and we lived near South Water Market, too, which is a place where you could, the big vegetables and fruits and big trucks used to come off and, you know, a lot of Italians were over in that side and, in fact, we lived in the Italian, it was a mixed community, Italian, Jewish, Mexican, Hispanic community, we lived all in that area there, and a lot of, just, just a mixed community, period, and so, we, we came in contact with everybody, you know.  I had to go by the, the Hispanic theatre to get to my theatre.  When I went to go in the church, I had to walk in the, the Irish community, to go through to get to my church.  To go downtown, I had to walk through the Jewish community to go downtown and buy things, you know, and Jew Town [Maxwell Street], whereas on the weekends, particularly on Sundays in Jew Town, they used to have the fish fries and at the fish fries you might see Buddy Guy out there and some blues players and my mom used to take us down there and we used to buy shoes and there were some real good quality Buster Brown, quality clothing area, you know, but everything was sold there, at wholesale.  You could have a, in what we called then, was called Maxwell Street but we called it Jew Town 'cause you could go down and you could Jew everybody for what you wanted, you know, and the Jewish people they owned pretty much all the stores that were down in that area during that time.
Speaker 1: So you could barter and negotiate, what--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you could smell Polish sausage and the, and the onions being cooked in the air.  It was just such a, a vibrant, stinging community, you know, and then like when you walked through the Mexican community, where we used to go to the pump swimming pool, you could smell the enchiladas, the, the, and now that I'm thinking about it, man, I'm, I mean all these aromas that are coming back to me, you know, and then and you come back to our neighborhood, man, you're gonna, you're gonna smell some fried chicken, some catfish, it was all good, and we all shared.  It was no, as a child, no one ran me out of anywhere, you know.  Go over to the Italian community, the spaghetti was over there and you know the meat sauce was going and it was just a good, good way to grow up in Chicago [Illinois] during the '50s [1950s] and early '60s [1960s] for me, yes.
Story_ID: 127401
Speaker 1: So what elementary school did you attend?
Speaker 2: On the West Side of Chicago [Illinois], I went to Medill [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and then when we moved south, I moved over to an area called Chatham [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: What time, what age did you move from the West to the South?
Speaker 2: When we moved from the West Side, I think I was about eleven years old going to the South Side.
Speaker 1: So you spent most of your elementary school years at that school?
Speaker 2: On the West Side, yes.
Speaker 1: On the West Side.  Were there any teachers at that school that were very influential to you at that point?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I had a couple of 'em.  Mr. Nakagawa is a Japanese teacher who I eventually got a chance to see as an adult, as an entertainer, musician.  He came by to see me and it just blew me away to see him.
Speaker 1: And what subject did he teach you?
Speaker 2: Mister, he was a general studies teacher.  He was my homeroom teacher and he was tough on me.  He was tough on me but it paid off and he was very proud to see the success that I've had as a, as a musician.
Speaker 1: And who else did you, other teachers?
Speaker 2: Mr. Mason, who was my gym teacher.  He used to, he made me a boy, not a Boy Scout, a crossing guard.  He died after long, I, all my teachers were great, every one of 'em at Medill Elementary School was great.  I had one teacher, her name was Mrs. Young, and my last name, prior to me changing it, was Young as well, and it's a real interesting story because where I ultimately ended up living, her, she used to come, well her relatives lived there and she used to come by there and I would see her from time to time.  Mrs. Branch, our library teacher, ended up moving to the same neighborhood, on the South Side of Chicago, and she lived like three doors down from me.  I used to see Ms. Branch from my West Side elementary school but the thing about Mrs. Young was, well not so much about her, but that whole period of time and her as a teacher, my first time being on stage, okay.  Remember I told you I sang and I could, you know, I sang around the house and I had this little talent and she saw this thing, one of my teachers saw it, and they had this show "Hansel and Gretel" and you know who they made play Hansel.  I didn't want the part, didn't want to do it, I fought it but somehow they got me.  My mother [Juanita Thomas] got me to do this, okay, and there was a part in this, in the, in the story where Hansel and Gretel are sitting on the bench and Hansel's got his arm around Gretel and he's saying, you know, "Don't cry, we'll get home," or something like that, and, and I remember I had to sing a song to Hansel, I mean to Gretel--
Speaker 1: To Gretel.
Speaker 2: --and it was "Now I lay me down to sleep, fourteen hours work over me", remember that song in the, in the show?  And then at the end of that song I was supposed to kiss her and I wasn't kissin' no girls, man (laughter).  That was out, there was not gonna be any kissing--
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: --not at five years old.
Speaker 1: You were five years old.
Speaker 2: Yeah, man, first time on stage, and my mother and my grandmother [Mary Elizabeth Henry] stood up and said, "Boy, you better kiss that girl" and I did, and I think that was the, the real start of my career because after that I started getting so much attention that I realized I had something and--
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: I was an average student, actually I was a terrible student.  I wanted to have more fun.  I probably had ADA, attention deficit disorder, ADD [now attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, ADHD], you know.  I drew a lot of attention to me, you know, very exciting, you know, very energetic.
Speaker 1: So you were a very energetic child.  What kind of child were you outside of the school room?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was a mischievous child, you know, always gettin' into stuff.  What child wasn't?  It's just that I was a very mischievous child and I wanted to hang out with the big boys.  I always wanted to be with the big guys.
Story_ID: 127402
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about your, your siblings.  Could you name your siblings for us and their birth order and put yourself in there too?
Speaker 2: Well my older sister is Dr. Darryl Young.  Darryl is a, she was born May, May 4th, 1949 in Vallejo, California.  That's my heart, that's my mother today, that's my sister, she's, she's like my mom [Juanita Thomas].
Story_ID: 127403
Speaker 1: So you're telling us about your, your, your family, you started with your sister, you said, give us her name again.
Speaker 2: Dr. Darryl Young.
Speaker 1: Is she an M.D. or?
Speaker 2: No, she's an educator, a degree in education administration, yes.
Speaker 1: And then who was next?
Speaker 2: Next would have been my stepbrother, Mark [Thomas], he's a broadcaster.  He's over in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  If you ever listen to KFI radio, he's an announcer and an interviewer.  He is the first to interview Gates on the radio.  In fact, he set up that programming for KFI radio during that time.  He was the head newscaster on that radio station for many, many years, and right now, and then he went to public, PBS.  He's interviewed Bryant Gumbel, so many different people over there and he's a very well-known broadcaster over in Los Angeles.
Speaker 1: And then there was--
Speaker 2: And then my baby sister, Kellie [Thomas], and she's just a baby sister, you know.  Even though I was out of the house when she came along, at the point that she was born, I was pretty much on my own then but she went to Spelman [College in Atlanta, Georgia] and she has a master's degree in communications.  Very, very bright, very, very intelligent, very, she's my sweetheart, that's my baby.
Speaker 1: And they're all still in Chicago [Illinois] or--
Speaker 2: Her and my older sister is still in Chicago and Mark is living in California.
Story_ID: 127404
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned that your family attended church.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What church did, did you all attend?
Speaker 2: Well, we were Lutherans from the Missouri Center in Chicago [Illinois].  We started at Resurrection Lutheran Church, no, First Immanuel Lutheran Church on the West Side and then when we moved to Chatham [Chicago, Illinois], we went to Salem and then when we moved further south, we ended up going to Resurrection Lutheran Church.
Speaker 1: Were there any special experiences for you in the Lutheran church?
Speaker 2: All of it was good.  I was able to get involved with a lot of the youth programs.  I was a very devout religious child.  I had a lot of questions.  I questioned everything and I still question it all.  I think me coming through that, that Lutheran church, as you know, Martin Luther was a revolutionary and he revolutionized 'cause he broke away from the Catholic, Catholicism, and I think some of that having rubbed off on me made me the, the person that broke away from that religious way of life at that time, which ultimately I ended up going into Buddhism while in the military and then from there until now, el Islam, which--
Speaker 1: And we'll talk about that transition--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --as we go further in the interview.
Story_ID: 127405
Speaker 1: Now, where did you go to junior high school?
Speaker 2: There was no junior high school.  I went to high school, Harlan High School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went straight from elementary--
Speaker 2: Straight to high school.
Speaker 1: --straight to high school.  Who were some of your friends and buddies at Harlan High School?
Speaker 2: Oh, man, I had so many.  There were so many people I liked.  Athletes-wise, Cliff Meely [ph.], Freddie Shell [ph.], all the boys that played basketball.  One of my favorite friends, Arthur Cole [ph.], God bless him, he just passed away.  I had so many friends.  Emmett Brad Barry [ph.], Calvin Gray [ph.], Judson Hickson [ph.], I had so many, many friends.
Speaker 1: How about teachers that were important in high school?
Speaker 2: You know, Mr. Bill, Dr. [William] Bill Abernathy, he was probably, because of music, and he was the band teacher, him and [HM] Ms. Lena McLin, voice teacher, choir teacher in school, I had 'em both and they made a very explosive, impact on my life in me moving in the direction I'm currently moving in.  I mean, my parents [Juanita and Kay Thomas, III] were the start of it all but they found some, find some education into what I was doing, they bought that onto me and showed me how I could use that because they were professionals too at the same time.
Speaker 1: So you were starting to have a sense of a musical direction that was more, we'll say, academic with the music at that point.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But now were there any other activities you were involved in at school at that point?
Speaker 2: You know, I used to lifeguard, I swam, I, always into music, music has always been, like, second nature to me as a child.
Speaker 1: How about athletics?
Speaker 2: Athletics, I played basketball.  I played basketball at Harlan High School.  That was my thing, basketball and baseball.  I was a good baseball player, too.
Speaker 1: So your time was spent, your extracurricular activities were spent how?  How did you do your, besides music, what were you doing, you know, in your off thing, your down time?
Speaker 2: Chasing girls (laughter).  Chasing all the girls.  Actually, I only had one real sweetheart that I cared about but, you know, we all had so many people we could look up to and I had so many heroes, mentors, that I really cared about and I tried to associate myself with those people during that time.  So basketball, I had Dr. Brazil [ph.], who was a very kind gentleman to me, as a child, while I was in high school, and he presented some opportunities for me to play basketball for his school's team and I traveled, and performed and played with them.  Baseball-wise, I had Mr. Rello [ph.], Mr. Robinson.  I had so many little league baseball and on and on, and so I was involved, there was something to keep me actively--
Story_ID: 127406
Speaker 1: Explain, you mentioned chasing girls, as we said.  Explain the process of courtship stages back in the day, as they say.  Was it, was it different than it is today?  Or was it more rules and regulations involved?
Speaker 2: Oh, there were rules, man, you know.  I mean, everything was about mother, you know, and father.  You had to know the mother and the fathers during that time, and then everybody was chaperoned.  It wasn't like you had just left with the child alone so you could do what you wanted to do.  We would have our parties and we'd get to dance and, you know, hug and, but there wasn't a lot of overactive activity going on as it is today.  We were a good clean group of young people.  Again, with the church, we had good church families, teachers that were supportive of what we were doing and when there was a party, it was always a parent, several parents in the room and if you got too close, you would see somebody tapping you on your, you know you're not supposed to be doing this, son, you know, or to the young lady, as well.  No one was afraid to, to speak up.  We had a lot of church functions, roller skating, you know, just the, the typical things that children did, you know, did during that time and you didn't never want to go to those things alone but if you did, you always had a good time, whether you did or didn't and so, and you know, I had one girlfriend that I really cared about and, during that time [at Harlan High School in Chicago, Illinois], and, but as time went on along, we ended up breaking away from each other, yes.
Story_ID: 127407
Speaker 1: Now you're in high school [at Harlan High School in Chicago, Illinois], you're studying music.  Was the piano the foremost instrument for you now in high school or--
Speaker 2: No, I played tuba in high school.  That was in my freshman year.  I wanted to get in the band and they needed a tuba player and I excelled on the instrument.  During that time, Mr. Lindahl [ph.] was our freshman band teacher and he was also the varsity band teacher.  This was prior to Mr. [William] Abernathy coming to the school and they needed a tuba player in the varsity band and I excelled at the instrument, immediately.  I had so much musical background.  I just had a knack for it that by the time I got, you know, as soon as I got to the instrument, I was able to apply the, the parts to the bottom, to the tuba, and the next thing I knew, I'm up in the high school playing in the high school varsity band, and--
Speaker 1: Now, was this marching band and concert band?
Speaker 2: Marching band and concert band, yes.  Concert band, I ended up sitting up first chair, first stand, my freshman year and the senior that was there, Howard Toews [ph.], he and I were very competitive, very competitive musician.  He was, I think that job was given to me more because of his ego.  You know, Howard was, you know, a very, very handsome fellow, you know, very outgoing, all the girls loved Howard and Howard was just, you know, he had a little arrogance about himself but in general, Howard was a nice guy but I think Mr. Abernathy and then Mr. Lindahl, to cool him down, was to bring me into that spot and, but it wasn't that I didn't excel, I deserved the spot because I was talented.  I could play.
Story_ID: 127408
Speaker 1: So what was the young Young [referring to Ghallab] listening to on the radio?  Now, what were you, as far as your musical thing that you were listening to, what was influencing you?
Speaker 2: You know my father [stepfather, Kay Thomas, III] was taking me through so many different periods of music during that time, from Brazilian, Latin, straight-ahead jazz, avant jazz, avant-garde, big band, European music from like I was saying the Vienna Symphony Orchestra.  We went from so many different, water babies, listening to Miles Davis, John Coltrane, Eric Dolphy, Ornette Coleman.  I used to go to the Unitarian church on the South Side of Chicago and there they would have a jazz band, Muhal Richard Abrams used to perform there and he would play strictly avant-garde in between the sermons and it was wild but they had an outstanding band.  Richard Davis was there as well.  He was the bassist in the band, and Maurice White.  If you've ever heard of Earth, Wind and Fire, he was the drummer on the, in those bands.  I used to go to the Afro-Arts Theater, which used to be in the Oakenwald Theatre on Cottage Grove [sic, Oakland Square Theater, on Oakwood and Drexel].  I used to go down there and hear [HM] Phil Cohran and in his band he had Phil Cohran, Michael Harris, Rom Lee, Freddy Cole, I mean, the, Freddy, not Freddy Cole, excuse me, Fred White, Verdine White, everybody that started Earth, Wind and Fire came out of that, that scene and that music was such a creative music and it started with Phil Cohran during that time, teaching the children the frankiphone, the kalimba.  We called it the frankiphone, and he taught Maurice that, that instrument and Maurice really excelled at it, and Sherry Scott.  There was so many, Oscar Brown, Junior, his wife, there was so, so many, Chaka Khan, oh man, The Sons of Slums, it was so many bands around during that time, Weapons of Peace, and I used to just put my head into all of 'em, you know, everybody.  There was, Chuck, Chuck Davis.  I used to hear him all the time.  I used to sneak in these clubs and then would go down to Rush Street and go down there and Johnny Petrie would be playing in the lounge or maybe George Shearing would be playing at the, what was the name of that place, I was like fourteen during this time, the London House.  We might see Nancy Wilson.  You might see anybody down there.  Peggy Lee, you know.  I used to listen to her music at home.  Like I was saying, Frank Sinatra, all of 'em.  I grew up on all of this.  It was such a huge, amount of music that was being filtered in the air, including The Doo Wops, the Temptations, the Four Tops, oh man, I had so much music going, ringing through my head and I tried to do every bit of it.  The Five Stairsteps, The Jackson Five, [HM] Smokey Robinson, oh, man--
Speaker 1: So you had a, you had a wide gamut--
Speaker 2: A wide gamut of music to approach but my heart was more interested into the jazz music because it's very interpretive and that was something that was more, it, it would make me sit down to understand it, you know, and I would sit there with my dad and listen to all of it.
Story_ID: 127409
Speaker 1: So as you progressed in high school [at Harlan High School, Chicago, Illinois], playing the tuba--
Speaker 2: Hmmm.
Speaker 1: --did you have any idea at this point what you wanted to be, direction?  Say as you got close to the graduation, did you know what you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: No, I had no idea.  I thought I would be a policeman, a lawyer, a doctor.  I mean, just so many things were at my, at our hands, you know, and I couldn't figure out exactly what I was going to do with my life.
Speaker 1: When did the piano come into the picture?
Speaker 2: The piano came in more, it was always there, it never left me.  I used to go up in the church, excuse me, after we have choir rehearsal and I would bang on it and I'd go up and play on the organs and whenever we'd go to the, Natural Chicago museum [sic, Field Museum of Natural History], I would go there and I would go downstairs and play on that piano and have my mother watching me while I'm playing, you know, and--
Speaker 1: Had you studied privately at this point?
Speaker 2: I had never had any, any music lessons, at all, other than the tuba during that particular time.  The piano was just a natural thing.  It was just, it was a gift for me, you know.  It was, God gave me that gift.  He gave me the gift of music and not necessarily the piano.  He gave me the gift of music and I found the piano as an out--
Speaker 1: A way to express.
Speaker 2: --a way to express what I had musically and that gift that he gave me, it was strictly God, guiding that whole, that whole movement during that time.  That was the peace for me, was music.
Speaker 1: We have footage of Wes Montgomery saying that he didn't play the guitar, he just used it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: He used it to get his ideas across.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 127410
Speaker 1: So you're getting close to graduating from high school, now it's time for a young man to do something.
Speaker 2: Well I didn't graduate from high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I dropped out.  During that time in Chicago [Illinois], there was such a, my teenage years, there were gangs.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were a lot of gangs going on in Chicago and, I mean, there were gangs in elementary school.  I had problems with 'em because we lived in the homes and you had those kids that lived in the row houses, particularly London, the, the Lowden homes, and I wasn't joining any gangs.  My mind was, I was on to trying to do something with my life, be somebody, do something but I would always be confronted with them going across the campus, going to school.  In elementary school, I remember one time a kid that was coming out of the, the, Gypsy's I think it was the name of the restaurant, the elementary school, we used to go in there and get French fries at lunchtime, and one time after school I dropped in there and I was getting some French fries and this kid picked a fight with me and the boy pulled out a razor.  Man, do you ever see anybody do the 102 flat?  I wasn't fightin' nobody over nothing, you know, but he just didn't like me because of where I lived, you know.  I lived in a home, you know, and I probably was a little different too because I was a little more eclectic in my thinking, a little bit more intelligent in terms of how I carried myself, my dress.  A lot of people didn't like that, you know, and, or those kids didn't like it.  So that followed me even into high school and the same kids tried to chase me and one day they chased me across the campus, caught up with me and they beat me up and I went in the school, in the cafeteria, I lost my temper and I went after one of the kids.  Well, thank God there was this teacher, Mr. Thompson.  He was a nice guy.  He was a very nice kid and he brought me into the office and he talked to me and he said, Ghalib, you know, he cooled me down anyway.  He asked me what I was going to do with my life and I couldn't tell him.  So I ended up going up to Detroit [Michigan].  Anyway, I just left that there.  I don't want to talk about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 127411
Speaker 1: I ended up going to Detroit [Michigan] and I lived up there for a minute, and I started getting involved with music a little bit more and I told you I did some boxing at the Kronk Gym, or, in the, in the Brewster[-Douglass Housing] Projects.
Speaker 2: With Emanuel Steward there?
Speaker 1: With Emanuel Steward and he knows me to this day.  He remembers me and he remembered me as a child 'cause he used to hang around there all the time.  It was right across the street from where I was living and--
Speaker 2: Now who was living there at that time that you stayed with--
Speaker 1: My real father--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and his family.
Speaker 2: Let's talk about him for a moment.  Let's kind of back up.  What was his name?
Speaker 1: His name was Harold, Harold McLemore [ph.].  I can't tell you too much about Harold other than the fact that he was, he was a worker, he worked hard, he painted cars.  He used to work at Earl Scheib and he probably worked at Ford Motor Company because during that time, everybody worked at a few different places but I can tell you about my stepbrothers, you know, 'cause he had three other sons.
Speaker 2: So let's discuss this.  So you had a little trouble in Chicago [Illinois], it's time to go to Detroit for cooling off a while.
Speaker 1: Well he came to Chicago.  My mother [Juanita Thomas], she thought it was good for me to make that move, to take, they asked me if I wanted to stay or what.
Speaker 2: Had you been in touch with him before previously  and--
Speaker 1: No, he came down looking to see me, though.  He'd been down to see me once before and I think I was fourteen years old then, fourteen, fifteen years old.  So I--
Speaker 2: So he actually came looking for you?
Speaker 1: Yes, he wanted to see me and well I had an Auntie ChiChi [ph.] who was in touch with him who lived in Detroit and this is my grand Auntie ChiChi and my great Auntie ChiChi, who lived in Detroit and she knew of my problems that I was having in Chicago and she told him about 'em, through the family, he got word.  He came down to see me once, went back, and then came down again and I ended up going back up with him the second time that he left.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you go back and it's kind of a different situation because you really haven't been reared by him but you have some stepbrothers.  Tell me about them.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, Jake and Harold, man, they were cool.  They were cool, they, and, Sheila, my oldest sister, she ended up dying, she OD'd.  But this was like, now I'm getting the street, I'm getting pure street now.
Speaker 2: Detroit style.
Speaker 1: I'm getting street, brother, you know.  I mean, you know, that was unthought-of in Chicago, although I was probably heading in that direction anyway from some of the things that was happening to me but pure street, you know.  You know Sheila was there, a lady of the night, Harold was a gangster, Jake was in, a very well-known athlete at Pershing High School.  He was a great athlete, basketball player, so he and I we had that one thing in common but I drifted toward the other two because they were, they were in the thick of the mud, you know.  He used to take me up to the Woodward Theatre and I'm 14 years old, right, and he would get me in.  I'm sittin' up there watching Smokey Robinson, you know, Steve Little, Stevie, Stevie Wonder and, you know, he'd just park me in and he'd go and do his business and do his thing but I'm up there enjoying all this entertainment and I was in awe of it.  I remember one night we went to the Cobo Arena and, which ended up becoming the Joe Louis Arena--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and we saw the Dells and some other people.  Harold was the, Harold Junior was that type of guy.  He was into, he was very clever, very slick, streetwise, you know, very, very clean, handsome, very handsome.  Sheila, on the other hand, she tried to mother me and she did.  She worked hard at trying to be a mother to me, to her little brother, you know, but she was caught up in drugs and which ultimately she died, she OD'd and that hurt me when she was, when she died, because I really loved her.
Speaker 2: You were there then?
Speaker 1: I wasn't, I was in Detroit at the time but I was, you know, I used to be with Sheila quite a bit, either her or Harold, and Jake was always in school so, you know, but, when she died, that hurt me because she was somebody I truly loved, you know, and I, and it was a shock to me, you know.  I mean, I'm up in Detroit just for a little while, you know.
Speaker 2: Around what year would this have been?
Speaker 1: This would have been about '63 [1963], '64 [1964].
Story_ID: 127412
Speaker 1: Now how was Detroit [Michigan] as a city at that point?  Was it really--
Speaker 2: Detroit was cool, man, it was swinging.  I remember going out to Eight Mile Road and, you know, and mind, remember I told you, I always wanted to be around older people so I found my association with older people and I ended up joining some singing groups 'cause I had a high voice and I could sing high, that falsetto real good, so one of my dad's friends son had a singing group and one of the guys couldn't make the, make it so I ended up taking this guy's place and singing his parts, and that was fun, you know, for it was.  And mind you, Diana Ross is my cousin, okay, and she lived down in the, in the Brewster's [Brewster-Douglass Housing Projects] too, and dad [Harold McLemore (ph.)] used to, my, she doesn't say dad, but my father, I mean he's not like daddy, daddy, but he took me over to--
Speaker 1: Natural father.
Speaker 2: --my, he's my natural father, he took me over to, to their house and I knew the family and everybody, they knew me, and so it was a time I used to just frequent into the place, in and out.  I never claimed her as a relative, as an adult, but I knew then that she was a relative to us.
Speaker 1: She was in Brewster Projects?
Speaker 2: She lived right down the street, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, right now during that time period, '64 [1964], '63 [1963], Motown is getting ready to come on now.
Speaker 2: Motown was on, man.  I used to walk by there going to school 'cause I went to Northwestern, I went to Northwestern High School [Detroit, Michigan]--
Speaker 1: And the, and the--
Speaker 2: --and you had to cross Grand Boulevard and there it was, you know, and it was something to see, man, you know.
Speaker 1: Now were your aspirations changing now, like I got to get involved with this.  What was happening to you?  You're in Detroit, of course, it's not all the most pleasant thing, everything, but what's going on with you now at this point in your life?
Speaker 2: Well I'm maturing now, you know.  I'm like, I have my athleticism going 'cause I started playing basketball for Northwestern High School, and during that time there was some great ballplayers and I was also accepted as one of them and I made the team during that year coming from Chicago [Illinois].  I played in several games and then we ended up moving from that area going to the West Side and I ended up enrolling in another school.  And mind you, Sheila, enrolled me into Northwestern and Sheila enrolled me into McKenzie [High School, Detroit, Michigan].  She was the one that kept me in the schools.  Like I said, she was like my mother, you know--
Speaker 1: She did the best she could with her situation.
Speaker 2: She did, she did the best.  She always looked out for me.  If I needed money, she kept me moneywise.  If I needed money, Harold kept me moneywise, Harold, Jr.  I never had any problems, you know, when it came to them.  When I was hungry, if there wasn't nothing to eat, they would go out and somehow get me something to eat and bring it back home for me.  They loved me and I loved them too and I didn't, I never, you know, I miss both of them to this day.  I have no, I have no idea where Harold Jr. is.  I have no idea where Harold Sr. is, nor Jake.  I was in touch with one sister, Renee, and she was by another mother and, but I have no idea where she is either, to this day.
Speaker 1: So how long did you stay in Detroit?
Speaker 2: Almost two years, almost two years.
Speaker 1: And what, where did you go when you left Detroit?
Speaker 2: I came back to Chicago.
Speaker 1: This would have been about what, 1965?
Speaker 2: About '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 127413
Speaker 1: Now you're back, you had two years of good Detroit [Michigan] folks, it's only a four hour difference.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, you're back in Chicago [Illinois] now and--
Speaker 2: But to me, it wasn't a four hour difference.  To me, Chicago's like a million, million miles away 'cause I'd never been anywhere.  I mean, I've been places but I didn't know the difference in terms of miles between the two cities, the distance, yes.
Speaker 1: So you go back to Chicago, what do you do when you get back to Chicago?
Speaker 2: I came back to Chicago and I told my parents [Juanita Thomas and Kay Thomas, III], I said, "Look, I can't stay here, I gotta go in the military."  I ended up going back to the same, to high school [Harlan High School], the high school that I was first started at.  They put me back in there and then after going back into that high school, same problems, same people, but I'm a little bit more mature now.  I'm able to hang out a little bit more.  I've been in night clubs now so you know where my head is.  I want to hang out in the street.  I don't want to be going to school.  I'm an adult now.  I've, I've matured tremendously in relationship to my friends.  So I started doing that and that was a no, no to my mother and father in Chicago.  You know, I became very street-wise.  I was, I was a street-wise kid and that really blew them away, you know, to see me.
Speaker 1: How about musically, what were you doing musically?
Speaker 2: Music was still there with me.  It was always there but--
Speaker 1: Were you still studying?
Speaker 2: --that little bit distance, but a little bit more at a distance now because now I'm trying to figure out what am I going to do with my life.  You know, where am I going, you know?  I wasn't joining any gangs, no Blackstone Rangers [Black P. Stone Nation], no Egyptian Cobras [Mickey Cobras], or nothing like that.
Speaker 1: Did you, did you have an association with a Willie Pickens?
Speaker 2: I did have association with Willie but that was later in life--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that was later, after I got out of the military and after I got--left college.
Story_ID: 127414
Speaker 1: So now you're going to Detroit [Michigan], you're back in Chicago [Illinois] and you decide that you won't be hanging, you want to see the world and do what you want to do.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, that's not going to jive too well with your parents [Juanita Thomas and Kay Thomas, III]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So what do you decide to do at that point?
Speaker 2: I joined the [U.S.] Air Force.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They signed me up, they allowed me to go on in the Air Force.  They wouldn't let me, I wanted to go in the Marines but my mother wasn't going to have that, you know, and, or the [U.S.] Army, she wasn't going to have either one of those and mind you I was seventeen at the time.  So I had to wait until my eighteenth birthday, anyway, before I could go in but they did allow me to sign up and they signed the papers for me to do it and I ended up going in the Air Force.  I did my time in the Air Force and then came on out.
Speaker 1: So where were you stationed?
Speaker 2: All over.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we'll just leave that alone.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 127415
Speaker 1: Now, so after you get out of the military [U.S. Air Force], were you doing any music in the military now?
Speaker 2: I was.  I was playing piano in a couple of different bands and that's when it began to increase.  I met this sergeant at one of the bases I was working at, this African American trumpet player, can't remember his name, but he introduced me to, he was into Miles Davis and they needed a piano player.  They had a drummer, had a bass player but they needed a piano player.  Well, hey, I had such a good ear for music and he bought me these tunes he wanted me to learn and I started learning the tunes.  He wanted me to learn the technique of the songs and I didn't want to learn the technique.  I told him I could hear the songs and I could play 'em.  Ended up playing those tunes for the band and we ended up doing a lot of officers' parties, doing holidays and working officers' clubs, doing a lot of gigs around the base there and off the base and I learned some songs by watching.  There was one guy up there that was the drummer in the band and he knew some Horace Silver pieces at piano and I would watch him play those tunes and I picked it up from him.  The next thing I know I'm playing A Song for My Father, Jacky Yang and some other tunes by Horace Silver and including, too, "So What", all blues, you know, and I sang too so that was the other difference to the whole thing.  They could take advantage of me singing.  So I sang some blues and some other things.  I joined a--
Speaker 1: So now the music is getting' kind of serious for you, now?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it was, it was happening.  It was really going on and I started getting recognition as a pianist.
Story_ID: 128417
Speaker 1: It's a, it's a new experience for you--
Speaker 2: Oh, man.
Speaker 1: --and it's going in and you're seeing the sleekness of Detroit [Michigan] but now you go back to Chicago [Illinois], you go through the Army [sic, U.S. Air Force] and what we need to do then, and I'm really curious to find out when the switch, the name change and all of that happened for you also.
Speaker 2: That happened later on too.
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll, we'll get through that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So we come through the, we come through the military stint--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and now you're, now, what were you doing when you get out of there?
Speaker 2: Oh, when I got out, I knew I had this talent as a musician.  So, the one thing too before I went in, I had a job.  I was working in a, at this, this clothing store in Chicago called Carson Pirie Scott and I saved up enough money.  I bought my own organ.  You remember that Farfisa deluxe?  Well I had a Farfisa, man, and I was playing with different bands.  We had a neighborhood band and we're playing gigs and stuff and, you know, a couple of the guys are in high school, too, and they were playing Lonnie Hubbard, Wayne and some of the guys, and we had a band together and we started doing some, you know, getting a few gigs here and there, a few gigs in there and it was very, very intriguing, man, very exciting period because now I'm doing something and making some money at playing.
Speaker 1: Now what year would this have been, approximately?
Speaker 2: This would have been about '67 [1967], just before I went, I went in the Air Force in '68 [1968].
Story_ID: 128418
Speaker 1: Now let's talk about this, during the '60s [1960s], a lot of stuff is happening in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: John F. Kennedy is, is the president--
Speaker 2: Assassinated.
Speaker 1: --and then he's assassinated--
Speaker 2: [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].
Speaker 1: --Malcolm [X] in '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Dr. King in '68 [1968].  Robert Kennedy, I believe, in '69 [1969; sic, 1968].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So all this was going on at the same--how was this affecting you?
Speaker 2: You know, it was and it wasn't because I was moving so fast, man, you know, that I didn't really pay very much attention to the Civil Rights Movement during that time.
Speaker 1: There were riots going on.
Speaker 2: There were, well the riots, when the riots came, I was gone, I was in the Air Force so I, I was blue, I wasn't black, I was blue, but there was another thing that was happening with my parents, the Contract Buyers League.  Well they were, the homes that they had bought were not worth the value that they bought these homes.  They had these homes that were built from the ground up and they were being ripped up by the mortgage companies and so they decided they weren't going to pay their mortgage anymore and people's families were being, police officers, school teachers, everybody was being, it didn't matter but these were well-to-do people.  My dad [stepfather, Kay Thomas, III] worked hard.  My mother [Juanita Thomas] worked hard to get this home and people were being evicted.  Our next door neighbors were being evicted.  It was just, it was really a, something, and then the police that came in to do the evicting were people that lived in the neighborhood and a lot of them fought against the situation that was going on.  Anyway, so I started realizing that some of this was happening and I started being on the side of the cause of right, which was our parents, okay, and so I was standing out and picket with them and cuss and holler back at the police as they were trying to evict the, well who, the sheriff, when they came, with the sheriff, 'cause the city police decided they weren't gonna do it and the sheriff's police came in and they were the ones that started evicting people out of their homes but eventually they won the suit and theirs homes, they got, they got everything settled and the homes were rightly priced and their monies were, that they had held in escrow, finally starting going back to the companies and some of them paid off their homes earlier.  The homes during that time, they weren't worth $40,000 during that time.  I think they were charging them like 60,000.  The homes were not worth the value that they, but now those homes today are worth, worth in excess of $200,000, see.
Speaker 1: So you were starting to feel some social injustice?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Having been to the military.
Speaker 2: No, I hadn't gone in yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was just about to make that, that intro and then at the point that I made that intro, I left all that behind me.  So when the riots happened in Chicago, I could remember the yuppies during the '67 [1967] period because I could remember, I forget his name--
Speaker 1: The hippies you mean?
Speaker 2: The hippies.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: And, yuppies, right--the hippies.  I can remember them and what they were doing in downtown Chicago and Mayor [Richard J.] Daley but I was never down there, or when I was down there, I was avoiding that area, you know.  I never went into the areas, in order to get into that, you had to go to it.
Speaker 1: As it always has been.
Speaker 2: As it always.  You know, you had to just jump in it.  It wasn't, if you didn't want to be involved, stay on the outside and keep on rolling.  For me, I knew how to roll in the other direction to get to my objectives, okay, so that's what I did.
Story_ID: 128419
Speaker 1: So you come through the Service and you're back at this clothing store [Carson Pirie Scott in Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: You're working with the clothing store, now.  Is this--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --is this before or after the Service?
Speaker 2: This was before the Service.  I had the job at the clothing store.  I worked for Ardell Tuma [vice president and director of fashion apparel at Carson Pirie Scott].  She was a, a, I was a clerk, a fashion clerk.  I used to go with her to the Merchandise Mart, pick up all the, the clothes that the ladies were going to be wearing for the year.  She would go to New York and they would send the merchandise to the Merchandise Mart.  I would go over there and pick it or set up mannequins in the store, whatever she needed I was her clerk and I did everything that needed to be done during that time.  It was a great job, a great experience, that's what got me into clothing 'cause I love clothes.  I'm sharp as a tack.  I may not be now, but I am sharp as a tack, here.
Story_ID: 128420
Speaker 1: So you come back out of the Service and you, what do you do when you get back?
Speaker 2: The first thing I did was go back and get that job that I had at Carson's [Pirie Scott in Chicago, Illinois] and I was--
Speaker 1: And they were, they were glad to give it back to you?
Speaker 2: And they were glad to give it back and happy to see me back again.  At the same time, I got, I had a girlfriend, she got pregnant, we had a little boy and--
Speaker 1: Do you want to say her name and his name?
Speaker 2: Yes, his name is Ghalib the Second.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And her name is Elaine, Elaine Fraser [ph.].  She's living in Oakland, California.  Ultimately, we ended up moving out to California but prior to that, though, back to the music side of me, I was working, there was so much happening, man, I mean, so much.  I had a, is the word plethora sound--
Speaker 1: Plethora, yeah.
Speaker 2: Plethora sounds relative, so, I had so much going on for me during that time, man, and I was all over the place trying to figure out, what, my hands were in everything.  My hands were in everything.  I ended up working at South Shore Country Club, excuse me, South Shore YMCA [Chicago, Illinois], where I became assistant program director over there, assistant aquatic director, and I was teaching swimming, playing music in the band, the sole production band.  We're working down at The Guys and Gals.  I met Charles Earland and, 'cause he was, he was awesome, man, and I dug Charles.
Speaker 1: I got a chance to play with Charles for a while.
Speaker 2: Oh, did you, you know.  You know he's--
Speaker 1: The "Mighty Burner".
Speaker 2: Yes he is and he was an inspiration for me because I was playing at that time, not the Farfisa deluxe, I had a Farfisa professional, the next one up.  So I'm a Leslie in this thing, man.  I'm gettin' ready to go off in the music, right?  So one night this band that I've been playing at where after we met Charles Earland and stuff, we're going to do a gig and we did a gig with Charles Earland and, at the Guys and Gals Lounge.  The guy that was producing the band, actually, he was the director of the YMCA and he had me playing in his band.  We ended up going to this club called The Sutherland Lounge, which is on 47th and Drexel [Chicago, Illinois].  We're walking there and he says, Ghalib, you're going to play this organ in there and the band's going to set up the stages up here and the bar is down, right.  The stage is in the middle of the bar.  Walk in there, man, there's a white B3 organ, which one Leslie on one end, sterile Leslies, one on the other end.  He said, you're gonna play this.  I had no idea how to fire up an organ.  I said, how do you turn the thing on?  I didn't know how to push, I saw the button to turn it on--
Speaker 1: But there's two buttons.
Speaker 2: But there's, right.  So the, the bartender came up and showed me how to get it on and got it on.  I would have preferred to use my little Farfisa but it wasn't competing with this Hammond B3 organ.  Man, I come in and, and so we're on stage playing and this guy comes in with a gold cape, a pair of gold boots, gold suit, gold shirt with this cape on it and on the back of it says, "Lonnie the Golden Boy".  I said, okay.  He's like, shoot, so I'm like 20, 21 during 21, during that 20.
Speaker 1: This is about 19, what is this about 19 what?
Speaker 2: This would have been around 1970, '71 [1971], '72 [1972].  It's been around the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, actually early '70s [1970s], '71 [1971].  So he comes in, he jumps on the organ, flips the thing on, man, and him and my drummer and my sax player, they started jammin'.  Man, and this cat was walkin' the bass line and I'm like--I'm headed toward the hills.
Speaker 1: Would it by chance have been [Dr.] Lonnie Smith?
Speaker 2: It was Lonnie Smith.  It was Lonnie Smith and, man, he was a phenomenal organist but he wasn't the organ player that weekend.  The weekend organ player was Jimmy Smith.  Jack McDuff was the organ player that weekend, not Jimmy Smith, Jack McDuff.  And we walked out of there and that was my lesson, so you know what I did?  I put that axe down.
Speaker 1: You said no more organ.
Speaker 2: No more organ, no more music, period, man, I was through from that point.
Speaker 1: Which is a phenomenon that occurs with sometimes with musicians, it's a turning point for you.  You think about it for a while or you do something about it real quick.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So what did you do?  You put it down for a bit.
Speaker 2: Oh, I just said, forget it, you know, it wasn't for me 'cause I got my butt burnt, man, you know, and it was embarrassing, you know, to, to sit around this type of greatness and this kid's much younger than me and he's sittin' up here playing this act and tearing it up.  Hello (laughter), you know what I mean.  Oh, man.
Speaker 1: And with all due respect to the, to the great Dr. Lonnie Smith--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --who's one of the greatest--
Speaker 2: Yes, most definitely.
Speaker 1: --organ players in the world.
Speaker 2: Ahhhh--
Speaker 1: And with fairness to you, that was, nothing you could really do with that--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --at that point.
Speaker 2: Not then.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 128421
Speaker 1: So then what happened?
Speaker 2: So, like I said, I had a son [Ghalib Ghallab, II] and, and you know, and I was still young and just fresh out of the [U.S.] Air Force too.  I hadn't been out of the Air Force six months yet and all this is going on.  So, my girlfriend [Elaine Fraser (ph.)] at that time said she was moving to California.  So she did.  She left me and she moved with the baby to California.  Kept calling me telling me, come on.  So finally one day I hooked up with a friend and we drove out to California, trumpet player, Steve.  So we drive out to California and I'm living in Los Angeles in Watts and couldn't find a job, man.  Went all, everywhere, trying to find me a gig.  Couldn't find me a gig but I had relatives in Northern California, my Uncle Frank, and the music is not on my mind at all.  Music was not there, it was--
Speaker 1: Gone.
Speaker 2: Gone, forget it.  But we go up to Northern California with my Uncle Frank and got up there with him and lived with him.  Then I brought her and, and the baby, and Ghalib, and we're living in Northern California and we started getting things together. I got me a good job, working at Mare [Island] Naval Shipyard, refueling and defueling nuclear submarines (laughter).
Story_ID: 128422
Speaker 1: And I had a nice apartment.  Man, I had my custom-made speakers and stuff that I brought back with me from the military and I had nine--
Speaker 2: Explain that to us now.  I noticed that people that came through that time period in the military always had an excellent what they call, hi-fi equipment.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Explain, explain that.
Speaker 1: Well, when you're in the war you start realizing that, you know, quality and, you know, was important and some of the gear that we had was like a, you had the Nakamichi's, you had the Akai's--
Speaker 2: And the TEAC.
Speaker 1: --and the TEAC and, you know, and Macintosh.
Speaker 2: I can recall, you know, you might have experienced this, with my uncles had the reel to reels and just--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well I had the Akai, reel to reel, the Triple X heads, you know, and every, everybody had those, you know, and you can get 'em in the military through the BX at a cheaper price than they, through the BX, the PX, which is the, the military exchange.  You can go in there and what will cost you maybe $100, it'll only cost us like twenty bucks.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you could afford to buy those things and that's why I did during that time.
Speaker 2: So you had a nice apartment up in the--
Speaker 1: A very nice apartment, custom-made speakers.  I had this guy build my speakers for me, man.  Shoot, I was laid out and had the jazz going, just didn't have no instrument.
Story_ID: 128423
Speaker 1: You're in the Bay Area [in Northern California]?
Speaker 2: I'm living in the Bay Area, well I'm living in Vallejo, California.
Speaker 1: Which folks have to understand too, that there's a big difference in, in the whole spirit and climate of Northern and Southern California.
Speaker 2: Oh, most definitely.  Hipper, very intelligent, felt, I mean, and I shouldn't say hipper, but it was a very, more cultural experience.
Speaker 1: Eclectic.
Speaker 2: Eclectic experience being up there and the type of music that I was enjoying.  I was meeting musicians that were playing that type of music, all of it, from avant-garde to straight-ahead to contemporary, your R and B groups, the whole works.  So I was up there, she, we got married, and she knew that she didn't want me as a musician.  She didn't want a musician 'cause, and I'm going to school too.  Mind you I'm going to Napa [Valley] Junior College, I'm playing basketball for the college team.  I got my GED while I was in the military so that afforded me that when I got out and I had all this money and stuff from the military so--
Speaker 1: The GI Bill.
Speaker 2: The GI Bill, and I used that to go to Napa Junior College in Northern California.
Speaker 1: And what were you studying there?
Speaker 2: I was studying Napa Junior College.  What was I studying, was in music, that was my major.  Did I go to class?  No (laughter), but again, it was an experience.
Speaker 1: But you were enrolled.
Speaker 2: And I enrolled and I tried out for the basketball, the college team.  I made the basketball team and we started traveling and playing basketball.  I got a, a college bask--man I'm playing college basketball, okay.  That was my, that was my other love, okay, and, and we had this, I met this friend of mine, his name is Artis Terrell, he started going to school there.  Actually, the apartment that I lived in was owned by his uncle and, and during that time I didn't know it till, we met each other in school and then I met him and come to find out his uncle owned my apartment, well I knew Mr. Terrell owned the apartments but I didn't know that--
Speaker 1: He was his--
Speaker 2: --yeah, that Artie was his nephew prior to, but Artie and I met at school.  There were hardly any African Americans going to the school during this time, okay.  I mean, you could, if there were more than four of us, that's what it was.  So Artie said to me, Ghalib, let's start, the black, you know, every, every college had their black student union.  So Artie said, let's start a black student union, let's get it chartered through the school and let's do it and get the few blacks that were going to school there.  Mind you again, there were only four going to this school up in Napa.  So Artie said, I'll be the president, you be the vice president and we were the only two students that were part of this, this organization.  Nobody else had time for us, right, and they started sending us around the country to these peer groups, peer counseling groups.
Story_ID: 128424
Speaker 1: We [Ghallab and Artis Terrell] went down to Los Angeles [California] to, L.A. City, L.A. State, Long Beach.  I think there's a--
Speaker 2: Long Beach State--
Speaker 1: Long, Cal State Long Beach
Speaker 2: Or Cal State Long Beach [California State University, Long Beach in Long Beach, California].
Speaker 1: And we went down there for a seminar and while I was there I got the hook again.  I went in, they had the jazz festival going on.  I went down there and we hung out one night and saw Willie Bobo playing, the Willie Bobo group.
Speaker 2: Great percussionist.
Speaker 1: Ahhhh, man, that blew me away and you know what happened?  I got the bug.  So we go back to our hotel room, which is the Travelodge, and next door to the Travelodge was, was Lumps, and we go in there and they got a band playing in there and man, this, this urge came onto me, you know, I want to play.  Man, I jumped up and went there and they let me sit in on piano.  I didn't know what the heck the song was but I started playing and my hands were going where, you know, the chord progressions, the whole thing.  Mind you, I'd still been pounding on the piano but I hadn't made an approach to this is going to be my instrument yet, okay, and after that, we ended up going to the Whisky a Go Go and that night we go in there and there's Donny Hathaway and they're playing on, what's that Hollywood--
Speaker 2: Sunset.
Speaker 1: Sunset and Hollywood, walk in there, man, and we go in, excuse me, and just Artie and I we go in and we run into David Susskind's son and he was in there and man, we enjoyed this show and after the show we went from there to David Susskind's house, his house where his son lived, and mind you now we're dealing on another level here, you know.  I mean something is, my whole life is going through a transition, now.
Speaker 2: There's an energy.
Speaker 1: Another energy's coming and I'm into music now, can't wait to get back to Vallejo.  We go to David Susskind, Jr.'s house, we have a party at his house, you know, and--
Speaker 2: Typical '70s [1970s] party.
Speaker 1: Right, met the father, you know, and the things that go along during that went along with that time.
Speaker 2: Typical '70's [1970s] probably.
Speaker 1: We were into it.  Mind you I had a bandana, I had a flower shirts on, and I had a, a, I bought this, this orange coat that I bought from the Grave Wolfman.  It had a flower, lining all over, I had boots and, man, I was just--
Speaker 2: Clean.
Speaker 1: I was too clean, baby.  So, and my hair, I had a 'fro.  You know, my hair was, I had a beard too back then, during that time, and Artie and I we were very close.  So anyway, he and I, we partied, we partied with David, Junior and now I'm dealing on a whole different level.  I'm on a upper level now.  I'm beginning to see something.
Speaker 2: You're on the "A" list now.
Speaker 1: On the "A" list, now, right.  We go back to Vallejo [California], we got back home.  There was, all this happened in a weekend.  It seemed like a lifetime, you know.
Story_ID: 128425
Speaker 1: Go back to Vallejo [California] and, you know, get back up there and well in the meantime, I'm having troubles with my wife [Elaine Fraser (ph.)].  We're not, we're not, she don't want no musician.  She didn't like what I was doing and she was doing her thing and I was doing my thing.  Ultimately, we got a divorce.  I got my own place and I was living on a, in Vallejo right off Main Street and this guy that lived across from me, I saw this grand, they had an upright piano.  I had a nice place, man.  One bedroom coach house in back of this big house and I could overlook the valley from where I lived on this hill, right off Main Street and Georgia but my house was off the, off the alley and this guy was driving down, I said, man, what you gonna do with that piano?  He said, I don't know, man, I'm, I'm gonna get rid of it.  I said, man, you wanna sell it?  He said, yeah.  How much?  $200.  I said okay.  I came out, gave him $200, I had me an upright piano.  Brought that in my house, everything changed from that point on.  Man, I practiced, I played every day, almost, I wouldn't go to work, I was so involved with trying to learn this instrument.
Speaker 2: And how were you going about learning it?
Speaker 1: Just playing.  I didn't buy any books, I just, I would listen to music and I would try to play the stuff that I was hearing, you know, and I got pretty good at that.  I could pick out a song.  I knew the, the chord, I knew the, knew the keyboard, I knew the notes, I knew everything that was on there but I hadn't had any formal training so everything that I was doing I was doing it on my own.
Speaker 2: Raw inspiration.
Speaker 1: Raw inspiration.  I met this guy, he's a friend of mine, his name is Jimbo Sudan [Jimmy Boyden], his brother, Chockie played a bass.  Chockie, that was his name.  Chockie Boyden and Jimbo, and Jimbo was a percussionist but he was a different type of, he had the harp of a piano and the strings, just the string section of a piano and he made these, you remember those, what do you call those things you play with the, the--
Speaker 2: The xylophone or the--
Speaker 1: Not the xylophone but the, it was another string instrument that you play with, with these feathered-typed mallets [hammered dulcimer].
Speaker 2: Uh--
Speaker 1: Anyway, I can't remember the name of, but that's, he created an instrument out of the harp of the piano and they used to come up to my house and we would practice in the house.  It was avant-garde.  Man, we were gone.  We were zapped plus we were partying quite a bit and I'm reading, I'm reading all type of books.  I'm reading, oh, I'm getting heavy in the head, just, just scientifically, you know--
Speaker 2: This, this is like '73 [1973], '74 [1974]?
Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973], '74 [1974], I'm gettin', you know, I'm beginning to, to approach some, some intellectual, a--
Speaker 2: A metaphysical-type--
Speaker 1: Right, and that's exactly what it was and then along with the herb, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so to speak because I had to have the herb to get the urge to want to be creative, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 128426
Speaker 1: And so one night, Jimbo [Sudan, also known as Jimmy Boyden] said to me, "Ghalib, let's go over to San Francisco [California]."  I said, okay.  I said, "Where we going?"  "We're going to Keystone Korner."  I said, "Okay, man, let's go.  Who's playing?"  Ahmad Jamal.  We go over to Keystone Korner, man, we drive from the Bay Area to the, from Vallejo, which is about, about, an hour and some, an hour and fifteen minutes from Vallejo, crossing great, the Bay Bridge going to the, to get over there.  So we get over there and we go in and I could hear the band playing, man, and we're coming in, he got Jamil Sulieman [Jamil Nasser] on bass, Frank Gadd on drums and, of course, McCourt, McCourt, you got--
Speaker 2: Ahmad Jamal--
Speaker 1: --Ahmad Jamal on piano.  So we pull up, the guy knew Jimbo 'cause he had always been in there, Sudan, so Jimbo took us up and he took us right up to the front, set me right in front of the piano and as soon as, and mind you, we had drove over there and smoked a joint, I had me a glass of burgundy on it, 'cause see I was very refined then.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, burgundy wine was the, so we sit down and so I'm drinking my burgundy and enjoying this and then the next thing I know it, I look up and this piano player's staring at me.  Man, he played to me, not to the audience.  We locked in on each other and he played to me.  He knew he had me and he had me.  I mean, whatever he wanted to do musically, I was going with him.
Speaker 2: "Poinciana".
Speaker 1: Ah, it, whatever he was playing during that time, and mind you, Ahmad Jamal could go outside and stay inside at the same time and he was pretty young during that time.  So he's like 74 now.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Mind you, and then I'm 20, 22, 23 years old.  So he and I were locked in on each other and he continues, I mean, he wouldn't let me out of his eye sight, man, I couldn't turn my head away.  I couldn't look to, we had eye to eye contact, feeling to feeling, spirit to spirit.  Whatever was happening there, mind to mind, was a marriage that was going on between Ahmad Jamal and I and people were watching us.  I look away and everybody's looking at me, you know.  I couldn't figure it out but it was a good feeling.  So, and mind you, I didn't drink that burgundy and I had sobered up, listening to this man's music.  So after he did that first set, I said, man, I said, "Jimbo, I think I better, I need to go back here and talk to him, man.  I want to know, you know, how can I get to this performance level?  What do I do to learn this?"  So, he said, "Go on back there."  I said, "I don't know, they may not let me back there."  He said, "Oh, they'll let you back there, they know me."  So sure enough, I got up from the table and I walked around toward the back.  I said, do you mind if I go back and speak to Ahmad Jamal?  They said, no problem.  I went back in the back and he was sitting down at a table, by himself, and I walked down and said, "Mr. Jamal, do you mind if I ask you a couple of questions?"  He said, "No, come on in, son."  I said, "I'm a young aspiring pianist, is there some, something you can tell me what I need to do in order to, to get to that level that you are in terms of performance?"  He said, come on in and sit down, son.  And mind you, I could do, I was so skinny, man, I could do the hula hoop in a cheerio, okay, I was like, you know, I didn't think about eating, for me it was just about, you know, it wasn't about getting high and drinking, but it was about trying to find knowledge, you know, at that time, during that period of time.  Everybody was trying to get heavy, trying to figure out what was going on in the world.
Speaker 2: There was an awareness.
Speaker 1: Yes, you know.
Speaker 2: As there is now, like a resurgence of that, so.
Speaker 1: It is, definitely.
Story_ID: 128427
Speaker 1: And mind you too, there was another thing that was happening.  There were the riots that were going on over at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley in Berkeley, California] and, near the college, you know.  You had this big thing going on.  You had [HM] Angela Davis, you had George Jackson, all of that.
Speaker 2: [The Black] Panthers, yeah.
Speaker 1: The Panther movement, all of this stuff was going on at the same time.  Mind you, I was aware of all of these things but not involved in any of it.  If I was involved in anything, it was involved in music but I was reading and I started reading some things on religion and becoming a lot more aware who God was during that time and knowing that I needed God to help me in my situation.  So, I'm back here in the back and, and Ahmad [Jamal] says, "You know, I was driving across the desert, in a limousine, coming across the Mojave from Los Angeles going to Las Vegas," and I'm listening to this and I'm saying to myself, what in the heck does this have to do with music?  So he starts telling me, "And as I'm riding across the desert, I see this hawk flying up in the sky and I roll my window down and I leaned out to look at it while I was riding in the limo and the hawk was flying this way left and right and turning right and turning left and going up and going down and then it started really coming down and as it was turning it was making these quick moves and I looked down and it was a jackrabbit running across the desert floor."  I said, now what does this have to do with music, man?  This is like, this cat is crazy.  To me, he's not, you know--
Speaker 2: He did tell me about "A" minus seven to "D" seven or--
Speaker 1: No, he wasn't helping me, go to college or any of this stuff, he was giving me some, some story about him and his car, you know.
Speaker 2: A jackrabbit and the hawk.
Speaker 1: And a jackrabbit and a hawk and he said he saw the hawk and he kept going and going and wherever the rabbit went, the hawk was there before it.  It anticipated everything that the hawk was doing.  He said it went down, the hawk grabbed the rabbit and flew off with it.
Story_ID: 127427
Speaker 1: So now the, the hawk had the jackrabbit, he's [Ahmad Jamal] telling you, told you, to this point of the story.
Speaker 2: Okay, so he took the jackrabbit and the hawk grabbed it and flew off to the mountaintop with it.  Then Ahmad looked at me and said, "It's time for me to go back to play," looked at his watch and said, "Man, I gotta get back on stage."  So I said, okay, but he, he left me in a, in a daze, man.  I couldn't figure out what this man was, where he was going, what he was doing, what was his thinking on this rabbit and this hawk but as soon as I walked out, we walked out and I sat back at my table, the same thing happened the first set that happened the second set.  He locked in on me and he played to me and man it was like, wow, you know, and we never spoke again, that particular day after that period of time.  I didn't say goodnight to him or anything.  He went straight in the back and I just walked out with my thoughts of, well this guy's different, you know.
Story_ID: 127428
Speaker 1: So we drive back to Vallejo [California] but something did happen to me.  I stopped drinking, you know.  From that point on, I hadn't, I just stopped drinking.  I wasn't drinking any more alcohol and so I went into my apartment, to my, in my home, and I would practice and I bought some more Ahmad Jamal albums and see, 'cause he was such, I mean his articulation, his performance, his hands is all over the piano.  I mean, his runs, his chordal progressions is just so beautiful and, and just deep, you know.
Speaker 2: He was Miles' [Miles Davis] favorite, favorite piano player.
Speaker 1: Oh, I could see why 'cause the man has so much ability and I remember buying one of his albums back in the '60 [1960], while I was in the military, "Jamalca," and he was playing a lot of contemporary things with the Fender Rhodes electric piano, which he didn't like at the time but the studio wanted him to play that instrument.  That was what really attracted me to him was his contemporary styling at first until I heard this sound that I was listening to.  So I'm back in, in Vallejo and mind you I lost my job, you know, because now I want to play music and hang out and, you know--
Speaker 2: Missing work.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know.  This is, this, the job was insignificant, you know.  I wanted to do this thing.  Like I said, the mother and I, we're, we're not together, although I wanted her back but she didn't want me so boom, that was over.  The little boy, he was, you know, growing up and, you know, but I love my son so he spent a lot of time with me.  I kept him all.  Whenever she went somewhere, I kept him, and I had a few dollars saved.  I had a few pennies and I still have money coming in from the military so I was--
Speaker 2: You were okay.
Speaker 1: I was all right.  Then one day I was in, in the house and I had met this guy, his name was Edward.  Now I can't remember his last name and he was a sax player.  And Ed was always teaching me about Islam.  He was the one that, where Islam was coming in.  He was always teaching me about Islam and, just, just tell me about Elijah Muhammad and all of this and what have you and he's doing this and that and I was saying to myself, well, if he's all of this, why aren't you a member.  Now he will wear his FOI coat [Fruit of Islam] and blue jeans and come and party with me and get high and do all this and he was, and then I started realizing that this guy was being very hypocritical of the religion and I didn't want him around me anymore because I found the religion to be very serious and I got to thinking about Ahmad and I told this guy, don't ever come around me again.  Don't ever come around me again.  Don't, don't dare come around me.  He lived a couple of doors down.  One day he came and knocked on my door.  I said, man, I told you, don't come to my house.  So a friend of mine called me up, he was in the [U.S.] Air Force too, we had a, he was a bass player and we were hanging out together and, Eric Moore, do you know Eric?
Speaker 2: I don't know Eric.
Speaker 1: Okay, he was announcer on Clark, Clark Radio down in jazz radio station.  Anyway, he came over, said, "Ghalib, let's go play some basketball."  Well, you know, that's my game so, went over, had a couple of beers, well he had a couple of beers.  We went over to the court and we started playing ball and Ed, as we were getting ready to pull off, he comes over and he says, Eric, not realizing that he and I were having these problems, he invited Ed to come with us.  So, I said, well look, I'll sit in the back and Ed sat up front and we went over to the court and we played ball.  Well Ed didn't play ball, he sat up there on the benches and got high.  So you're saying, what does this have to do with music?  We come back to my apartment after we got through playing and Ed comes back to my door and asked me, can he come in?  I said, no, you can't, man, leave me alone.  Don't come to my house again and he came again.  I opened the door, I said, Ed, if you ever come to my house again, I'm gonna hurt you, man.  Now, I have asked you once, and I've asked you several times, leave me alone.  It's like this guy was a total irritant to me, man, 'cause he was a hypocrite.  He was a hypocrite.  He's teaching me all this stuff and he's out here doing something totally different to what was being taught to me, you know, and I became conscious, in the beginning, it didn't bother me 'cause I was learning something but after I got filled of it, full of it, then I began to see who he really was.  And I said, man, you, you, actually, you, you were the devil.  He came to my door one more time and just at the point that I was gettin' ready to go after him, I turned around, I slammed the door, I walked in this bathroom and this pounding was coming in my head and it was, it was just, just, I just had a big huge headache, man, and I went into my bedroom, I put on some music and then this light came on in my head and this, and the thought of what Ahmad Jamal came back into play in my head about music.
Story_ID: 127429
Speaker 1: The hawk was me and the music was the rabbit and I'm hungry, it's time for me to eat.  So I'm flying down after the music, the light is coming on, man, this whole thing is like, you know, what he, what he dropped on me, the wisdom of what he had put on me was coming to light and that if I wanted the hawk, I had to go down and get it and wherever it went, I had to anticipate it, be there before it.  I said, man, it blew me away.  It was something.  Ahmad Jamal had dropped this seed on me that was just now beginning to, to break in my body, in my mind, it was just so amazing.  I grabbed that rabbit and I flew off with it.  He was coming back that next week to, this is like maybe six months down the line, and they do a six-month tour in and out of these clubs, you know, six months in, six months out.  There's a whole tour they were doing this time.  And I went back to the club [Keystone Korner in San Francisco], with Jimbo [Sudan, also known as Jimmy Boyden], and I told, he did the first set, we didn't lock in on each other but he was jamming, he knew I was there and I went backstage, I said, "Ahmad, I got the rabbit, so what do I do with it?"  He said, "Man, I want you to take that rabbit, I want you to cook it, I want you to boil it, I want you to broil it, poach it, barbeque it, in other words, take that music, do everything that you can to play this, play that, play jazz, play blues, play R and B, play everything there is."  That's what he was saying, take it, take it up and cook it, you know, now you got it.  Go to the mountaintop with it and take it to the highest heights that you can take it and that was his message to me.  And when he dropped that seed on me six months prior to, from that point on, Ahmad Jamal and I have become truly the best of friends.  We don't see each other but we talk through other friends of ours.  Seldon Newton, who was a percussionist and plays, too, with him, he used to be on the road with him all the time and then at that point I was back in Chicago [Illinois] and he would ask me, he would come over when I was working at The Cotton Club, he'd come over and say, "Ghalib, Ahmad just wanted to know how you doing and what you up to now" and he said, "I see you doing all right" or when I was in San Francisco [California] playing somewhere, Seldon would somehow end up in these places wherever I was playing around the country.  I'm seeing Seldon Newton, okay, and he would always tell me what Ahmad did, and I haven't, I don't know where Seldon is to this day but during that time he would tell me Ahmad would always ask about me.
Speaker 2: So this is like the mid to late '70s [1970s]?  Now you're starting--
Speaker 1: Now we're at about the mid '70s [1970s], about '76 [1976].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: At this point, I'm about to go back to Chicago, you know.  I'm ready to go back home and, and, you know--
Speaker 2: One reason, you're tired of Ed, for one reason, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, I don't even want to talk about him, you know, but--
Story_ID: 127430
Speaker 1: Tell us now the Islam thing.  Had you embraced it fully and changed your name?
Speaker 2: I had embraced Islam.  What had happened was, during that same time, I became quite aware of who I was, and I went over one day and I decided that I was going to join, and I joined.  I ended up becoming a member of the Nation of Islam.  At that time, I joined the FOI [Fruit of Islam] house, I moved out of Vallejo [California], moved over to San Francisco [California], joined the FOI house, moved in with seventeen other guys, man, and started selling newspapers and fish.
Speaker 1: The Final Call [newspaper].
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't the Final Call it was the Muhammad Speaks.
Speaker 1: The Muhammad Speaks at that point.
Speaker 2: The final call was after--
Speaker 1: Later on.
Speaker 2: --after that.  Mind you, I also bought a Fender Rhodes electric piano because during that time I also got another job.  I was working at Shell Oil Refinery.  I was a light oil processing operator (laughter).  So I saved up enough money to buy a, buy a Fender Rhodes piano with the help of somebody, and so I had that and I had a 1963 white-on-white, in white, Thunderbird, man, swivel wheel, power seats, power bucket seats, man, everything, diamond in the back, sunroof top, digging the scene with the gangster lean.
Speaker 1: So it was a '73 [1973] or '63 [1963]?
Speaker 2: This was a, it was a '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963].  It was the two pipings on the side.  It was a great car, man.  I got that for $200 from a kid.  He was playing bass for me.  He needed some money so I gave him $200.  I had that car.  I used to drive that car all over the, the Bay Area.  And I started my own band then.  At that point I was ready.  You know, I had my Fender Rhodes and, I could, I knew pretty much where I was gonna, what I was gonna do in terms of writing.  Still young but, you know, knowing that I could do something here.  So I started this band in Vallejo [California] called the "Valley Jo Negro Jazz Ensemble".  Man, I wish I could show you some of the, the brochures.  And the music that we were playing, we were doing some early, I had a young lady singing with me, I forget her name, but Ed was on bass, and Lance was playing drums.  And I can't remember their last names but we were all pretty, pretty much, pretty young.  We're all the same age, too, by the way, except for Ed, he was a little bit younger.  We, we used to play at the Elks Club in Vallejo and then they started this, this jazz club called "The Cellar".  We were playing The Cellar.  I left Chockie [Boyden] and Jimbo [Sudan, also known as Jimmy Boyden] because they were playing too much avant-garde and they were telling me that I didn't play outside.  And they probably were right because I had tune in my head and I couldn't follow just playing outside all the time.  I had to come back into some form.  I was looking for some form to direct where I was.
Speaker 1: That's real funny because the music was going through a transition where, after the post-bop era, then the free era came in, freer outside as you put it--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but many people were cited for not being out enough.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Out, out was supposed to have no rules but then out all of a sudden had rules to being out.
Speaker 2: But the cat said, we're out, we're coming back in, see, like the [HM] Herbie Hancock's, you know, the Chick Corea's, man, everybody was playing with Miles [Davis], man, you was a great piano player.  I dug it, you know, because anybody was playing with Miles during that time, was my guy.  Miles was my--
Speaker 1: Chick Corea, Herbie.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Chick and what's the other guy's name?
Speaker 1: Joe Zolan.
Speaker 2: Not Joe, I bought his Koln concerts that somebody got for me.
Speaker 1: Keith Jarrett.
Speaker 2: Keith Jarrett, phenomenal pianist, man, probably to me, Keith was the better of all of them because he had depth in his statement, you know, and he was, he was, and is smooth, much smoother, and he probably gave Miles a real warm foundation, you know, but he didn't want to play that electric piano.  He was a pianist and that's what he wanted to do, was play piano.  He didn't stay with Miles very long.  So these are the cats I'm listening to so I wasn't playing outside no more, now I'm beginning to find some grooves.  I put a "wow-wow" [ph.] on my Fender Rhodes, man.  I started, oh, man, I was ready to groove, oh man.
Speaker 1: Which was the thing, that was the thing of the day.
Speaker 2: Shoot, I had a pile [ph.] on my head, man, I was, you know, I was, I was ready for the next scene, I was ready to get hip on everybody.
Story_ID: 127431
Speaker 1: So I come back to Chicago [Illinois] and Chicago was limited in the amount of jazz that was going on during that time.  It was happening but the scene was not very contemporary, it was straight-ahead--
Speaker 2: About '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976], '77 [1977] but starting for me coming back in, and I was teaching school during that time.  I was working at a school for the emotionally disturbed children, Saint Eulalia.  Ada S. McKinley Services had this school, Saint Eulalia, and I was teaching music at this school.
Speaker 2: Now had you graduated from any of those colleges?
Speaker 1: No, I didn't graduate from college.  It was a teaching assistant job.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But ended up becoming my own--
Speaker 2: The teacher.
Speaker 1: --a teacher, you know, and I loved those kids, you know, and playing music at the same time.  So I'm playing around Chicago, I'm working with different people.  Mind you, at the same time I had met "Munch," Darryl Jones.  He was fourteen years old during that time and I had him in my band and I had him playing different type of music then.  He was one of my students, as I call it, and--
Speaker 2: For those who know, Darryl Jones is currently, currently--
Speaker 1: Playing with the Rolling Stones.
Speaker 2: --with the Rolling Stones.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  There was two other musicians that were in high school that I had playing with me too, Mike White and Larry Campbell.  I had 'em both at the same time, part of my trio, and we're playing on the North Side of Chicago, at a lot of different clubs, up on the North Side.  Well, Mike White ended up playing with David Sanborn.  He was the, the steady drummer for me.  He had, his bass, his drummer, Frankie Beverly's his drummer.  He also played with, wow, you name it, he played with everybody out there as far as contemporary jazz is concerned and he's done his own recordings.  Larry Campbell played with George Duke and so did, both of them they started, they came out to California together.  They started doing their thing but when they were performing with me, they were just kids in high school and I was already on that cutting edge prior to, okay.
Speaker 2: Now explain the scene.  You said the scene was, was somewhat limited in Chicago when you got back?
Speaker 1: It hadn't really flourished.  It was, at one point it had, the disco was pretty, the dominant.  Going to dance clubs was a big thing, not going to the night, to jazz clubs.  It had lost that appeal that it had in the early '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s], going into (singing) "ah, ah, ah, staying alive, staying" and then when that came, period came in, it was beginning to die off.  So I caught it right at that point that it was probably at its peak but getting ready to go down.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And people were looking for an alternative to the jazz--to the disco scene.  And I came in right at that point, a nice California sound, hip sound, contemporary.  I knew how to groove.  I played with cats in California, with Kenny Nash, Mark Clark, you know, being on the gigs with Danny Maupin and some of the casts from the "Headhunters."  So I really started getting hip and Herbie Hancock at that point was pretty much an inspiration for me, my mentor in terms of playing electric piano.  No one could compare with Ahmad Jamal as a pianist to me, nor can I compare with Ahmad Jamal as a pianist.  He's like a, a messenger from the piano, you know.  He's, his performance and the things that he's talking about, the celestial things, he's in, in heaven, and this was his gift from God and he's doing it and he's a phenomenal pianist, without a doubt, and to listen to him, to see him perform live, and just let your mind flow with the spirit of what he does, let your spirit flow with the spirit of what he does.  He can take you to so many peaks and valleys, man, and when you come out of it, you're like, you're, you're in heaven man, you know.
Speaker 2: So you're back in Chicago--
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: --I had to bring you back for a minute.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause I'm about to go off on it.
Speaker 2: We're getting ready to go there.
Story_ID: 127432
Speaker 1: We're in Chicago [Illinois] now, it's late '70s [1970s], going into the '80s [1980s], you have a new sound that's not really what we call a traditional, straight-ahead jazz.  Would you call it, it was more of a, would you call it a mixture of what you were feeling?  How would you--
Speaker 2: It was becoming more contemporary--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and it was a mixture of everything I was feeling but more contemporary because I was taking those contemporary grooves and playing it.
Speaker 1: So instead of just a swing or the straight-ahead beat rhythms that had been predominant before, now you were using some of the funk grooves and--
Speaker 2: Right, the rhythm section was doing that.  I was playing straight-ahead.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I left the improvisating, the element of improvisation open.  I'd start with a melody and then I would take it out to another level.
Speaker 1: And do you think that was the original intent of some of the music that we call smooth jazz today?  People like Grover Washington and guys that were well-versed in their musical knowledge--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --and the Ronnie Laws and the guys that could really play their instruments--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --and do you think that was the original intent to make music that might have been, to really take jazz somewhere else--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --with its integrity?  Do you think that's where they meant to go?  But do you think the industry might have done something different at that point because, because now, you don't hear the depth that you're talking about in the music a lot of times.
Speaker 2: Right, it's very shallow now.  It doesn't play with the, that had the improv, that language is not there now.  It's just one note, two notes that are held on while the groove is going on in the background and it's so pocketed, so tight now, that there's really no creativity at all in the rhythm sections at all.
Story_ID: 127433
Speaker 1: So, so you're doing this now in the late '70s [1970s], going into the '80s [1980s].  What's going on for Ghalib now in the, so, so now you changed your name--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --when you joined the Nation [of Islam]?
Speaker 2: I changed my name in the '70s [1970s], yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now, what exactly does it mean?
Speaker 2: Ghalib means, "One who is subduing, dominant, a warrior".  Now mind you, when you asked, when we were talking earlier, we were talking about my astrological sign, when I found out what my name meant, it was more akin to my astrological sign, not me realizing that because it was sort of mystical how I found my name.  I opened up a book, ran my hand down, and my hand stopped there.  Ghalib, okay, I'll take that.  I didn't even read the definition.  I closed the page back, closed my eyes, opened up the book, ran my hand down, my name is right up under Ghalib, here's Ghallab.  Now how, you know, how many times in a million does that happen that you find your name, your second name right, without even--
Speaker 1: Right underneath each other.
Speaker 2: So, tell me that was not a gift of God, okay.  I knew that.  I knew when I read the definitions of these names and started looking at my character and the person that I am, I found that those were true of me.  So, you know, the, my faith is in my God and, and in God, is increasing along with the intensity of this music that's going on at the same time.  I started worshiping God more and the more I worshipped him, the more, things, music came to me.  My mind started opening up--
Story_ID: 127434
Speaker 1: I met Willie Pickens.  I went over to, he was teaching at the American Conservatory School of Music [Hammond, Indiana].
Speaker 2: You would have been how old while, you were like twenty-five, thirty?
Speaker 1: I was about twenty-eight, twenty-nine.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I met Willie.  I used to go see Willie play because he reminded me, 'cause there's some things that he would do that you couldn't tell me that he didn't get it from Ahmad Jamal, see.  So there was some, something that he did that gave me some nice feeling and he took the time out to show me some things, to give me some chord progressions, to tell me to work on some things.  And I went to his classes and, but he took me on as a personal student because he enjoyed what I was doing.  He could see there was something there and so I studied with Willie for a little while and then that came to an end because I couldn't, I wasn't, I'm not a technician--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --of music and I didn't want to be a technician of music.  I wanted to play what I felt from the inside but it started drawing people to me, you know.  It started, I started getting gigs around Chicago [Illinois] and the name started, bolstering itself.  There's not a club that you could not come in and be entertained that I would not feel or about the guys that I had not played with some top quality musicians during that time.  I had Herb, Herb Walker on guitar which I ended up giving him the name Shadee.  Outstanding guitarist, man, Herb.  George Benson gave him a Hollow Body Blonde.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: One day we were working, man, somebody broke in his car and stole that guitar.  He never saw that guitar again.  So beautiful.  George had signed it, gave it to him and at that time he was into that, that style of play.  I had Jimmy Allen on bass.  He ended up playing with Al Jarreau and Joe Sample and a lot of other, Wilton Felder, a lot of great musicians he ended up playing with.  During that time, I also had Jerry Pickett, an outstanding entertainer, drummer entertainer.  He would smile and he loved what he played.  He ended up getting endorsement through Ludwig Drums.  Jerry's now in the church.  He totally left the business of music and now he's in the church teaching.  I had Dr. Edwin Daugherty on saxophone.  Outstanding saxophonist, man, this cat can play.  He had the depth and he was a doctor of music as well.  Now mind you, here's a cat man, he ain't got no education, nothing, as far as music is concerned.
Speaker 2: Playing with some real heavyweights.
Speaker 1: But I'm playing with some cats, man, and I felt my confidence as I played with them, you know.  It wasn't like I was weak, you know.  I mean, I had my, I held my own with these cats and I told, there was me telling them what to play and where they, you know, the tunes and giving them writing and doing all the charting now.  I had to eventually get heavy because of the cats that, you know, to convey what I wanted so that's why I did study and I bought books that helped me understand how to write.  Going to class with Willie Pickens, gave me chordal progressions and knowing how to write chords and I put these things out and at the same time, I'm a businessman, too, so I started reading this book, "This Business of Music", which got me right on track.
Speaker 2: Great book.
Speaker 1: It got me right on track.  So I started realizing that I could make a good business out of this.  I could pay these musicians good money and we can be very successful out here in the industry.
Speaker 2: So this is the '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 1: This is still the late '79s [1979s], going in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: I had a good band, man.  I had Kewu Oya playing percussion, man.  He was more of a Yoruba.  His religion was Yoruba and he was more of a, a, what do you call that drum, the--
Speaker 2: Djembe.
Speaker 1: The djembe.  He's a djembe drummer [sic, conga], master drummer, but he would play congas on his gig.
Story_ID: 127435
Speaker 1: Man, we were working these clubs around Chicago [Illinois] and everybody's coming in to see us.
Speaker 2: What were some of the names of some of the clubs?
Speaker 1: The most dominant one, and there weren't like, I worked all of them, but the most dominant club was The Bulls Night Club, which was a historical, or it should be historical landmark.  That's where everybody would come from, from David Sanborn to, the Brecker Brothers, to Al Jarreau.
Speaker 2: Like Jordan, Michael Jordan would hang out in there.
Speaker 1: Oh, Mike, no Michael was later.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was later, another club.  You name it, man, all the greats would come there and why, because it was centrally located and it was right across the street from the Park West which was a major concert hall.  So after the gigs, this place would be open till four o'clock, five o'clock on Saturdays.  After they get through playing, they would all come over to this place.  Man, I got to meet the man that built the, the first, John Wycamp [sic Houbolt].  He built the first space, Apollo.  He came in that club, man.  I got to meet Rhodes, Bill Rhodes [sic Harold Rhodes], the man that made the Fender Rhodes piano.  I got to meet, oh, man, you name it.  Al Jarreau came in one night, jumped on stage, he just really became a star during that time and got on stage and started singing, man, and it blew the room away.  Dave Freeman brought him, man.  One night, George Duke came in and sat in with us man and blew us out.  Blew us out.  Then the Brecker Brothers came, man, and got on stage, invited us to come to New York and play in their club in New York City.  I mean, it's the early, the '80s [1980s] was just beginning, the early, the late '70s [1970s] going into the '80s [1980s] was just beginning to jump off.  There was not a person of any major stature that would not come to that club to see us play and we took charge.  Sergio Mendes.  One night I was playing, and I'm sitting there and I'm tearing up, man, going down, this guy comes up and says, "Man, can I sing with you all?"  I said, "Yeah, whatcha want to sing?"  He said, "Man, I feel like doing some blues."  This is Tony Bennett, okay.  Tony Bennett gets on the stage, I start playing "Sweet Home Chicago" for him.  He started "Come on, baby, don't you  wanna go" and while he was doing that, I'm singing "I left my heart in San...", the changes are the same.  It didn't go, it didn't go very, you know, I mean, you know, you got your one three, your one, four, five changes in through the whole song so I was able to sing that, that whole song as a duet with him.  And in the interim, he makes caricatures in between our band, 'cause you know he's an artist.  He draws caricatures of the band.
Speaker 2: I was telling our videographer I was playing one time in Atlanta [Georgia] and, and at the end of the night he was there.  He also drew on a napkin--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what he did.
Speaker 2: --a picture, a picture of myself also.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 127436
Speaker 1: So you're a local hero now in Chicago [Illinois].  You're doing it, you're playing, plenty of work going on, how's your personal life?  You said, of course, you're very much embracing Islam and your--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --but how's your personal life doing?
Speaker 2: Personal life is turning around pretty good.  I met my wife, Toya [Ghallab].
Speaker 1: Where'd you meet her?  How'd you meet her?
Speaker 2: I met her in a jazz club.  I was introduced to her by one of my friends and, actually it was Father's Day, 1980, and the day I met her, I told her, we're gonna get married.  It's the same day I met her 'cause there's just, her language, her conversation, everything was just akin to where I was at the time.  Although I met her prior to that, I went to a, a store to buy another lady some clothes and she was the manager of the store.
Speaker 1: So you remembered, oh, I remember her.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so that all came back to, to haunt me in this next jazz club that I'm working and here she is and--
Speaker 1: 'Cause she remembered it, didn't she?
Speaker 2: Oh, she remembered it and she made me remember it also.  So, but I, in that conversation, and my car stopped working that day.  I had a Volvo, man.  For some reason my car didn't work and she was the only one that lived on the North Side besides myself so she gave me a ride to the north end of Chicago and as we were talking, I told her, I said, you know, I'm gonna marry you.  And sure enough, man, we married and had, you know, one of my oldest son and two more sons after that.  So, and she raised my oldest son [Ghalib Ghallab, II], too, 'cause I ended up getting him, after--
Speaker 1: So what year did you get married?
Speaker 2: We got married in '86 [1986].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: You were together before then.
Speaker 2: But we were, and so when people ask me I say, well, I've been married twenty-seven years.  We've been together twenty-seven years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And from the day one that we started, we've been together ever since and I've not teeter-tottered ever since, you know.  We've been locked in on each other.  She's been a gracious, backbone, helped me to everything that I have done in my life and--
Speaker 1: Is she in the business?
Speaker 2: She's not in the business.  She has only, she's been the one that has kept me sane and not egotistical about the business because you don't see nothing around here with my picture on the wall, no Ghalib Ghallab, no nothing other than in my studio and that's limited because she didn't play me up that way.  She didn't play me up--
Speaker 1: She saw, she knew you, the man, not the musician.
Speaker 2: Right, she dealt with me strictly for who I was and those were not the things that attracted her to me, it was my performance as a musician, it was the person that I am and my belief and my love and my mind, you know, and so those are the things that have kept us together through life and so when I'm at home, I ain't nobody, I'm just Ghalib but out there in the street, there's a different character out there.  Out in the world, there's a different character but if they could really see the person back at home, you would see that there's a, there's a real balance here in our house and so I don't bring that home like a lot of musicians.  They bring their egos home and you better do this and you better do that.  Before I started talking about what you better do, she told me you better shut up and chill out (laughter).  You know, this is what's being done.  So she's been that type of--
Speaker 1: So, so what is her profession if you don't mind us asking?
Speaker 2: She's into, she's studying finance.  She graduated from Mundelein University in Chicago and it's a women's college and she studied finance and it has been her primary thing.  Right now she's working for a computer company of which she works in the help office.  She used to manage the department and she left for a couple of years and just recently went back to work.  She was the manager of their customer support division and which was a very, they manufacture whole systems for most of the major hotels in the world and she has a heck of a job and a very strenuous job, you know.
Story_ID: 127437
Speaker 1: So, the '80s [1980s] you're married now [to Toya Ghallab], you're married, you're in Chicago [Illinois] and all of a sudden things, well did things peak for you and you decided it's time to move somewhere else.  What happens for you?
Speaker 2: Well, things were going along pretty good.  I had to clean up my act a little bit.  I got a chance to go to Europe a couple of times.  Went to England and performed there.  Worked at Ronnie Scott's in England, came back home.  I mean, a lot of big things are going on now.  Went to, to Italy, stayed over there all summer long.  Stayed in Italy for about four months, performing all over Italy.  Went to Monaco, France, and mind you, now I'm beginning to pick up another experience too at the same time dealing with other people from other walks of life and pretty much finding that everything's the same.  Over there it's the same, here it's just the language is different, okay, but culturally speaking, there were some cultural differences but the basic human things were the same and those were the things that helped me survive while we were there.  Came back to the States and you're having babies too.  You see my children made diamonds out of my wife and myself 'cause I had to feed my babies, now I wasn't turning my back on my children.  I wanted my oldest son to go to college.  So I had to make more money in order to send him to college.  So I did those things that was necessary and with her help, she was working as well and she did it too.  I mean, we worked together to put our children through school and so we sent him down to Kentucky State University [Frankfurt, Kentucky].  The other two were still young and then I got an opportunity to come out here to [Las] Vegas [Nevada] and make some more money and realizing the type of monies that I was making in Vegas was like the type of monies that I break being on the road covering my hotel expenses and everything.  So I said, wow, man, if Vegas is like this, I better move into the city and get myself associated.
Speaker 1: So you just came out just basically for the gigs at first?  Just--
Speaker 2: At first and then I got hooked on the city.  Got to seeing how things were.  How the people were living, the modern amenities that were here, the growth of these casinos and that they needed entertainment and the type of music that they wanted was, when I first came out here playing, mind you, I was playing that contemporary fusion.  So I, it, it took a certain type of mind to, to sit here and enjoy it, okay, but it was a novelty to the people here because they hadn't had that before.  So I played my way in and played my way right out because it became, how do you say, once you heard it a few times, you don't want to hear it no more.  So I had to go back home and go to a workshop and figure out now how can I keep this music going?  When I was here, I met this entertainer, his name was [HM] Sonny Turner and Sonny--
Speaker 1: A HistoryMaker.
Speaker 2: Right, a HistoryMaker, and Sonny told me, Ghalib, you need to entertain the people, not just play music just for the sake of playing.  We all know you're a good musician and you're talented but you got to entertain people.  You got to make people feel good.  You want them to sit there and enjoy you.  So I went back home to Chicago and I was heading in that direction pretty much now at this point.  I knew I had to add more entertainment to my songs and so I started finding more contemporary tunes and then, like I would take a, I'd sing too, so I would take a Lou Rawls song, "You'll Never Find" but I still put an improvisation on it so I wouldn't lose that creative.  So you're gettin' the contemporary thing going that, the entertainment, and you're getting the improv, you've got the jazz happening on top of that and I started finding that formula to be very successful for me so I started choosing all types of music that were more contemporary or, what's the word I want to use, Top 40 in vein.
Speaker 1: Popular--
Speaker 2: Popular music--
Speaker 1: Popular and familiar to people.
Speaker 2: --popular.  Other musicians were doing it also at the same time.  Gerald Albright came in with some real hip themes.  George Benson was doing it, "Masquerade."  George was really off into it, Grover Washington, a lot of people were doing it.  Bob James, a lot of people were doing this type of music so I said, boom, this seems to be the popular thing, come on, Ghalib, you're already in there, just keep on rolling with it and get a little bit more entertaining with it.  Get people to enjoy themselves and have fun with it and create more of a happening for 'em.  And I did, and I came back to Vegas, got an offer to come back out here to perform and I got called on again and this time it wasn't in and out, this time they were asking me to stay because they saw it was a good commodity, it was a good, you know, source to bring people into the city to enjoy it, or to enjoy, to, to be entertained, and it was very good entertainment for the players.  When they took their breaks, boom, I had my thing going on.  So I found it, man, it took me to where I wanted to go.  The next thing I know, I'm working at Caesars Palace, hello.
Story_ID: 127438
Speaker 1: Is your wife [Toya Ghallab] out here [in Las Vegas, Nevada] with you, the kids?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I moved the kids.  Well at first, before I started, before I started moving up the ladder, I had to get a good foothold on it and then I brought my wife and my children out here.  We found a home here and we leased a home in the beginning and brought her out here, showed her what was happening, she saw the type of money 'cause I'm sending my checks home--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: --daily.  I'm not out here playing around.  I'm not gambling.  I'm not into slot machines or anything 'cause, they, that wasn't making me money, what was making me money was my music.  So, I started sending my monies home and she said, she came out, I leased a home, I said, baby, come look at this.  I met a guy in the casino who had these homes and he bought 'em but he was using them as a, what's the word--
Speaker 1: Write-offs?
Speaker 2: Write-offs and what have you.  So, you know, he leased me the home for 800 bucks a month.  It was a four bedroom, 1900 square foot, nice house, brand new.  The first renters that lived in it decided they were going to move out and they didn't want to live there anymore.  They had another job somewhere else and so he needed to get somebody to do it.  I flew my wife out and said, baby, would you like to have this and she said, "Yes."  Mind you, we were living pretty good on the North Side of Chicago [Illinois].  We had a really nice apartment where we were living.  Actually we had a duplex in Chicago but we needed a change too.  The weather was kicking in.  I wasn't there at home and my career was taking off out here.  So she said, come out.  Soon as we got out here, the day I landed, I got fired from my job.
Speaker 1: Which job?
Speaker 2: I was working at Harrah's [Las Vegas] at that time.  No, I was still working at the Aladdin and I lost my job at the Aladdin Hotel.
Speaker 1: Any particular reason why?
Speaker 2: Yeah, new owners.  New owners came in, said they didn't want the music that I was playing any more.  Man, my wife and I, we just got scared 'cause I, all my savings, all my money went into moving my family here and moving all our, all our personals here and I had no other gig, nothing going for me.  So, of course, God is in the works and the thing about that is, I didn't play with my God.  I always prayed.  I always, and it didn't matter whether I was successful or not, I've always given my love and my first thought to God.
Speaker 1: So the gig ended and what did you do?
Speaker 2: I started praying more, you know, and, and I got out here and started hustling but there were some people that saw me at Harrah's Casino and Hotel, Ginny Shanks, and I had a few friends, [Michael] Mike Paskevich, and Marian, and Marian Green and her husband and those people started supporting me, again.  I ended up getting a gig at Harrah's.  Ginny Shanks was the entertainment director.  She ended up hiring me at Harrah's.  The next thing I know, I'm at Harrah's Casino and Hotel and then from there to Caesars, from Caesars to the Rio, from the Rio, and then there was a point where I was working, doing four gigs a week, man.  I'm working Harrah's, Caesars, Boulder Station doing Sunday brunches over there and on, and also working doing a double at the MGM, doing a dayshift at Caesars and the MGM at night.  Man, we started saving our money and we just, 'cause all this was coming at me so fast but our entertainment in the music was so good and it was good and it still is good.  People enjoyed what we were doing.  They enjoyed the entertainment, enjoyed the interaction.  I started honing in on reacting with the audience and talking to the people in between sets.  The career started taking off.  The next thing I know, I get a call, the Rio Hotel wants me to come over there and work at their hotel.  They built this room called the VooDoo Lounge and who do they have to open up the lounge?  They asked me to come over.  I did.  The next thing I know I get another call that lasted for three years and mind you, while that was going on, I was working Caesars during the day, too, and doing a couple of other gigs on the side.
Speaker 1: You were busy.
Speaker 2: Busy, making money, and all praises due to God.  This was the blessings we were receiving for doing the work that we were doing.  The next thing I know, I'm working at the, I get another call, Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] from BET [Black Entertainment] Television opens up a restaurant here at the, the Bally's Casino, the Paris Casino and Hotel, it's called Tres Jazz.  And I get a phone call and they want me to come over and, wow.  So I go there and I start working there and that lasted for two years.  Then I get another call from Caesars Palace to come back the week that I lost, that they closed, he divested all his interest in BET Television, he divested all his Tres Jazz, his Tres Jazz restaurants, which were all across the country.  And then I get another phone call, so, they're telling me they're going to let me go.  They let me go that Friday, that Tuesday I'm back in the gig again.  I'm working at Caesars Palace.  Man, all these blessings are coming to me and all I'm saying is, Alhamdulillah, all praises due to God, thank you so much.  And then my wife at the same time, she's moving up at her position at work so we were really doing a great job, you know, all these things were happening for us.  I mean, it's just been an ultimate success.  I get this call to come to Caesars and I go over to Caesars.  I start working at Terrazza Jazz, it's Terrazza Restaurant.  I picked up an endorsement, a couple, well I had a piano endorsement already but I picked up another endorsement with this other company and it's called, the Petrof piano and they give me this, this--
Speaker 1: Beautiful.
Speaker 2: Yeah, first I had a six foot two grand piano they gave me and then New Year's Eve I'm doing a gig, Johnny Pay had a fifteen-piece band and Johnny Pay did all my arrangements.  Him and another young man, Michael, Mark, Michael Julio and one other person, Rick Arroyo, who I still use Rick, helped me on my arrangements as far as the big band, doing fifteen pieces.  So I'm doing this big gig, man, for Caesars and, for their New Year's Eve, and I got a fifteen-piece band.  The company gives me a seven-foot eight grand piano and that's the piano sitting over there.
Speaker 1: It's beautiful.
Speaker 2: Took the six foot two and gave me this one and these were all the blessings that were coming to us and they were just phenomenal blessings that were just coming to our family.
Speaker 1: So this is '80 [1980], into the '90s [1990s]?
Speaker 2: This is now, I am in the '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: All the way through the '90s [1990s]?
Speaker 2: All the, I'm in the '90s [1990s] now, going into the 2000s--
Story_ID: 127439
Speaker 1: So, here we are in the 2000s and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and what is Ghalib Ghallab doing now with his music?
Speaker 2: You know Ghalib got to the point now that, first of all, I got another home for my family, you know.  God blessed me with, you know like I said, the income where we could get the family and I've always been a, the monies that we received in which were really nice, I started making big donations back to my community and helping my community, my imam, Warfti Muhammad [ph.], and trying to help them develop because this language and this knowledge that I'm having is what's helping me develop into the character that I am developing into, clean up my life, get myself straight, as best as I can.  There's still a lot of challenges because there's the negatives that tend to attract us to it and I've had those come at me but I thank God that I was able to come out of those and still continue on this road that I am going on now.
Story_ID: 127440
Speaker 1: Now we met Jihad [Ghallab] earlier today and he, he's in your band, your son.
Speaker 2: That's my son.
Speaker 1: How old is he?
Speaker 2: He's, he's now twenty-five but he started playing for me professionally when he was seventeen years old.  I got to tell you the story right quick.  While I was working at Bob Johnson's [Robert L. Johnson's] Tres Jazz Restaurant [in Las Vegas, Nevada], I had these guys performing, working along my sideman, outstanding bassist Darryl Williams, who I still use from time, but he's my regular on bass.  Whenever I hire a bass player, he's my guy and I had this other young man playing drums and with the significance, with the understanding that you cannot sub out this gig to anybody.  You're working here and I'm paying you such and such amount of money a week and this is a steady job.  You can't sub this job out to anybody.
Speaker 1: It's a job.
Speaker 2: I didn't have it in the contract and on paper but it was understood that this was the case.  So this one drummer that we had came over to me and told me, called my son, he was at home, he said that he couldn't make it to work.  He didn't want to call me 'cause I do a brunch on, a duo, Sunday brunch.  He didn't want to call me.  He just called my son and my son calls me and says, Dad, your drummer can't make it to the gig next week and I said, oh, no, and he said no and this has got me upset because I've gotta be back at, I'm working Sunday, I'm off Monday, I've got to turnaround Tuesday and come back.  Where am I going to find another drummer that can play my music.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: And in the meantime, well, my son had been studying music and he's going to high school and he's in the jazz band, first chair, first stand, and I've, and I've practiced with him for years and I've gotten him some private, great lessons from a couple of real good teachers and trying to get Jihad built up to a point where one day in his lifetime he'll be able to take this gig and hopefully he will go onto college and study music and move on with it.  So now I'm in a dilemma.  This is Sunday.  Finally the guy calls me, I said, man, didn't I tell you that you couldn't sub out my job?  He says, but I got a job paying me a lot more money.  I just need to do this for the week.  I said, no, it's the principle of things.  Once I give you something, I tell you I'm gonna do something, I do it.  I'm not going to turn my back on ya.  I'm a man to my word.  When I tell you I'm gonna do something, I'm gonna do it.  This guy turns around, he says well, Ghalib, I can't do it.  I said, well I won't need you any more as a drummer.  I'll see you later.  So I said, man, where am I gonna get a drummer?  And I'm talking to Darryl.  I said, Darryl, we gotta get a drummer.  Darryl said, Ghalib, I don't know, everybody's working.  I said, yeah, you're right.  The type of drummer I need needs, one that can play salsa and can play straight-ahead and can play contemporary pop tunes.  You know who can do it all?  I need somebody very well-rounded.
Speaker 1: Sensitive person.
Speaker 2: Very sensitive because the music is taking so many different valleys and peaks.  So, I said I know who I'm gonna get.  I came home.  I looked at him.  I said, Jihad, you got one day to learn every song that I play in my book.  Now mind you, he and I would play together from time to time around the house here so he had a sense of what should be done and I gave him, but he knew two grooves which was cool.  He knew how to play straight-ahead and he knew how to put four on the floor and two and four on the snare.  That's all I needed.  I could build everything else off of him.  He knew a Bossa Nova.  So those was, that was a, that was good.  I said, Jihad, you got this job.  That same day that he was to work with me, he graduated from high school.  That night, he, his grandmother, my wife's mother and, and my sons, everybody was there and he had his first professional gig.
Speaker 1: The day he graduated from high school.
Speaker 2: The day he graduated from, that night.  His girlfriend, everybody was there.  Half the school was there trying to get in to see him play.  It was something, man, and it was really a blessing for him and it was God giving him to me for this service.
Speaker 1: That was eight years ago?
Speaker 2: That was eight years ago.
Speaker 1: So, so did he go on to study professionally in school?
Speaker 2: He has not.  He's just continued on with it as is.  He's been out here working with me and performing, he's made--
Speaker 1: And just keeping the legacy going.
Speaker 2: He's keeping it going and he's done quite well, yes.
Story_ID: 127441
Speaker 1: So let me ask you a couple more things real quick, we'd like to ask you.  What is the state of the jazz scene now in [Las] Vegas [Nevada] and your position now as far, of course you're working but what do you think, how is it, that same fertile ground as it was when you were here now or is it more difficult and more challenging now?
Speaker 2: I think the economics dictate as it is today.  There's not as many jazz musicians working as it is pop music and, again, we've come back to this dance scene again 'cause you've got a lot of dance clubs here in town and the dance clubs seem to, you know, we're back at the disco scene again.  So those have taken back over the, the gigs here.  Most of the, most every hotel in town has a, has a dance club and most of the kids, the youth today, are going to those dance clubs to dance hip hop, rap, funk, the whole works, is all in those clubs.  The live musician, he still exists but he's for a more mature crowd.  So you have to find a mature hotel where that's happening and if there are bands that are playing pop music, they're all the way pop.  I mean, they're, they're not playing jazz, they're doing--
Speaker 1: The Top 40 in--
Speaker 2: The Top 40 bands and that's how it is here in this town.  For the jazz musician, we began to start going off to some of the smaller restaurants again as things were in the beginning but there's a transition getting ready to come in again where you know we're going to be back into the environment.
Speaker 1: Is there an audience for it still here?
Speaker 2: Oh, there's quite an audience.  My phone is jumping off the, off the hook every day, Ghalib, where are you?  Where you been?  Whatcha doing?  What have you, and not only that, as a result of those things being as they are, now mind you, I'm not at Caesars Palace any more right now.  They closed the restaurant down and they put another one in instead, Rio's, and they don't have any more live entertainment there.  What that did, it made me go back out into the world and start playing.  So I've been traveling quite a bit and thank God I've been fortunate enough to go back to Chicago [Illinois] and have performed in that community.  I've been working in California, Catalina, a lot in Catalina.  A lot in North Carolina.  Been able to hit a lot of different places.  So the scene is still vibrant out there and now I'm getting ready to go to Dubai and I'm going to go to Dubai for two weeks and perform over there and then come back home.  Hopefully at that point, and I start, and I really haven't started seeking out a lot of work here in Vegas yet 'cause I've been enjoying myself through relaxing time.  I've been at this business for thirty-three years and I haven't had a chance to take a break.  and you ask me what have I been doing, well I've been able to purchase a lot of equipment, studio equipment, state-of-the-art gear and I've been applying myself to the studio trying to work on material which is still contemporary and groovy and in line with today's jazz market and trying to perform that type of music now and getting away from the, you know, just taking time and applying my mind more to the studio instead of playing out live, getting away from the live performance but as time, but I keep a gig.  I always keep a job.  It's been a blessing.  I've been able to keep a gig and, you know, my summer was beautiful.  We had a wonderful summer.  We were blessed to have done a lot of playing in Chicago [Illinois], like I said, and, and Catalina and North Carolina and met a lot of people.  That's how I got hooked up with The HistoryMakers and [HistoryMakers founding executive director] Julieanna [Richardson].  She invited me to come and do the, to the tribute to [HM] Quincy Jones.  Man, I had a wonderful time with that and it was just a, to see [HM] Herbie Hancock, [HM] James Ingram, so many people.  There is just so many, so many great musicians.  Bobby McFerrin, [HM] Eddie Levert, Lesley Gore, Lou Gossett [HM Louis Cameron Gossett], there were so many beautiful people there and just to be in that scene for the moment was just really nice and talking with those guys and it brought this spirit back to me again, so now I'm back on that point again.  I have not talked to Ahmad Jamal in years.
Story_ID: 127442
Speaker 1: So you've done quite a bit.  You're doing well and you said the jazz scene now you say is changing.  You think it's going to re-emerge for the jazz musician soon.  You're, you're still working; you're doing your studio things--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: You spend a lot of time there.  Do you have your own label that you're recording?
Speaker 2: I do have my own label.  My own--
Speaker 1: Are you recording just yourself or other artists?
Speaker 2: I'm just doing me, you know, it's a, you know, every, every artist has to have a paintbrush and a, and a canvas to do their work on and I have mine.  So, you know, I'm back there painting and trying to do some abstracts and some contemporary commercial art back there.
Speaker 1: So, how do you feel about the way that you lived your life and what's really important to you now at this point?
Speaker 2: You know right now, what is important to me is trying to find God and doing things in the right way.  He's given me this gift so I'll never lose this here.  This has been my medium to experience, to talk to people, to associate with people, to, to be mentored, to be a mentor, to help guide people, to help people that have been in pain.  Music is a healing force.  I've used this as a healer for friends, for people who I don't know.  I've talked to all types of people from all over the world.  God has blessed me with the success from it, the material success, the spiritual success and now I'm trying to follow that right guide and try to stay on the right track, not be, not to deviate from it and still do what I do and to convey this and give it to people via the music, more by example, and not so much by direct teaching but give by example, you know, and, and just living the life and trying to do the right thing, you know.
Story_ID: 127443
Speaker 1: Here's your chance to give that advice that Ahmad Jamal gave you.  What advice would you give for those going into the entertainment or the music business today?  What would you tell them?
Speaker 2: You know it's a tough business, man, and you really can't see the naturalist of the business is not as it used to be and what do you say when I mean a naturalist?  The way that I came into the industry, the way most musicians have come into the industry by OJT, on the job training.  You know, getting out there performing and trial and error because the clubs are not there anymore.  Now it's more of a technical thing.  You've got the advent of computers.  So I would say you need more education today.  You need to know writing, you need to know composition, you need to know the business of music, you need to know engineering, how to, how to work in your own studio, how to, I mean, you have to have so much information now.  This is an information society that we live in today.  People don't come out today.  You need to know video.  You need to know audio.  You need to know everything, you know, and express yourself to all these idioms and not just the one thing.  You, you, and most of all, again, keep your faith and your trust in God as you go about it, you know, and strive for success through these different things.
Story_ID: 127444
Speaker 1: What do you still want to do that you haven't done yet?
Speaker 2: I want to do more of what I'm doing.  I want to travel more.  You asked me the question about [Las] Vegas [Nevada].  It's not just about Vegas, I want to go outside the city.  As I said, I'm going to Dubai [United Arab Emirates].  I like to go in areas like China, Indonesia.  I'd love to go to Russia.  I'll go back to Europe.  I'd love to go to Africa, area countries in Africa, Ghana, Nigeria and some of the more commercial environments, Johannesburg [South Africa], Zimbabwe, you know, Tanzania.  I'd love to, I would love to take this music, this gift that I have and go in those places and uplift the spirits via this instrument and working with quality people, top shelf people who are of some significant intelligence, who are striving also for the same things and that we can work together and come up with this, I hate to say I wanna be the lead on it, but I am going to be the lead and I, that's why I thank God for giving me my son [Jihad Ghallab] 'cause he and I can go out as a duo and do what we do today with the advent of this technology, in which we do, because I sequence a lot of my stuff now.  Sequencing meaning I perform and record all of my stuff in my keyboards and him backing that, those bass, the bass up percussion and the strings and the horn parts via the drums and me playing lead on it.  It has given me a, a tremendous, it has kept my outlook going on and on and on.  I have not died at the plate.  I still can get to first base, second base, third base and still hit homeruns without needing the whole team today but I would prefer to have a whole team but a team of understanding, a team of people that are, are honest, that are not subdued by the alcohol and the drugs, that want to get out and be successful and make a life at this business.  This is a tough business we're in.  There's a lot of frustration in it but if you have a positive outlook and you can override so that you can see to the end of where you want to go, then you can override all the negatives that exist in the business, you know.  I hope that made sense--
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: --what I'm saying, you know.
Story_ID: 127445
Speaker 1: So what are your hopes and aspirations and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: You know there's, there's, there's, there's a lack of information in our community now.  There's a decadence.  There's a decadence there because the children aren't getting the education.  They don't have the heroes that I had.  Today's heroes are the gangster, American gangster, you know, the athletes that were real athletes when I was a child are not the athletes today.  Most of them are the American gangsters.  They're doing drugs, they're portrayed in the media in such a negative way and they're not, they don't, so you ask me what, what should we do?  We need a true revolution in our community, just in our community.  We need to kick out the thugs, you know.  We need to straighten up the, or re-educate the thugs, you know.  Get 'em to see a sense of real truth and real reality.  We need proper leadership in our community, not the leadership that's out fornicating and adulterating and doing the things that they do and then say you're my leader too and at the same time you're out here doing these other things.  We don't need that.  We need positive role models for these children today.  Am I a positive role model for these children?  In the frame and the mind that I have today, yes.  We need to bring our children home and re-educate them or educate 'em and not just black African American children, but children of all color need this today.  They need some real reality.  They need God in their life.  God is not in the world today.  He doesn't exist in this world as it presently exists, you know.  We need him and we need those people that know how to teach correctly, teach the truth to these children.
Story_ID: 127446
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, what stands out the most?
Speaker 2: My faith, my belief in, in my God.  That stands out more than anything, and me trying to do the right thing.
Speaker 1: What values do you consider to be the most important and why?
Speaker 2: Morality is a very valuable commodity if that's what you're saying.  We have no morality.  There's none on television.  I watch sports more than anything.  I can't watch any of the movies, not a lot of them unless there's some information, giving more insight to the reality of the way the world is supposed to be but the value of doing the right thing and finding the right road to get on and then showing others that road, I think that, that for me is, is as valuable as it can get, you know.  Finding that road and, and staying on the road that I'm on and then directing others to see that path as well.
Story_ID: 127447
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered and what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: As a man for the people, a good honest guy, a very sincere individual, even with my faults.  I've had my faults, believe me.  Man, I've done some things that I'm not, that I regret having done in my lifetime but I pray to God that I've done enough good to overcome the things that I've done that were bad and that the good will outweigh the bad and that he was a good guy, man.  A good musician, good father, good husband, good friend to everybody, treated people fair, great entertainer 'cause I love to entertain.  I love making people feel good.  I love the smiles and one who truly, truly believed in God first 'cause it's always been about him first, even as a child, you know.  I mean, when you, when we talk about my music, even though piano music was always there, God was always number one 'cause there was no way I could turn my back against that, you know.  My mother made [Juanita Thomas] sure I was in there and I thank her for that.  My grandmother [Mary Henry] made sure I was in there and I thank her and my stepdad [Kay Thomas, III], man, he's just, and to this day he's a very religious man.  No matter what the teaching was, be it Christianity, Judaism, Buddhism, Islam, the fact that they kept me with that faith.  You know, I chose the road that I wanted to go but there was other roads that I traveled that helped increase that information, you know, and I thank God for that, you know, and I thank those people that have helped me.  I thank you, you know.
Speaker 1: Well I want to thank you, too--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and thank you for the life that you've lead, all the great history that you shared with us today and I just want to thank you for being gracious with your time, sharing with us and coming from an honest place and thank you for this interview.
Speaker 2: Oh, right on brother.
Speaker 1: All right, brother.
Speaker 2: Now I'll get you a guitar, really (laughter).
Story_ID: 127448
Speaker 1: This picture here is a picture of Celine Dion.  This was after we did a concert in Montreal.  This is in Montreal, Canada and actually we did it at Laval, at her home.  This was for St. Sebastian's Church, St. Sebastian Hospital where they, she raised $100 million for cancer research for their whole, and we were the main performers there.  Her sister performed with us.  Celine came on stage but she didn't perform with us that particular night.  She's performed with us before.  We performed with her in her West Palm Beach home where she invited us down there to perform at Mar-a-Lago which is owned by Donald Trump and we did a gig there for her.
Speaker 2: A ball player I should have been but God had me become a pianist instead but this is one of my favorite basketball players in the game, ever, and this is Michael Jordan and my son, Jihad [Ghallab].  We took this after Michael Jordan's, he has a camp here in town, it's called the "The Jordan Flight School" where he teaches corporate basketball players how to play the game and corporate guys to come in and play and he had us perform for his event and, again, he's just a person.  I know his wife very well and he's somebody I truly admire.
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: Oh, we were doing a gig at the Terrazza Restaurant in Chicago [Illinois], I mean in Las Vegas [Nevada] here, at Caesars Palace, and this young man came here one evening with his wife and they had a wonderful time, Dick Clark, and I got to telling him about how I grew up on his show the "American Bandstand" on television and he and I became friends that particular evening.  Nice guy, very nice guy.
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This is one of my guys, and you know if you look at this a little closer, you can see we even look alike, you know.  I'm a little taller than him but, but we look alike and that's [HM] Herbie Hancock.  He's somebody I really love as a pianist.  I've been admiring him and his, this was taken after The HistoryMakers actually, the tribute to [HM] Quincy Jones and he was the Master of Ceremonies and he performed there that night and I was there and I got a chance to a get a personal shot with him.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now I got to be on stage when he and Bobby McFerrin were rehearsing.
Speaker 2: Oh, you were there that night too?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, man, were you one of the cameramen at--
Speaker 1: I was walking around with a handheld camera.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that handsome young man right there to my left is my son, that's Jihad, that's my drummer and my son.  He's an outstanding drummer, one of three.  He's my middle child and he's the one that got the talent out of the three of 'em.  He's a good drummer too, excellent drummer.  So if you guys need somebody, you can hire.
Speaker 1: I like it.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's me.
Speaker 1: We do that, we tip it over in photo shop later on.  Okay, tell us about that.
Speaker 2: That's me standing in front of Petrof piano which is made by Geneva International.  It's distributed worldwide.  It's one of the fastest selling pianos, an outstanding piano.  It's, to me, it runs the Steinway in the ground, the Yamaha can't stand up next to it.  The Bosendorfer, just move aside but it's an outstanding piano and it was a gift to me by Earl Matzkin and his wife, Elaine.  That was their gift to me for New Year's Eve and it's now sitting in my home.
Speaker 1: One second.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, the album cover behind you.
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead and talk.
Speaker 2: This is my very first album I ever recorded.  This was recorded in 1980.  This is called "Morning Sunrise".  It was produced by, actually by myself, and with a lot of assistance from a lot of other people but the significance point of this was that CBS Records wanted to take the CD on, this album on, and with Dr. George Butler.  At that time it was Columbia Records and they, it was recorded in their, at Universal Recording Studios in Chicago along with, where the Blues Brothers, and while we were doing this, the Blues Brothers is being shot next door with Aretha Franklin, James Brown, Jim Belushi and Dan Aykroyd and all the guys and I got a chance to meet all those fellows during this whole time that we were shooting this and they were supportive of us, too, as we were recording this album.
Speaker 1: It sounds like fun.
Speaker 2: And my first blessing from God, Amen (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay, can you turn it, slightly towards me, okay, excellent, okay, ready.  Tell us about this painting.
Speaker 2: This is a painting by a young artist here in Las Vegas [Nevada].  A very first painting I've ever had of oil work and she did it, she took a photograph of us and blew it up, took it home and she came back a couple of weeks, almost a month later with this oil painting, it was a trio with Darryl [Williams], Jihad [Ghallab], myself.  The artist's name is Kathy Kubiak [ph.], very nice lady and very dear personal friend, and this was done at Caesars Palace.  If you look closely, there's a Roman emperor there and that's Darryl up to the left and this is Jihad and yours truly in the middle.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.
