Story_ID: 18041
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Miss, would you state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Betty, B-E-T-T-Y, Elizabeth Alice Helen Watson, you wonder why I have all those names--Gross is my married name.  When I was born, my, one sister was reading about Helen of Troy, one was reading about Queen Elizabeth [I].  They didn't know that Betty is a nickname for Elizabeth so that Betty Elizabeth is still part of my name.  One was reading 'Alice in Wonderland', and they were arguing on what my name should be.  And my dad said, "Oh, name her all of them".
Speaker 1: So you were named, your sisters participated in your naming?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Can you give us the date of your birth and place?
Speaker 2: Well, I've told so many stories about my birthdate, but I was born October the 24th, 1914, and it was only recently that I've been proud that I've lived this long, this well.
Speaker 1: Okay, you were born in?
Speaker 2: Rock Island, Illinois--.
Speaker 1: Rock Island.
Speaker 2: --over a theater.  And I said I was destined to be a movie actress.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what's today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is July the 15th, 19--2003.
Speaker 1: 2002.
Speaker 2: Just say two thousand three [2003].
Speaker 1: Two thousand two [2002]
Speaker 2: Oh, that's right, two thousand two [2002].
Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we?
Speaker 2: In the home of Betty W. Gross.
Speaker 1: On the South Side of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: South Side, in the Hyde Park area.
Story_ID: 18042
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Greens.
Speaker 1: Okay. What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Color, black.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like all kinds of weather.  It doesn't bother me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I like the variety that Chicago [Illinois] offers.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Cruises, I love cruises.  It doesn't matter where we're going.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Do unto others as you would have them do unto you.
Story_ID: 18043
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your background.  Now, you were born in Rock Island, Illinois.  Can you give us the names of your parents and their birth dates and where they were born?
Speaker 2: Well, I just--I don't know their birthdates, but I know my father [James Watson] was born in Amherst County, Virginia, but he was raised in West Virginia.  My mother [Fannie Smith Watson] was born in Clarksville, Tennessee.  But I think she spent most of her time in Nebraska 'cause her mother [Amy Parish] died giving birth to twins.  And it was her grandmother that raised her, Grandmother Parish.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, let's talk about your father's background.  Did he have any stories about his family, his family, the origin of your family and what they did back before slavery was ended or?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, his mother was born in slavery, but she was a house maid and a dancer.  And she was known for her fantastic dancing technique.  And my father said his name should have been Bradley, but that father was so cruel to the children that they ran him off the farm.  And another white family took them in by the name of Watson.  And so he took that name of Watson.  And I didn't know until very recently that his name was not Watson originally, and it was Bradley.
Speaker 1: Okay, so his mother was born in slavery and his--?
Speaker 2: Named Molly.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's good.  What's her name again?
Speaker 2: Her name was Molly.  I just know her name was Molly.  What the last--Molly Watson, I guess, and, and he had several sisters, Daisy [Watson], I don't remember all of them, Ann, and one that did not have children.  So when she died a few years ago, she said she wanted her brother's children to have whatever was left in her estate.  It wasn't much, but we were so surprised, each of us to get this check for--
Story_ID: 18044
Speaker 1: We were talking about your father [James Watson]'s background in Amherst County, Virginia.  And you said, then he moved to West Virginia, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And before he finally moved out of Virginia.  Did he have any stories about, well did his grandparents have any stories or, or any of your other relatives, any other stories about the family that you want to tell us?
Speaker 2: Well, that was the main one I remember about Molly [Watson], his mother.
Speaker 1: She had, she danced with a basket on her head?
Speaker 2: Danced with a basket on her head, and she was known to go through all these gyrations and never lose that basket from her head.  And that was, she was famous for that.
Speaker 1: Did you meet her?
Speaker 2: No, no.  No, she had gone before I was born.
Speaker 1: Now, did your father talk about, you know, how he ended up in Rock Island [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, not to me.  Now, my baby sister [Jeanne Watson] was the last one home, and she said they sat down, and they would talk a lot.  And that's where, where I learned about Molly and his sisters and change--name change.  She said father would talk to her about it.  He was, by trade was a plasterer.  And a Dangerfield in Rock Island, Illinois taught him how to plaster.  And when we moved to Dunfermline [Illinois], oh, he could make a room look so smooth that people would come from twenty-five miles around to pick up Jim to come do plastering for their new homes.  And he never worked by the hour because he was fast.  He charged by the job.  And he such a good job, and they would always look for Jim Watson.
Story_ID: 18045
Speaker 1: Now, what about your mother [Fannie Smith Watson]?  You said, she's--.
Speaker 2: She finished high school, and where she taught I do not know.  But they think, according to the stories I hear, she was, she taught school.  She was also a midwife.  She delivered babies in our neighborhood quite a bit.  And I think maybe that's where my sister and I got the idea of going into the health field.
Speaker 1: Was she from Clarksdale?
Speaker 2: She was born in Clarksville.
Speaker 1: Clarksville, Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Tennessee, the first--she finished high school.  That's all I know, but where, I do not know.
Speaker 1: So you don't know if she was in Rock Island?
Speaker 2: I know she didn't finish high school in Rock Island.  But she got married in Rock Island, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there a story about how your mother and father [James Watson] met?
Speaker 2: No, and I never--always, I guess I should have asked because that always puzzled me.  He came from one end of the country and she from the other, and they ended up in Rock Island.  I don't know how that happened.
Speaker 1: And she didn't have any stories about or did she have any stories about her grandparents and their experiences in (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: Just, just Grandma Parish.  And she had, Grandma Parish had two or three sisters.  And I was named after one of the sisters named Betty [Parish].  So I was named after Aunt Betty.  And Aunt Betty moved out to Nebraska, and that's where she was most of her life.
Speaker 1: Now, were they born during slavery too or?
Speaker 2: No, no.  The only one I know that was born during slavery was Molly [Watson], my father's mother.
Story_ID: 18046
Speaker 1: You have all sisters, right?
Speaker 2: There were seven of us.  The oldest one [James Watson] is a boy.  All the rest, the six remaining children were female.
Speaker 1: And where do you fall in there?
Speaker 2: I was next to the baby.  And I liked being the baby.  My baby sister [Jeanne Watson] didn't like being the baby.  So I didn't mind, and I would sit on my mother [Fannie Smith Waston]'s lap and let her pet me cause my other, my baby sister didn't like that.  She didn't want to be petted.  So everyone thought I was the baby because I was, would allow them to treat me like a baby.
Story_ID: 18047
Speaker 1: Think back to the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in the neighborhood in Rock Island [Illinois]?  Now, tell us about the neighborhood and what were things like?
Speaker 2: I don't remember one thing about Rock Island because we moved to Canton, Illinois when I was about, I must have been about three years of age.  And we lived in an eight-room house next to a Baptist church.
Speaker 1: Okay, Canton, Illinois.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, where is Canton?
Speaker 2: It's thirty miles from Peoria [Illinois], and that was a big time, going over to Peoria when we got in our early teens.
Speaker 1: Well, what are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Canton, Illinois?  What was that like?
Speaker 2: Not too many blacks in Canton.  And all during high school, I was--and all during grade school, I was the only black in my class.  And I had one memory of my first year, and the main room teacher, I'll never forget her.  Her name was Ms. Moore.  The last day of school, she lined up all the students and as they went out the door, she kissed them goodbye.  And even then I was aware of racism because I wondered when she got to me, being black, would she kiss me.  And she did.  And I've never forgotten Ms. Moore because she kissed me.  I've had so many experiences with racism in a subtle way.
Speaker 1: Now, did they make a big deal of the fact that you were the only black student in class or?
Speaker 2: Not particularly, except in high school when we had plays, I was into the French class.  And I would always be in roles that concealed my identity.  I would behind, manipulating the, what do you call those things, little dolls that you dance, manipulate with--?
Speaker 1: Puppets or--?
Speaker 2: What you--?
Speaker 1: Puppets?
Speaker 2: Yeah, puppets.  And I would be behind the screen and manipulating the puppets.  And then we had another play, and I was a pussy willow.  Well, I was dressed like a pussy willow, with all black all over me, and looked like this--but I don't know whether it was a vegetable or what it was.
Speaker 1: A tree, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but they couldn't tell that I was black.  And then my sister who came after me was valedictorian of her class, but they said she wasn't.  They couldn't have a black person up there being the smartest in the class.  So they said she was the salutatorian.  Then two weeks later, it came out in the newspaper that there was a mistake.  The girl that was named valedictorian had not taken the correct courses.  So she could not be the valedictorian, and Jeanne Watson was the valedictorian.  But she did get a four-year scholarship to [Illinois State] Normal College [now Illinois State University] in [Normal] Illinois.  I'm trying to think of where it was, and she went on to become an occupational therapist and a school teacher in the public school system here.
Story_ID: 18048
Speaker 1: Now, you all lived in an eight-room house.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's a pretty big house.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was it like on farmland or--?
Speaker 2: No, it was a busy street in Canton, Illinois.  And my father [James Watson] wanted to buy it, but they, there was a clause that said as long as any heirs that owned it lived, the house could not be sold.  And there were, there was one bedroom downstairs, and, oh, about four upstairs.  So two of us shared a bedroom, except one sister who nobody wanted to share a room with her 'cause she, she liked to eat starch.  And I don't know why, whatever reason we didn't--.
Speaker 1: Right out of the box?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Starch, okay.
Speaker 2: But what was so interesting, whenever it lightning and thundered--my mother [Fannie Smith Watson] and father's bedroom was down on the first floor, and soon as it started raining, that lightning and thunder, my dad would automatically get up out the bed 'cause he knew we would all come downstairs and get in bed with Mama.  I don't know why we thought she could protect us from the lightning and thunder.
Speaker 1: What kind of--do you remember the kind of food you all ate when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: Well, me and my mother, we always had to sit down at the table.  We could not just come in one at a time and eat.  We all sat down at the table and ate.  So I'd like to tell you about one of the Christmases that I enjoyed best.  My mother, we would--I believed in Santa Claus 'til I was about ten or twelve years old, and that was terrible to be that naïve.  But my mother would throw the tops of pans up the steps and as they came down, they would, you know, make a noise.  And we thought that was the reindeer leaving, but we couldn't come downstairs until we had heard the reindeer leave.  And when, when--this one particular Christmas, I remember coming down and the little red table and turned to the set, and candles set, and that little set of dishes right there I have in the cabinet.  And that was such a beautiful Christmas, just to see that little red table with lights and those little set of dishes.  And they let me keep them because they knew that if they all kept--had them, they'd probably all get broken.  But I still have those dishes in my cabinet.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have any other relatives in Canton besides your immediate family?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, our family was, it was the--when we moved from Canton, when he could not buy this house, then my dad bought a house in Dunfermline.  It was not as large--.
Speaker 1: In where?
Speaker 2: Dunfermline, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: D-U-M-F-E-R-M-L-I-N-E [sic, Dunfermline], Dunfermline, Illinois.  And that meant we had to, my sister and I had to walk a mile to catch a bus to finish high school in Canton.  But my baby sister [Jeanne Watson] went to school right there in Dunfermline.
Story_ID: 18049
Speaker 1: Did you have any teachers in Canton [Illinois] or in grade school or high school that you really remember that helped you?
Speaker 2: I remember my eighth grade teacher, my first grade teacher and my eighth grade teacher because she was very strict, and because my mother [Fannie Smith Watson] had a philosophy if get a spanking in school, you're gonna get one when you get home.  So one--something happened in the eighth grade, and she didn't know who was guilty.  So she lined us all up to give us all a spanking.  And all I could think about was telling my mother--I don't know why I thought I had to tell her.  But I knew if I got this spanking, I would get another one when I got home.  And just about two students before me confessed that he was the guilty party.  So I was relieved.  I was not, I didn't have to receive a spanking when I got home.  And I liked her, she--because she was very strict, and I think I learned a lot from her.
Speaker 1: Were you a real good student in school?
Speaker 2: Yes, I always stayed on the honor roll.
Story_ID: 18050
Speaker 1: Did you have a fixed idea of what you wanted to be when you grew up?
Speaker 2: I had always thought I'd be a school teacher because we played school teacher at home all the time.  But then my sister who was older than me [Katherine Watson] wanted to be a nurse.  Even at eleven years, she would go down to the nursing home and work.  She wanted to be a nurse.  So my mother [Fannie Smith Watson] cashed in a policy and sent her to Provident Hospital [of Cook County] in Chicago [Illinois].  And she would write such grand letters home about her experiences at Provident Hospital that I announced near graduation that I was going to be a nurse.  And my--I heard my mother tell my father [James Watson], "First sight of blood, she'll be back home."  But I didn't.  And when I went on to Provident Hospital, nineteen--I graduated in 1939, so that must have been--that was a three-year program.  And I was still a freshman, and my sister was on the staff 'cause she had graduated.  And she told everybody, "Betty's gonna be the director of nursing one day."  And I said, "Aw, Katherine, you shouldn't say that."  But it did happen.  So I said, she was born with a--she always claimed she was born with a veil over her eyes.  But I did, and when I would go out on recruitment talks, I would tell the students, you hear so often, people say, if I had my life to live over, I would do this or I would do that.  But if I had my life to live over, I would still choose to be nurse.  I said, because there are so many opportunities with a nursing background.  Any city you go to, you can get a job, any hour, you want to work part time or, or full time.  Or you can teach, and the social aspects you can experience.  And it's just a wonderful background to have.  And so I had to say, I, I was glad I chose nursing cause I was able to teach also in nursing because I had taught with professional investments, trends in nursing, and i-nursing [Internet nursing].  The doctor would give the i-lectures [Internet lectures], and then I would follow up with the nursing aspects.  And whatever disease, I forgot I taught, but I don't remember.
Story_ID: 18051
Speaker 1: Let's go back to when you first arrived at Provident [Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] or first arrived in Chicago.  Had you ever been to Chicago before?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or other city the size of Chicago?
Speaker 2: No, and I had visualized elevators or something, way up in the sky, and that you had to take an elevator to get to the transportation.  And some you do, but my idea was, you know, very, very exaggerated, just like Rock Island [Illinois], Davenport [Iowa], and as a child, I visualized Davenport as being a city with some big 'Davenport' going across it (chuckle).  As children, you can have some fantastic ideas.  But I, I enjoyed Chicago though.  And my sister [Katherine Watson] was here working, not in the--and I stayed with her.  And the elevator would come right by us.  It was terrible, but you get used to that noise and I was able to sleep until I got accepted into the school.  Then I stayed in the dormitory.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, Provident Hospital, give us--for those who, you know, look at this interview years from now, you know, I guess they want to know what the significance or Provident Hospital is and why?
Speaker 2: Well, Emma Reynolds, I did, when I did my thesis, I had a chapter on the history of Provident Hospital.  And so many times recently I have heard that Emma Reynolds was from some other place, but when I did my research on it--.
Speaker 1: Emma Reynolds, you said?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was the first nurse that graduated from Provident Hospital.  But in my research, she came from Kansas City [Missouri], and she came to Chicago and no school would accept her because she was black.  So she went to Dan Williams and Dan Williams went to her uncle who was a minister on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois].  And the two of them got together, and with a few doctors, they said, "We'll start a school of our own, for our own people."  And that's how Provident Hospital got started because Emma Reynolds wanted to become a nurse.  She went on to become a doctor after--only two graduated at her class, Haywood [sic, Daniel Hale Williams] and, and herself.  But she went on to become a doctor.
Speaker 1: Did you know her at all or did you--?
Speaker 2: No, she graduated in 1891.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was--.
Speaker 2: A little bit before my time (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I understand--I'm just--and Daniel Hale Williams was gone too.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  But there were--his instruments are over there and his picture, and that's all we heard about Dr. Dan Williams operating on this heart and the patient coming into the emergency room by the name of Connor, I think it was.  And--.
Speaker 1: And George Cleveland Hall was gone too?
Speaker 2: Yes, a picture, a beautiful picture of him in the hall.  And--.
Speaker 1: So Provident started in the 1890s?  What was the year they started?
Speaker 2: Well, she graduated in 1891.  Then it had to have started, at that time, the program was eighteen months.  You could become a nurse in eighteen months when Emma Reynolds came along.  And, yeah, 1891, she graduated, so--.
Speaker 1: So maybe--.
Speaker 2: It opened up in a fifteen-bed house or apartment building, and then in 1939, they moved into a, a bigger--I think it was about twenty-some beds.  And then in nineteen--my sister helped move them to 426 East 51st Street [Chicago, Illinois] where they had almost 200 beds. And then in 1985, they moved into the present hospital, 500 beds.  And we had some outstanding doctors, but I shouldn't say this probably, but, but I think integration did not help the black physician or the black nurse or the black community because when the econ--the economic conditions became so poor, before none of our black doctors could go to the white hospitals.  But when we had empty beds, they wanted to fill those beds so they allowed the black doctor to bring their patients to there.  And the black doctors were so proud to be on these white hospital staffs.  I recall one doctor who would put on his white coat and just walk around the lobby of this big, white hospital, let people know he was on the staff there.  And so many times, I would talk to the doctors about bringing their patients to Provident.  And someone said, "My patients don't want to come Provident.  They refuse."  I said, "Don't tell me that.  A patient will go wherever her doctor, or his doctor tells him."  And when I got my master's degree, I got all kinds of offers from the white hospitals.  But I said, "As long as Provident Hospital can use me, I'm going to stay here."  So, and I feel that, honored to do their service to my own people, why give my skills, if it is called skills, to somebody else, when Provident was the one that gave me an opportunity to begin my education.
Story_ID: 18052
Speaker 1: I just want to take, let's take you back on, kind of step by step through the process of becoming a nurse, you know, when you were in school in the early '40s [1940s].  I mean what was that like, and can you remember your first class or the first time that you--?
Speaker 2: I remember the doctors taught us.  We didn't have the follow up like we had after I became in charge.  I, the doctor gave us lectures, and that was it.
Speaker 1: So the doctors taught the nurses.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And they taught us surgery, taught us medical nursing, medical aspects of patient care.  And--.
Speaker 1: What are some of those things?  I mean we don't know.  I mean people listening to this in the future want to hear what they are.  So.
Speaker 2: Well, it's--they gave us the symptoms that we were supposed to report to the doctors.  If a patient's pulse--we had to take her temperature and pulse and respiration.  And if it was above certain level, we were supposed to chart--we always had to chart everything.  And if it was above a certain level, then we'd have to call in the doctor.  Your patient's running a temperature or your patient's pulse is this or that, and, and in surgery, I would--that was my first job.  I was a surgical nurse.  And I remember Dr. [Roscoe C.] Giles and Dr. [Ulysses Grant] Dailey, oh, Dr. Dailey was outstanding.  And I could tell who would operate on me and who wouldn't.  But (chuckle) I wouldn't let that be known.  But I--one doctor would tell residents and interns, "Get out my way.  I'm trying to do this."  But Dr. Dailey would say, "Now, here this is what I'm doing.  I'm tying up this ligament, I'm doing this."  And it just was a difference.  He wanted to teach the younger men what to do.  And the other one, you know, he wasn't as skillful as Dr. Dailey.
Story_ID: 18053
Speaker 1: We were talking about the doctor in the surgery, and how their--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  And you had to know all those instruments.  And at one time, the doctor asked me a for a (unclear) and I gave him a tenaculum.  I said, "Oh, Lord."  He threw it away out of the field.  I said, "I'll never forget a tenaculum and (unclear) after that."  But, and that was not one of my favorite doctors (laughter).
Speaker 1: But most of them, did most of them have agreeable personalities?
Speaker 2: Oh, most of them did.  They were very cooperative sitting ther.  And when you handed them the forceps--the, the clip, you know, to tie off the ligaments, you had one that was straight, the needles, and you had one that had those hooks on them, that when you put them in every time, they wanted you, to clap that handle in their hand.  You don't just hand it to them, you know, you slap it into their hands, and then they're ready to use it.  But I, I enjoyed being an operating room nurse.
Speaker 1: Was there any--?
Speaker 2: And you had to be ready for an emergency within ten minutes.  If they called for an emergency during the night, and you're working out there, you know.  You had to be over there in ten minutes.
Speaker 1: So what was a typical day like?  Did you--you stayed in the dormitory as a student, and I mean--.
Speaker 2: And as a graduate for a little while.
Speaker 1: Okay, did that mean that you were on call all the time?
Speaker 2: No, only when I was in the operating room, but I got promoted from the operating room to pediatric head nurse.  I went out to Cook County Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] and took a six-month's course in pediatric nursing.  And when I came back, I was head nurse, not in pediatrics, but in the out-patient department.  But that had a pediatric department.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when did you go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]?  Did you go to Howard before you went to Provident [Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] or--?
Speaker 2: No, afterwards.  I, they were two years trying to get me to come to Howard.  But I was, I had heard so much about Washington, and if you weren't light skinned with pretty hair, you wouldn't get along at How--at Howard.  And I knew that Dr. Dove's daughter was there with her big harp and all.
Speaker 1: Dr. who?
Speaker 2: Dove, had a daughter that went to Howard.
Speaker 1: Dr. Dove, was that a--?
Speaker 2: She was a female doctor here.
Speaker 1: Was that at Provident or?
Speaker 2: She was here in Chicago, but I don't think they discriminated, and you had to go through a lot of routine to be admitted.  If you had a patient, I think you could just bring a patient, but later on, you had to be approved by the medical staff and show all your credentials and your resume in order to be admitted to the staff.  But that was--I was two years, see, I, when I was at Provident, I worked in the clinic, and Dr. Howard--Dr. Hall, named [James] Lowell Hall, was head of the clinic.  And he sent me over to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] laboratory to learn how to make allergens for allergic people.  And I would have these people bring the dust from their home or, and I would make an allergen and then test them to see if they were allergic to something in their own environment.  So after Dr. Hall went to Freedmen's [Hospital] in Washington [D.C.], and he tried to get me to come down there to set up a, a clinic.  And I said I did not want to go to a prejudiced city like, a place like I heard Howard was.  But, and that I didn't want to go to Freedmen's, so when this position as a assistant head nurse on the campus came up for the health department, he told me about that.  I said, "Well, I'll try that."  And it was, I was making $80 a month.  That was a lot of money.  They were gonna offer me $100 a month and room and board.  So I accepted that.  And when I went there, I did set up this--I was working at Howard as a health nurse.  But I went down to Freedmen's and set up this allergy clinic and trained one of the nurses to handle the department.  And I, I enjoyed the-- and then I was promoted to health nurse position, I was the assistant health nurse.  And what I liked about my position there was, I could go to school tuition-free for two courses.  And if I wanted to take the third course, I'd have to pay for that.  But I was able to almost graduate, and my husband wanted me to come back to Chicago.  He said, "We have schools here."  And I only had about three or four, two quarters really to finish, but he said, "We have schools here."  And so I came home, and transferred all of my credit to Loyola University [Chicago, Illinois].  They gave me credit for everything I had received at Howard.  But I still had to take their six theology courses in order to get a degree from a Catholic school.  You had to take the metaphysics, natural theology and logic and all those courses.  So that delayed my graduation a little.  But, when I did graduate, my husband was getting his master's and I was getting my bachelor's.  So the campus paper showed where husband and wife graduated in 1951, and she with this bachelor's and he with the master's.
Story_ID: 18054
Speaker 1: Where did you meet your husband or when did you meet him?
Speaker 2: I met him going to school at Loyola [University, Chicago, Illinois], and I kind of liked him.  And I would run into him purposely on the elevator or coming back and forth, and we would talk.  And then I met him at a party, and we became friends, and, and then he went off into the Army, and that's when I, while I, I went--that's when I went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], I think [1942].
Speaker 1: So it was during World War II?
Speaker 2: Yes, and he was in Europe.  And as soon as he got there, it was peace.  I said, "I'll see my husband," and he did, he ended the war over there.  And when they were sending him to the Phillippines, I said, "Oh, shoot, that's why they're sending him to the Phillippines because he ended that war over here.  Now, he's gonna end the war in the Pacific."  And sure enough, it took forty-five days to get over there from Europe on the boat, and by the time he got there, that peace was signed.  So I was bragging, just teasing, that he ended that war too.  But he wrote me letters every day.  One letter I got was forty-five pages long.  It took him that long to get to the Phillippines.  And we'd write every day.  And then we came back--I wanted to stay until I finished, but his brother sent me brown wrapping paper and string, hinting for me to pack up and come on back home.  I said, "Oh, well," to keep peace.  And his brother married my sister [Katherine Watson Gross].  She met him at our wedding, but we had to get--we met, he was in Seattle [Washington] when we met--when we got married.  And we had to get a special dispensation to get married because it was Lent, but since that was the only time he could, they, my priest got a special dispensation from the bishop to marry us.
Speaker 1: So this is in the Catholic--?
Speaker 2: It's Episcopalian.
Speaker 1: Oh, Episcopalian, okay.
Speaker 2: They call it Anglican, some of them.
Story_ID: 18055
Speaker 1: I can follow the Catholic service very well, because it's so much--.
Speaker 2: It's very close [to Epicscopalian services].
Speaker 1: But you're, they say it's not true, but the Episcopal church was founded when the King of England [Henry the VIII] wanted to get married [sic, divorced], and he couldn't because they didn't allow Catholics to get married.  So he founded the Episcopal--the Church of England, called the Anglican church, and, so he could get married.  But they say that's not the only reason.  But I don't know what the other reasons could have been.  But I, I prefer the Episcopal church because I feel--now, my husband was Catholic, but he didn't mind going along with me and being Episcopalian.
Speaker 2: Okay, you're a member St. Thomas Episcopal--?
Speaker 1: St., St. Thomas Episcopal Church [Chicago, Illinois], and I've been a member for--well, I was christened there, married there, married through the system, buried my mother [Fannie Smith Watson], my father [James Watson], and my two, two sisters from St. Thomas.  And the church burned down [in 1962], and I had, we held services at Jackson Funeral Parlor.  He sold us or gave the church, that building on Michigan [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] to, at the same time the church--
Speaker 2: Where was it originally?
Speaker 1: It was at, where it is now, where it is, but when it burned down, we had to have, hold services on Michigan Avenue.  And I said, "I hope we get a church before I have to bury any more people 'cause we had to roll the casket down."  I said, I'm, "I don't like rolling my father and mother down between these charred chairs."  But it was an Episcopal service so I--they were buried from there, Unity Funeral Parlor did such a beauty job, but they didn't understand the Episcopal format so well.
Story_ID: 18056
Speaker 1: Let's talk about some of the activities at Provident Hospital [of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] and maybe some of the issues 'cause as the--it was the first black hospital in the United States, and--.
Speaker 2: Well, they said that, but then someone challenged that and said there was a black hospital some place south, but, it, it's not as--not only is Provident, we know that Provident was the first hospital that had this, Dr. Dan [Daniel Hale] Williams who did the first open heart surgery, and I think that other hospital, wherever it is, is not known.  But I did hear that someone challenged it, but there's no proof of that.  So we still think Provident was the black hospital.  And--.
Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the issues around Provident during the time you were there, and what role did you play in a lot of the--?
Speaker 2: Well, the first thing they had to--.
Speaker 1: -- development and issues around Provident?
Speaker 2: The fundraising was one of the biggest problems.  And we had volunteer programs, and I'll never forget the young women volunteers would give a Cotton Ball every year, and the admission was a sheet and a couple of pillowcases.  And that helped to keep the linen supply going.  And then there was another group that would give a benefit every year, a dinner dance at the Parkway Ballroom [Chicago, Illinois].  And that benefit came to Provident Hospital, and we still have a volunteer group that still works for this Provident Hospital, trying to preserve the legacy and name of Provident.  But I would go to all of the activities, and I enjoyed what I could do for Provident.  I became the assistant director [of nursing] in 1948, I think it was.  And then when the director left, I was the director of nursing.
Speaker 1: Okay, was that almost simultaneous with your graduation from school?
Speaker 2: Yes, from--I had finished--got my master's [from DePaul University, Chicago, Illinois] the same year that I was made the director of nursing [1957].  And at that time, every school wanted to be accredited by the National League for Nursing.  So I told the administrator [at Provident Hospital], "I can get your school accredited, but it's gonna cost money."  He said, "Well, whatever it takes, I want the school accredited."  So I redid the library, brought that up to date, with modern books and all the books needed for references.  And I said, "We will need a qualified faculty."  And so I recruited the faculty with the degrees and so forth.  And one year after I became the director of nursing, I got the school accredited by the National League for Nursing.  And to backtrack a little bit, I was the first black nurse to be a member of the Illinois Nurses Association, and also the Illinois League for Nursing.  Well, the league emphasized education, and, of course, the association was an all-around organization for nursing to promote the welfare of nursing practice.
Speaker 1: And I think you said off-camera that you were the first black graduate of--I mean, first--.
Speaker 2: I'm the first member of the Illinois Nursing Association Board of Directors.
Speaker 1: Okay, but also you were the first--?
Speaker 2: The first black nurse in the Illinois League for Nursing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you were the first black person to get a master's degree [sic, bachelor's degree] from Loyola [University, Chicago, Illinois], you said?
Speaker 2: As far as I know, I was the, nurse, anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There might have been other people, black people because my husband got a master's from there, but as far as nursing, I think I'm the first black nurse to get a degree from DePaul and from Loyola.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that was pretty--that's a lot of progress.  In one year you were able to--.
Speaker 2: Get the school accredited.  Well, I knew what it took because as a, you know, I took my course in administration.  And it talked about a Joint Commission on Accreditation of Hospitals, and the values and standards that they look for.  So I knew what to expect.  And I knew that when they came in to evaluate us, I knew what they would be looking for.  They would be looking for lesson plans.  They would be looking for our nursing notes, our educational curriculum, the--well, I just knew everything that they would be looking for.  And I made sure--and I had supportive staff.  And I had all the head nurses and supervisors--we met once a month, and--in the library.  And I got their input and told them what we had to have.  And they cooperated so beautifully.  I'll never forget the girl that had the safety program.  Her name was Arkansas Doyle.  And she had a beautiful safety program.  And we saw pictures, and one of them said, how they evacuated patients.  She had it step-by-step, what to do in case of a, an emergency housing, evacuate patients.  And that, they said, that was ahead of our time.
Story_ID: 18057
Speaker 1: Just before we closed the hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], about two years before, the nurse that represented the Joint Commission on Accreditation [of Hospitals] had a Ph.D. so they warned me, "You better be careful.  You're gonna have a Ph.D. nurse coming to look over you."  See, they'd have a nurse and a doctor, I don't remember if they had maintenance person or not, but I know they had a nurse and a doctor that would come and look over everything.  And she sat across from me at the desk, and she would turn her page.  I had a policy manual and everything there, and she'd look up at me, and then she'd turn over again.  And she'd look up at me, and I was, you know, curious, why--but she--I knew then that was a little form of racism too because she couldn't figure out how someone in the ghetto would be knowledgeable about something this important.  And just like I was a member of the district council, all the directors of nursing in Chicago met once a month.  And I was riding home on the bus with the instructor from Luke's, [Rush Presbyterian] St. Luke's Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] instructors, and she said, "How did you get on the board of directors?  I always wanted to be on there."  Now, that was a subtle form of racism, cause, here she is a nice white woman wanting to be on the board, and how did this little black child get on that board.  And to me that was a subtle form--and when I first used to go to the council meetings, I would stand at the door and look around.  I'd say, "I wonder who would mind if I sat next to them," 'cause I was the only black member.  And then I got to the point, I said, "I'm gonna sit where I want to.  And if they don't like it, they can move."  And then another time, another subtle form of racism, I was at a meeting and they had what they called these sensitivity training programs.  And we were all sitting around in a circle, telling our experiences for whatever the subject was.  And I told them about my experiences about wanting to know where I would sit at one of the meetings.  One girl who was from the southern part of Illinois, she said, "You know, Ms. Gross, I'm surprised to hear you say that because I used to see you at those meetings, and I used to wonder what nationality you were."  Well see, that's a subtle form of racism again.  She couldn't believe a black nurse would a head of a department like I was at Provident because until Belva Overton, all the directors of nursing at Provident were white.  Then when she became the Director of Nursing, she was the first black Director of Nursing.  And then Ms. Hughes, and then I was the third black Director of Nursing.
Story_ID: 18058
Speaker 1: What are some of the most, more interesting stories at Provident [Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], that you think that would, incidents that you remember that--?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember the annual affairs that we had to benefit Provident.  And, of course, I always remember the Joint Commission on Accreditation [of Hospitals] visits 'cause they--everybody had to bone up and be ready for that.  And when I was no longer the director of nursing, I was still--I became the patient advocate, and the coordinator for the Joint Commission on Accreditation.  So I would go to very department and see that they had policies and in-service programs, safety programs and all that.  And I think one time, this--they had, at the end of each visit, the Joint Commission on Accreditation would meet in the library and have all the department heads come.  And they would tell what their recommendations were for this department and for that department.  And this new board president I know thought that they should have a younger director of nursing so they could attract younger doctors, so she could attract younger nurses who could attract younger doctors to bring their patients.  Oh, oh, my goodness, what kind of thinking is that?
Speaker 1: They're talking about younger nurses would attract younger doctors?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh and that would bring doctors, you know, up to the Provident staff.  And maybe I was too old, I couldn't attract young--so, but all the people who raised money for Provident said, "If you touch Ms. Gross, we won't give you another dime," 'cause--I was surprised at that.  And even the, when I'd go to the cafeteria, I would sit with all the people, people, orderlies, or the people from the housekeeping unit, from the dietary department.  I mean I just liked people, and I liked to know what their background is and what their goals and ambitions are.  So when they said there was rumors that they were going to something, they said, "If you touch her," and the nurses aides and orderlies said they would picket the place if they do anything to me.  I said, "Oh, no, don't do that."  I said, "You've got to think of the patients, and that wouldn't be fair to the patients."  I said, "I'm just one person, and let them do what they want to, you know, I can take care of myself."
Speaker 1: So is the staff there fairly close, I mean the doctors or orderlies, and nurses?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  They were all in my corner, but this one young president of the board had that idea that we needed someone younger 'cause I worked past sixty-five there.  I worked, I said, I teased everybody, I said, "They closed the hospital to get rid of me."
Speaker 1: So you worked right up until closing?
Speaker 2: Yes, they closed in 1987, I believe it was, 'cause we moved, yeah, we moved over there in '85 [1985] into the new building.  But the doctors wouldn't bring their patients there.  And they were so busy take, taking their patients to the big white hospitals, Provident couldn't support itself.  So that's when it closed.
Speaker 1: You think it was basically the doctors not directing their patients?
Speaker 2: The economics of it, yeah.
Story_ID: 18059
Speaker 1: Did Provident [Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] over the years develop like some loyalty in the black community once people--?
Speaker 2: Yes, that was the purpose of Provident Hospital, and people enjoyed Provident.  It was their hospital, and they held their dances and their public affairs.  And it was just part of the community, just like--what was that place on 35th [Street]--Parkway, nah, down on 35th and King Drive.  It was a beautiful place, and we used to have benefits there, and everybody supported it.  And then they stopped supporting it.  They were taking their affairs downtown in these big hotels.  And, and that's a failure of that institution, it failed because--.
Speaker 1: That's a similar reason too.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You're saying that integration and to a large extent in Chicago--.
Speaker 2: That's right, it didn't do--I think it did us more harm than good as a community and as a race.  We didn't support ourselves--our, as we did before.
Speaker 1: And so where we had black institutions before, now we don't.
Speaker 2: We don't have any, and we're the last ones to be hired and the first ones to be fired.  But it wasn't that way when we had our own black institutions.
Speaker 1: And there are so many factors to consider in this.  It's really a, it's a complicated type of--.
Speaker 2: I know, we wanted integration, but we didn't want to eliminate our own.  We wanted support for our own institutions too because I said I didn't think there was a white nurse that knew any more about nursing than I did.  And I'm sure that some doctors feel that way, too.  So why didn't we support them?  I would always go to a black doctor because I wanted to support them.  But, the way of life, and the downfall of Provident.  But it's coming back, but I don't know how long it's gonna, how long the [Cook] County's [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] gonna be able to, cause I went over there and looked, and to me, as though they had a lot of empty beds.  And I went there on an emergency basis, basis as a patient, and I got good care.  And if we supp--it's in our community.  Why go way over to the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] when we have this hospital right here that we can support?
Story_ID: 18060
Speaker 1: Were there any special cases when you were Director of Nursing at Provident [Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] that you remember, any famous people that were sick, or were in a crisis or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Mrs. John Halliburton, you know, Halliburton [Company] architectural firm, well, she was chairman of my nursing school committee.  And Dr. Virginia Lewis who was the Deputy Superintendent of Schools for a while, was on my committee.  This was a nursing school committee that was one of the criteria requirements of the Joint Commission [on Accreditation of Hospitals] to have a committee, and she was the chairman.  And every year she'd give the school of nursing $5,000, and I remember how supportive she was, and just, when she expired, much later on, years, I--she was buried at Rockefeller [Memorial] Chapel [Chicago, Illinois] and I went to it, and we had a big turnout for that.  And Schirmerhorn was our board of--president.  And he was very supportive.  And Mr. Reynolds was the executive director and many times he came to the rescue to meet the payroll.  And I'm trying to think of who else was on there.  Of course, I remember as a student, DeLee, Dr. [Joseph B.] DeLee from the University of Chicago would always send us a box of candy every year because we spent three months over at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], part of our curriculum to learn OB [obstetrics] nursing.  And so we had a good background, and we spent six months at Cook County Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] to learn communicable disease nursing, psychiatric nursing, and pediatric nursing.  We had to get up at 5 o'clock in the morning to catch the streetcar to get there by 7 o'clock [A.M.] 'cause we couldn't--they wouldn't allow us to live in the dormitory.  And, but that was a sacrifice, but we got a good education from it and a wide variety of experience that you couldn't get in one locale.
Story_ID: 18061
Speaker 1: I was asking you about some of the stories about Provident [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] and some of the people that were treated there.  And you were telling me off-camera about a streetcar fire.  And what was that about, and who was the--?
Speaker 2: That was, Alma Featherstone was in this big fire, a streetcar accident and fire.  And she was burned all--I forgot what percentage of her body.  And they brought her to Provident Hospital.  And we had just opened up a physical therapy department, and we had this big tank where we could immerse the whole body for treatment.  And she did get a $67,000 from that fire.  And at that time, that was a whole lot of money.  And she was one of my patients.  I took care of her.  And she was so grateful.  And she was the one that gave me a birthday party in that picture you have, I have.  And when she went to Yugoslavia, she gave me--bought me that vase I have over there.  And I've kept it--I don't know how she brought a big vase like that all the way from Yugoslavia, but when she got her settlement, she just traveled.  And, but she never forgot me.  And then I had some other very renowned patients, Mary McLeod Bethune, I'll always remember her.  She was in a private room, and, of course, she would tell me all about her--I think she established a school or did something.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Bethune-Cookman College [Daytona Beach, Florida].
Speaker 2: Yes, right, and she was very proud of herself and would brag to me about all of her accomplishments.  And I hadn't known anything about it before, and it was interesting to me coming from the white environment that I did to know that there were some of us who accomplished the--and then Joe Louis [boxer] was one of my patients.  And I remember someone bringing him a big tray of fruit, and I took it in to him.  And I went back, not too much longer, later, and it was all gone.  I said, "Oh, my goodness, he ate all that fruit already."  Let me see, I met Joe Louis and Mary McLeod Bethune--Lena Horne gave a benefit for--we held an affair over in hospital day--we all have what we call hospital day.  And some outstanding person would come, and all the employees would gather.  And we'd have someone to come and either do something.  And she sang for us.  And she was so pretty, and I remember this big hat she had on.  And she sang for us over in our auditorium.  And let's see who else, trying to think of--well, at that time, all the outstanding, anybody who got sick came to Provident Hospital.
Story_ID: 18062
Speaker 1: So did black people come to Provident [Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] from other parts of the country even?
Speaker 2: Well, Mary McCleod [Bethune]--McCleod Bethune wasn't from Chicago, and she came--I don't know where she was located originally.  And, of course, Joe Louis was--and he was Louisville [Kentucky], I think.  And I know there was a fellow that owned a bathhouse here.  I can't remember his name.
Speaker 1: Black person?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Owned a bathhouse, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, on 35th [Street] or 33rd [Street], in the Grand Terrace, near the Grand Terrace.  And he was a patient there during my time.  I can't--I just know that anybody got sick, came to Provident.  And I'm sorry I didn't keep a ledger of all these--.
Speaker 1: No, no, that's fine.
Speaker 2: --these people that--.
Speaker 1: Was Provident a site then of--?
Speaker 2: It was known to be a--.
Speaker 1: Black folks, if you could afford the best treatment, you know--.
Speaker 2: You'd come to Provident.
Speaker 1: --for a black hospital, you'd probably come to Provident, is that safe to say?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  It was one of the best.  And, you know, Meharry [Medical School, Nashville, Tennessee] was, was good, but Freedman's [Hospital, Washington, D.C.], I guess was all right.  It was all black, and it was a government owned, but this was supported by blacks and run by blacks.  And that's what makes it outstanding in our history, that we could develop something like that and run something like that.  It was outstanding hospital.  I was very proud to be a member of Provident Hospital because I thought it had outstanding physicians.
Story_ID: 18063
Speaker 1: Who were some of the outstanding physicians [at Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Dr. Berry, Leonidas Berry, who developed the gastroscopic test and the instrument was still there in the lobby where he did gastroscopes on patients.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a book about him, I've seen a book about him.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Leonidas Berry, yes.  He was very outstanding in gastroenterology.  And, of course, I told you about Dr. [Ulysses Grant] Dailey, Dr. Cleveland Hall, Dr. James Lowell Hall and--.
Speaker 1: Are the Halls related?
Speaker 2: No.  Dr. James Lowell Hall, his son I think became a doctor too.  And let's see who else, oh, Dr. Cooper.  He was very outstanding orthopedic doctor, one of the best in the country.  And he's the one that helped get the physical therapy department established at Provident Hospital. And two nurses assisted him, Thelma Brown and Thelma Ketching (ph.).  And we had one of the best physical therapy departments, I think.  And Thelma Brown wrote a book on physical therapy.  And the other one that worked with her, is a patient--she's a resident down at Montgomery Place [Retirement Community, Chicago, Illinois].  So she finished Provident Hospital before I did.  And she might be someone to tell you more about some of the things that happened during her time.  I can't think of any other doctors that were as outstanding as those that I just mentioned.  Now, Dr. Carroll Smith, do you know him?  He's, he married the girl that run Gladys' [Luncheonette, Chicago, Illinois], the niece of the woman that owned Gladys' restaurant there on Indiana [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Yes, the famous black restaurant in Chicago, yeah, Gladys's.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Gladys's, yeah, but he was medical director for a while.  Conner was very well known for his cardiac specialty.
Speaker 1: Who is this?
Speaker 2: Dr. Audley Conner, and his son went to become a doctor.  And he was the administrator down here at Grant, at Jackson Park Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] for a while.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Audley?
Speaker 2: A-U-D-L-E-Y, Audley Conner.  Santos was, I think he was Cuban or something--I can't think of his first name, but he was outstanding in OB [obstetrician].
Speaker 1: What's his last name?
Speaker 2: Santos.
Speaker 1: Let's hold on one second, please.  We've got noise outside.
Speaker 2: Dermatology.
Speaker 1: We're rolling again.  You were trying to think of the name of the dermatologist?
Speaker 2: Yes, that built the library in Israel.  And he trained Thatcher and, and, and Boswell and all those dermatologists.
Speaker 1: What about--you mentioned Dr. [Edward W.] Beasley and Dr. [Theodore 'T. K.'] Lawless, I think, that--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Dr. Beasley was a pediatrician.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I know the school named after him [Beasley Academic Center, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, that was his specialty, and he was very good.
Speaker 1: He delivered a lot of babies on the South Side.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, right.  And Walter Johnson, who is ill now, but he delivered every nurse that had a baby (laughter).
Story_ID: 18064
Speaker 1: As you said, earlier, you were a member of some city-wide organizations, where you were the only black member.  There was the Illinois Nursing--?
Speaker 2: The Illinois Council--the Illinois Nurses Association, yeah.  Now, on a state basis, the Illinois Nurses Association.  Then on a district level--see, the state is divided into so many districts, and Chicago is part of first district, and I was a member of the council.  That was all directors of nursing in the first district, and we met once a month at Eight South Michigan [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] was our headquarters.  And at Illinois League for Nursing, we would meet maybe in Springfield [Illinois] or maybe here at the Illinois Nurses Association.  Usually, usually, they all met in Chicago because, I guess it was easier for everybody from the state, from all the districts to get here.  And our accommodations were more accessible.
Speaker 1: They probably liked coming in to Chicago.
Speaker 2: That's right, right.  And I remember one nurse that came from one of the--and every year she had the same dress on.  So I was always so conscious that I hadn't--didn't have the same dress on that I went the last time.  But she probably knew, remembered that she had worn that same dress at two or three of the district--state meetings.  Ever since that, I was always conscious of what I wore at the meetings.  And so one girl said she always takes a picture when she goes to someplace so she'll know what she had on.  That's just a--men wouldn't bother about that.  And they don't have to cause they, they wear such similar suits all the time.  But women are very vain about that.  I don't know what else--oh, the name almost came to me.
Speaker 1: And so you've also traveled a great deal?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: You're a member of an organization what's it called?  Zonta something?
Speaker 2: Zonta International.  Yeah, there are seventy-two countries, and it's a service organization.  And I remember one year--each year they have a project to do.  And one year the, each club volunteered to give so many wells to Sri Lanka 'cause they had no water there.  So each of us pledged, each club pledged so many wells to this place in Africa.  And each, every two years, we meet in some country that--.
Speaker 1: There's some workmen or contractors, I'm not sure what they're doing--okay go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, you were telling us about Zonta International.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, every two years, we meet in some country.  And as part of my traveling experiences, I'd always go to wherever they met.  They met in Hong Kong [China], they met in Australia, they met in Sweden.  I think we met in Russia, but I don't remember whether we met in Russia or that was one of the side trips from Denmark, Germany, Hong Kong, and it was so impressive the opening night, at the banquet.  Each president of each country would walk down the aisle in her native uniform and carrying the flag of her country.  And two years ago in Paris [France], we met in Paris, they didn't have the president do it. They had a member of the organization.
Story_ID: 18065
Speaker 1: We just confirmed Dr. [Theodore 'T. K.'] Lawless was a dermatologist [at Provident Hospital, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Um-hum, at the--.
Speaker 1: Amongst the other prominent physicians, you know.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, and one of the most outstanding dermatologists, and trained all the young dermatologist who came along, Dr. Thatcher worked with him, was probably next in line to Dr. T. K. Lawless.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and Dr. Thatcher, is he still practicing?
Speaker 2: No, he expired not too long--most of those outstanding physicians have stepped out of the parade.
Story_ID: 18066
Speaker 1: You were talking about Zonta International, and we talked about that.
Speaker 2: Oh, I said what was so impressive that each night the, the closing--I mean the opening session, each president of each country would have her, her native custom would tell the part of the country.  But this past year in Paris [France], we had the honor of the president of our club, South Side Club [Chicago, Illinois], to carry the American flag across the stage on opening night.  So we were very proud of the, the Zonta South Side Club had that honor.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you get involved in Zonta?  Was it through nursing that you found out about it?
Speaker 2: No, Dr. Virginia Lewis was the only black member of Zonta--.
Speaker 1: Was it a doctor--?
Speaker 2: Well, she's Ph.D. doctor.
Speaker 1: Oh, Ph.D. doctor.
Speaker 2: She was deputy superintendent of schools, and, but she was also a member of an organization I belong to called Alpha Gamma Pi.
Speaker 1: Okay, what is that?
Speaker 2: That's an honorary society.  It's not a Greek letter sorority.  It's an honorary, you're nominated because of your, supposedly, community activities and commitment to service for the community.  Our goal is to raise monies for scholarships for students.  And each year, we give at least four scholarships.  And Fannie Mae Summerall, in her estate, left money for us to give at least two or three thousand dollars a year to a student in the name of her organization because she was a member of Alpha Gamma Pi.  And Anita Boswell, who just expired was a member, and you're nominated--she was one of the founding members, Alberta Myers founded the organization back in 1963.  She honored about six or seven outstanding black women in Chicago for their contributions to the community through their services.  And they thought it was a good idea, so they developed this organization and decided to do it every year.  So in 1968, I was one of the--I mean the very next year, 1964, I was one of the nominees to be honored at one of the hotels downtown.  And, but that's another organization.  You want me to get back Zonta.
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, all of them, but--.
Speaker 2: And Alpha Gamma Pi is--.
Speaker 1: We're just trying to briefly cover all of them.
Speaker 2: We have a wide variety of members in Zonta, judges and social workers.
Speaker 1: It's an all women's organization?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's all--this is an all women's organization.  Now, Zonta is just beginning to talk about taking men, but it's always been an organization for the welfare of women and service.  And each, each year we have a project, like I told you about the wells or the building fund.  The, the headquarters are here in Chicago on Randolph [Street], the national, international headquarters, right here in Chicago.  And we bought the building, each club contributed so much.  And we have some meetings there, but our goal is to help people, to develop the status of women.  But now they're saying that the local clubs, we can take in men if we want to.
Speaker 1: Now, speaking of the status women, I mean how has the status of women changed in the health profession since the time that you got active as a nurse?
Speaker 2: Well, at one time, you know, female doctors, they could hardly get the female into medical school.  But now, I've seen them come in medical schools and come in as residents, and they are working--at most hospitals now, you have females.  But at one time--and there's still, some people who are not too happy about a female.  They think the man's ice is colder than the female's ice (laughter).  That's what I say about the black and white, the black man's ice is not as cold as the white man's ice.  But women have advanced quite a bit.  And they have a woman on the United Nations, and she's a Zontian.  And the Zontias, the South Side Club, oh, how I got into that was through Dr. Virginia Lewis.  She wanted the club to be integrated.  She was the only black one.  So she asked would I be a--could she present my name as a member of Zonta.  That was in 1968, so I have been a member of that organization since 1968.  And it's very interesting because we have such a variety of females.  Judge Hall, she was a member and they have architects, Gloria Cook is an architect.  And of course, teachers and, and the mayor's commissioner of aging is a member.  So it's just a variety of women with various backgrounds, and it makes the meeting very interesting to have such a variety of backgrounds coming together to, to talk and share experiences.  So I like that about Zonta.  And, of course, I'm always on the scholarship committee of whichever club I belong to cause I'm interested in advancing the education of people, of young people.  So I'm on the scholarship committee of Alpha Gamma Pi.  I'm on the scholarship of Zonta, and I don't know.  But then, I've just been, I just like people, and I, and I've been active so many, like the Health Council of Chicago.  I was the chairman of that committee for, for a while, but it's defunct now.  But it was an integrated committee that was interested in advancing health of our people and other people too.
Story_ID: 18067
Speaker 1: During your years at Provident [Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], you know, and what do you think--what was the, what were there--or could you rank maybe the number one health issues in the black community?  Were they trauma cases or were there, was it high blood pressure?  What was the--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, We have one of the highest emergency rooms in the city next to Cook County Hospital, gunshot wounds and, of course, accidents.  We have had a very, very active emergency room, and that was our biggest medical problem.  And then the--earlier polio was just beginning to phase out because they had developed the polio vaccine.  But we still had post-polio patients that we had to be rehabilitated.  And we did that through our physical therapy department.  And what other issues?
Speaker 1: Well, when you--I don't want to break your train of thought, but I, I just--it just occurred to me.  Do you learn a lot about human nature dealing with trauma cases and some of the other, you know, emergencies in the black community?  The stories of the people that come in there with those kind of problems?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I didn't work in the emergency room, but I would hear of some of the situations there.  A lot of abuse cases would come to, and it was almost a danger being assigned to the emergency room because we didn't know whether the man was gonna try--gonna follow his wife in there and shoot up everybody or not, 'cause you didn't know.  Shoot, they would be so angry, but, they'd finally calm down.  And I had a, one nurse who was very good in the emergency room.  And she learned to suture 'cause we had a lot of cuts and things, and so the doctors taught her how to suture.  And wasn't a nursing duty, but when nobody was looking, they let her suture (laughter). Course, they would always have a lot of ambulance chasers hanging around, trying--.
Speaker 1: Lawyers trying to--?
Speaker 2: Trying to get cases so they could sue.  And so you always had that as a problem.
Speaker 1: Was there a way that you dealt with that problem at all?  How as the hospital dealing with that kind of problem?
Speaker 2: Well, we would discourage it, and if we found out any nurse was taking bribes, you know--.
Speaker 1: Oh, so they would work through the--?
Speaker 2: They tried to do--
Speaker 1: --the staff?
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's what they would try to do, and if the administrator found out about that, then that was your job because they didn't want that stigma attached to Provident Hospital.
Speaker 1: Did you have cases where someone reported an injury that really wasn't true or tried to say that--?
Speaker 2: Well, they'd exaggerate them, but the person wasn't hurt as badly as they would want them to profess, so that they could get a bigger settlement.  But some of the ambulance chasers made good money, they tell me, just from that activity.  But you don't hear about that so much around emergency rooms anymore.  I guess with the HMOs [health maintenence organization] and insurances breathing down their neck, they can't get by with as much they used to.
Story_ID: 18068
Speaker 1: Do you think the needs of the black community in terms of medical care are about the same as they were when you were at Provident [Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] during its heyday or are they different now?
Speaker 2: Well, see, we turned down no one.  So we weren't worried about how it was paid.  But now hospitals are--the first thing they ask you for is your insurance card.  And if you don't have any insurance, then you go over to Cook County Hospital [Chicago, Illinois].  But I feel that the biggest problem now is with the drugs, and a lot of patients I think are being treated through the drug advertisements on TV, cause I had a lot of problem with my knees and they tried Vioxx 'cause that was advertised so much.  And I told the doctor it didn't do me any good.  And I wasn't gonna pay $80 for something that didn't do me any good.  And then they tried to talk about Celebrex, so I just think some times the doctors lean too much on advertisement of different drugs.  And then sometimes it'll come along, and research shows that it causes kidney damage or liver damage.  So I just, I don't take any of that now.  But that was the biggest problem at, at that time, that we didn't turn down anyone at Provident, money or not.  And, of course, you didn't pay half as much as we're paying now.  I was in the doctor's office for fifteen minutes and paid eighty, $85 for him to ask me, "How you feeling?", take the blood pressure, and that's it.
Speaker 1: You think it's become--?
Speaker 2: It's too commercial, and I think the hospitals have become too commercial.  And Provident was never commercial during my heyday.  We were thinking about the--taking care of the patient, and the welfare of the patient.  And the doctors were interested in the welfare of the patient.  And I said I'm glad I'm--you know on the normal curve of distribution, I'm glad I'm on the way out, instead of having to start over here and go up because I, I just see so much difference.  I look at the nurses' uniform.  You go in the hospital, you don't know a nurse from the cook or from the aide because they all wear these fancy multicolored coats and the heavy gym shoes.  I remember once when I was the Director of Nursing [at Provident Hospital], one of the district nurses who was the director of nursing at that time over at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], she said, "Betty, we're neighbors all these years, and I've never visited your hospital."  So I said, "Well, come over.  I'll give you a tour."  So I took her a tour on the hospital, and we got back to my office, I thought she would talk about the problem-oriented method of charting which was new in this area.  I had sent nurses away to a seminar, and they came, and we instituted the problem-oriented method of charting and lesson plans, and patient-care plans.  And I thought she was referring to something like that, like the Joint Commission [on Accreditation of Hospitals] did.  And you know what she asked me?  "How do you get nurse to wear such shoelaces and shoes?"
Story_ID: 18069
Speaker 1: Can you tell the story about the uniforms again?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The, you said that--.
Speaker 2: Where did I, where did I leave off?
Speaker 1: You talked about the, your visitor--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes?
Speaker 1: --remarking about the whiteness of the shoes.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, and I gave--showed her the, made rounds [at Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], and when we came back to the office, the question she asked me was how do you get your nurses to wear such white shoelaces and white shoes.  And that shocked me 'cause I thought she would ask about the issues, problem-oriented method of charting and nursing care system.  And that's what she asked me about that.  But I told her it was through example.  And said, "For example, I never--when I leave this office, the uniform, I've been sitting in my chair, had wrinkles in it.  And so I put on a fresh uniform when I made rounds so the nurses never see me in a wrinkled uniform or shoes that are not snow white."  And she, she said, "Oh, I never thought of that," but I always kept two uniforms in the office.  So one I made rounds in and the nurses couldn't understand how I could wear a uniform and never had a wrinkle in it (laughter), but they didn't know my secret.
Story_ID: 18070
Speaker 1: You also wanted to talk about the--.
Speaker 2: The Joint Commission on Accreditation [of Hospitals], but every hospital aspires to be accredited by the Joint Commission.  And, of course, if you're not now, the insurances won't pay the bills.  But this woman, who was a Ph.D., and she kept looking at me and all, and she's going through all the material I had on my desk for her to review.  And when we got the summation I understood now what she was thinking.  But anyway, she gave each department, maybe, maybe just one or two recommendations.  Most of the times, it was about their safety program or their--something not too serious, but she'd have two or three recommendations for every department [at Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois].  So she said, "Now, nursing department", said, "I have no recommendations."  She said, "In fact, they are to be complimented for their problem-oriented method of charting."  Well, the president of the board could have gone through the floor 'cause he just knew I would be torn apart with this Ph.D. evaluating nursing, and which she paid a compliment--and I was the only one she paid a compliment to.  She had recommendations for every other department.  So, but that was one of the highlights of my experiences as a administrator.
Story_ID: 18071
Speaker 1: What do think is the future of health care in the black community?  Is there room for something like a Provident [Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] again or something or what do you think--?
Speaker 2: Well, if, if we have a segregated community like we've had--now, Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] is supposed to be one of the most integrated communities in the country.  So, but we still are not given the first class treatment that the others get.  And so it would have been good to have our own.  But, you know, I have mixed feelings about it.  I like integration 'cause I have friends of all races.  But yet and still I, I know that if we could concentrate on our own race, we would--they would get better care.  And the only way you could do that is to have our own hospital.  But I would be criticized for even thinking that we should go back, that, that's going backwards.  But I know that we did get better health care when we were all black.
Story_ID: 18072
Speaker 1: So what do you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: The fact that I tried to represent my race, and like I was on the board of Komed Health Center [Chicago, Illinois].  I was on the board of the Chicago Christmas, is it Christmas seals [Chicago South Side Community Christmas Seal campaign, 1969-1975], the one that emphasizes tuberculosis.  I try to get involved in everything that I could bring back to Provident [Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois].  And that's why I got several citations, and even the, at the class of 1965 gave me a plaque for my, they said, I don't know what they call it outstanding, something, contribution.  But I remember telling students you have to decide now what kind of old lady you want to be or old man--and I was one of the first to take in male [nursing] students.  And when I took them in, other hospitals followed suit.  I was the first one to close the [Provident Hospital] School of Nursing [Chicago, Illinois] cause I saw the trend, where nursing was going to universities, and so I called the council together.  I said, "We are on top now.  We are accredited.  If we keep trying to hold on, our best nurses are going to universities.  We're gonna, we're gonna lose our good faculty, and there'll come a time when we may not get accredited.  So I think it's best that we quit now while we're accredited so we can always say we finished it, finished from an accredited school."  And they all agreed with me, even the board and the nursing school committee agreed with me.  Soon as I closed Provident Hospital School of Nursing in 1966, several other hospitals started following suit.  It was as though they were waiting for someone to start the ball rolling.  But now the universities, junior colleges and universities all have nursing programs.  And you don't see to many diploma programs in hospitals.  And the cost is one factor, and, of course, the prestige of being a college graduate also is meaningful to them.  But I think I was, almost a trend setter when I took in the male students, and I had a male student come to me at this class reunion, said, "If it hadn't been for you, my wife never would have become a nurse because I knew they were married."  If you were married during my time, before that, they'd put you out.  And there was one girl who only had six months to finish, a very good nurse, and her husband got mad at her and came and told the director of nursing, Melva Overton, that his wife was her student.  And she put her out.
Speaker 1: Now, why--?
Speaker 2: You couldn't be married when you--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, why was that?
Speaker 2: He got mad at her, and, his wife.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but why was that an issue in the first place that you couldn't be married and be a nurse?
Speaker 2: Why, why couldn't a male nurse be a, a nurse?  A male be a nurse.  I said, "Doctors are male, and he takes--looks over the woman.  I don't see why a nurse, a male nurse can't take care of a, of a female patient."  So it was an issue then.  You just couldn't get married and be--and at one time, you couldn't be a teacher, I think, and be married.  So, I don't know why they thought it was important not to be married, (unclear) just like priests aren't supposed to be married.
Speaker 1: Well, do you think it was because people felt that a married woman ought to stay home--?
Speaker 2: And take care of the children and, and appropriate, and she didn't have time.  If she was gonna take care of the family, she didn't have time to go out and take care of anybody else.  And, and I think that was more of a male trend of thought than it was a female because I'm not a homemaker.  I don't like cleaning up a house and cooking.  I have someone help me.  But for a man, that's the duty of a woman, and at that time in nursing, you, you nursed or you got married.  You couldn't do both.  So times, times have changed greatly.
Speaker 1: And why do you think it was a stigma on males who wanted to be a nurse?  What was the stigma there?
Speaker 2: Well, they thought, they felt that they were--if they wanted to be a nurse, it must be something wrong with them.  But the ones that I took in were very, very masculine, and I didn't have any doubt about their--and it didn't matter to me.  They're human beings.  And they're what God made them.  And if they're heterosexual, bisexual or homosexual, they're still human beings.  And I have friends of all kinds, and it didn't make any difference to me as long as they treated me all right.  I treated them all right.  I had friends that were from all walks of life.
Story_ID: 18073
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Of being fair, and I had a niece [Katherine Gross-Williams] who graduated from high school.  I gave her her first job as a nurses' aide, and I introduced her to the health field.  She liked it so well that she went on, said, "I can do more," went on to Loyola [University, Chicago, Illinois] and got a degree in nursing.  So when she came back, I assigned her to the emergency room.  And she found out there was just--there's so much you can do in that emergency room.  If she were a doctor, she could do more, so she went back to Northwestern University [Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois] to learn to become a doctor.  She lost her sight the last three months in medical school, but they let her finish through tapes and I did a lot of reading for her.  And the library for the blind has a lot of books on tapes, so she was able to finish.  And she passed state boards through the same mechanism.  So she works three days a week down at Cook County [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois], and two days at the [Chicago] Board of Health.  But the reason I gave you that background, she, when she worked at Provident [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois], something happened, and she was walking off the job.  She thought she could come to me because I was her aunt.  I said, "Did you go to the head nurse?"  She said, "No."  I said, "You go back and go through channels.  You go to the head nurse."  So the, the staff knew that, and they, they said that they knew that I was fair because I wouldn't let my niece get by with any more than I would let them get by.  When I taught class, the class [at Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] started at 1 o'clock [P.M.], and that door closed at 1:00 o'clock.  I was teaching promptness.  And they knew they couldn't open that door when it was closed.  And if they missed three classes, they'd have to repeat the course.  So the--I'd see the nursing students running across the campus.  They'd say, "Oh, they must be going to Ms. Gross's class," 'cause they knew if they didn't get there by 1:00 o'clock, they couldn't come in.  It's, it's all that you allow and that you establish.  One o'clock is the time--like when I used to pick up my nieces to go to church.  I said, "I shouldn't have to wait in front of the house for you.  You should be there waiting for me."  I said, "It's selfish," and I tell the students this.  "It's selfish to make people wait, 'cause it means that their time is important, their time is not important."  So it's discourteous to be late.  So whenever anyone is gonna pick me up, they tell me to be down in the lobby at 10 o'clock [A.M.], I'm gonna be down there at quarter to ten because if they're kind enough to pick me up, I shouldn't--they shouldn't have to wait.  And so that was one of the examples of how I taught them promptness, and, oh, and another student, when I told you that I had, teaching professional adjustments, and told him they had to decide what kind of a woman--I had an accountant to come in and talk to them.  And he talked about investments and so forth, and a couple years or so later, I met a nurse on the street.  And, "Oh, Ms. Gross, I'm so grateful to you for having exposed me to this;" said, "I've got eighteen thousand dollars, and it's all mine."  She had saved it.  And that made me feel good to think that someone did listen to you.  But I do feel that I was fair, and that's what I want to be remembered by; and did the best I could.
Story_ID: 18074
Speaker 1: Did your parents get a chance to see you become successful in nursing?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother [Fannie Smith Watson] saw me become--she came to my graduation as, from Loyola [University, Chicago, Illinois].  She expired in '59 [1959]--'69 [1969].  But she expired in '59 [1959], my dad [James Watson] expired in '69 [1969].  But so she lived to see me become the Director of Nursing [of Provident Hospital, Chicago, Illinois], and she also saw me get my degree from Loyola [University, Chicago, Illinois], but that's as that went.  But, but she always emphasized education, the importance of it.  And, of course, my husband said "If you can read, you can do anything."  So he emphasized education.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we haven't asked you that you'd like to say or before we--any other?
Speaker 2: Well, there are several plaques that I received there. And I don't remember what they were for, but citations and so forth.  But I think you've covered about all my life, but I have a lovely family.  I have lovely nieces, no children, but--and I love people.
Speaker 1: And your sister went on in nursing too, your sister was Jeanne [Watson], was it--?
Speaker 2: Jeanne, the only one left, she's a, was an occupational therapist.  Then she went on to be a teacher in the public schools here.  And she married a, a man who was a government appointee, and he was the one who integrated the banks, brought more blacks into the bank system here in Chicago.
