Story_ID: 7811
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is William Greaves, G-R-E-A-V-E-S, William Garfield Greaves, and what else did you want to know?
Speaker 1: I want to know your date of birth and place of birth.
Speaker 2: Well I'm not going to tell you my date of birth because in this industry that I belong to, one doesn't tell their date of birth. It's a--let's say that I'm over thirty-five.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just a little bit over.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well what is your place of birth?
Speaker 2: New York City.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I was born--you're looking at a Harlem [New York, New York] boy. I grew on 135th Street and Lenox Avenue where actually--it's now been called Malcolm X Boulevard.
Speaker 1: Right, you're right there by the Schomburg Center [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, The New York Public Library, New York].
Speaker 2: Right at--right where the Schomburg Center--grew up. That's where--I mean, built--that's where I grew up and played around the streets there as a young kid and so on.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's the heart of it almost.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely at the epicenter, is that what you call it? Yeah, sure.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation is--I'm a filmmaker. I make movies about a lot of things.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Today's date is the 16th is it of--17th. Today's the 17th of April.  Yeah, and--,
Speaker 1: 2003--.
Speaker 2: 2003. Right.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at DuArt Film Studios--Film Laboratories [New York, New York] and I have a studio here. I have an editing room here and I tend to make most of my films either here--or I come here, when we want to finish the films, then we come to the laboratory and it has a number of enhancement technologies here that make the films viewable, shall we say.
Story_ID: 7812
Speaker 1: Now before we get into depth, there are five lightweight 'People' magazine-ish type questions we always ask. It just requires short answers.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the first one is, Sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: What is my favorite food. Well I don't know. I must say I like peas and rice West Indian peas and rice from the Caribbean. I like Chinese food. I like Indian food from India. Some American foods, cheese and macaroni, and I don't like red meat. I'm basically a vegetarian and I tend to stay away from too oily film--food and I guess that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color? This is a 'People' magazine interview isn't it? (laughs) Favorite color. Well I could say black only because of the kinds of films I make tend to be films on the black experience, but I guess olive is my favorite color.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring, fall, summer. Some parts of winter.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well I've been all over the world, I mean, when you make movies you--particularly when you make documentary movies--you do a lot of traveling, so I've been virtually every continent--well I've been in every continent on earth--and all over the--almost all the states of the United States. I like the beach in Dakar, in Dakar, Dakar, Senegal. It's a beautiful place. I like the beaches in [Velha] Goa, which is in India. I like California, you know, Malibu. I've been to quite a number of beaches in Rio de Janeiro [Brazil] and so on. I mean it's--I don't have any really favorite recreational place to go, but I like India a great deal, particularly an Ashram that I often go to called the Sri Aurobindo Ashram [Pondicherry, India] and I tend to hang out there as much as I can.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure. "A race without a knowledge of its history is like a tree without roots," and that's pretty true.
Story_ID: 7813
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you about your family history. How far can you trace your family background?
Speaker 2: Well I guess you have to say that--trying to get my handkerchief here. I can--I think I can trace my family on my father's [Garfield Gilbert Hannibal Greaves] side back to Benin, it was called in colonial times Dahomey. On my mother's [Phyllis Emily Muir Greaves] side, my family can be traced to Sri Lanka to some degree and to the Maroons in, in Jamaica. On my mother's side, also, I think we have a progenitor a very infamous character called [Captain] 'Red Leg[s]' Greaves [active, 1670-1680] who was a Scottish pirate, who cut a swath through the Caribbean up into the Mississippi River because there are Greaves all along the Mississippi and down into the Caribbean. He was a slave trader, I understand some sort of plantations and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: 'Red Leg' Greaves.
Speaker 2: 'Red Leg' Greaves, that was his name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very infamous.
Speaker 1: All right. Now are there any stories that are passed down through your family about life in the nineteenth century or life during slavery or--.
Speaker 2: Well the only information that I can think of is the--my mother, my grandmother's [Elizabeth Kent], my grandmother on my mother's side was a Maroon in the, in Jamaica, and the Maroons as you know were very militant people who did not subscribe to--tolerate colonialism or slavery.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Those are people that escaped slavery.
Speaker 2: They escaped from slavery and they had what amounted to a little country of their own inside Jamaica, in the mountains of Jamaica.
Speaker 1: And are there any, any stories about that, that experience (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: No, I don't have any--I have no information on the Maroons. Frankly, I should really do more scholarship on the Maroons but I've been so busy with some other concerns that I haven't done that work unfortunately.
Story_ID: 7814
Speaker 1: Okay. Tell us about your father--can you give us his full name and his date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My father's name was--is--of course, he's passed now--Garfield Hannibal Greaves, Garfield Gilbert Hannibal Greaves. He was born in 1890. I think it was the 26th of August 1890, in St. Lucy's--in Harris' village, St. Lucy's Parish [Church] in Barbados [West Indies]. My mother, her name's Phyllis Muir, Phyllis Emily Muir, and she was born in Kingston, Jamaica and it was, in 1898, was her date of birth.
Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm going to ask about her too, but I want you to first tell me about your father and what was he like and what did he do?
Speaker 2: Well my father was a very--a man who was very interested in the Bible. He was a part-time minister at a church in Harlem [New York, New York], a Pentecostal church in Harlem, and he also drove a taxicab that he owned. And he was a man who had a feeling for literature for words, quotations from the Bible, and that's--I, I can't give you anything more about him other than the fact that he was a very hard working man and a very religious man.
Speaker 1: Now, did he ever tell you why he left Barbados?
Speaker 2: Well, he--my father was interested in coming to America like so many people from various parts of the world, particularly today from the so-called developing world. He worked on the Panama Canal [1905-1914]--and in the process of working on the Panama Canal I guess he heard from some of his friends that you could get, go to America if you worked on the Panama Canal. So I think there was a General Karl Richard Lepsius [perhaps Count Ferdinand de Lesseps, French diplomat and head of the failed first Panama Canal project, 1880-1894] or something like that who was in charge of the construction of the Panama Canal. Anyway, after he finished working on the Panama Canal, he came to America, he went to Boston [Massachusetts], and then from Boston he came down to New York and joined this church. I think it's Mount Calvary Pentecostal Church--I'm not sure about that at--12 West 131st Street in Harlem and he was there right at the beginning of what we call--or prior to the Harlem Renaissance. He came there I guess on the wave of [Marcus] Garvey, the Garvey Movement [black nationalist movement] as it started developing in the 1917s [1917], 18s [1918], 19s [1919].
Speaker 1: Okay, so was he a member of the UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association]?
Speaker 2: He was not a, to my knowledge he was not a member of the UNIA, but I guess practically every black person in America was either an official member of the UNIA or, or believed in it except for what--I guess [William Edward Burghardt] DuBois first was 'The Talented Tenth' who had a separate orientation, but not completely, actually, but there was this schism, this gap between the two lines of thinking. One was intentionally nationalistic and the other was intensely, I guess, integrationist.
Story_ID: 7815
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well tell us about your mother and give us her full name again.
Speaker 2: Emily Phyllis Muir [sic, Phyllis Emily Muir], M-U-I-R, was her name.
Speaker 1: She was born in Jamaica.
Speaker 2: Born in Jamaica. She loved poetry. She used to take us to museums. She used to read black history information to us, Frederick Douglass, Booker T. Washington, and so on. She was a very cultured woman and very religious again. As a matter of fact, she became an evangelist in her later years and preaching at various churches. Whether she didn't--it didn't matter whether they were white, black, or Puerto Rican, she went off and gave sermons at these various places and she was a very interesting woman.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now did your parents have a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: They met in the church, I believe. They met in this Mount Calvary Pentecostal Church [New York, New York], 131st Street between Lenox and Seventh Avenue, or Lenox and Fifth Avenue, 12 West 131st Street.
Speaker 1: Now did you know your grandparents at all?
Speaker 2: No, I never met my grandparents. The closest I came to meeting them--and I never met my grandfather. He was ninety-four when he passed away. But it was when my father [Garfield Gilbert Hannibal Greaves] went down to Barbados [West Indies] to see him after thirty or forty years. He went down to see him and came back with stories of his father. But no, I never met any of my grandparents.
Story_ID: 7816
Speaker 1: Do you have any siblings?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, sure. I have four sisters and two brothers. Two of my sisters have passed away, Lynnette and Alice. My other two sisters, Enid and Ruth Evadne, are with us and are very much active in what they're doing. And my two brothers, Donald, my youngest brother, and Teddy--Theodore--he's my--he's the brother in between Donald and myself.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're the--.
Speaker 2: I'm the pivot of the whole exercise. Yeah, the three sisters who were older than me, and two brothers and a sister who's younger. I'm in the center, so the first-born male child.
Speaker 1: Okay now. What does your, did your parents have a chance to get very much education in Barbados [West Indies] or Jamaica?
Speaker 2: Well my mother seemed to have gone through what would amount to something like high school here, almost to the--I don't know that she graduated from high school because she came to America in her teens. My father--I mean--he went to what would amount to, I suppose, grammar school in Barbados. But I don't, I don't know that he, he didn't go to high school. He may have gone to high school, probably did go to high school in Barbados, but he certainly didn't go to college.
Story_ID: 7817
Speaker 1: Okay, now you grew up in one of the cultural centers of Harlem [New York, New York] where the library is and where the Y [Young Men's Christian Association] was. Can you reflect back and give us a sense of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well--well, I don't know. I think growing up in Harlem, I was extremely lucky because Harlem was very impacted by Garveyism [black nationalist movement led by Marcus Garvey], by Harlem Renaissance, as you said.  And my teachers were--one of my teachers were people like Countee Cullen and Mrs. Handy who was the sister of [musician] W. C. [William Christopher] Handy. I think she was a principal, but we had a lot of--I had a lot of contact with some of the leading figures who had been part of the Harlem Renaissance sometime earlier like Langston Hughes and Hale Woodruff, [Arnaud] Arna Bontemps, Aaron Douglass, people like that. So, Harlem was very, very full of ferment and everyone was trying to get ahead in Harlem. Harlem was considerably different from the Harlem that we know today. It was very intensively, what we call the 'Capitol of Black America,' so I must say that I wouldn't have traded that experience for anything in the world. Because what you had in Harlem was the coming together, very positive thinking, race-conscious people who really wanted to move America into a more civilized relationship to people of color, who were very much against the apartheid nature of American society, and I grew up in that, that attit-, in that atmosphere. So as a result, I found myself constantly at the Schomburg Library [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York Public Library, New York]. Actually it was not called the Schomburg Library at that time, it was called the library--the New York Public Library, although it still is a part of the New York Public Library System.  But it was--that old building next to the Schomburg was the original library. And I spent a lot of time there and it was marvelous because I got a lot of training, learning black history from growing up in the Schomburg, and also at another library, the Ethiopian Library [Ethiopian School of Research History] on 138th Street, which was a wonderful library.
Speaker 1: Now was that a--like a private library?
Speaker 2: It was a private library and it was run by a man named Charles C. [Christopher] Seifert who was the person that coined the phrase [credited to Marcus Garvey], "A race without a knowledge of it's history is like a tree without roots."  He died just before I arrived at that library to study ancient African history, Ethiopian history and Zanian civilizations [currently Iran], Zimbabwe, Monomotapa Kingdom [14th to 17th century empire in Zimbabwe region], Benin and these various ancient medieval African civilizations. So I studied there under the heading of series of lectures given by William Leo Hansberry. I don't know if you know the name. He's the uncle of Lorraine Hansberry, but more importantly, he was the reigning authority on ancient African history in the United States--came out of Howard University [Washington, D.C.]--and he was perceived and considered the foremost authority on Ancient African history in the western hemisphere by [Earnest Albert] Hooton of Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Hooton was the President of Harvard during this period. W. E. B. [William Edward Burghardt] DuBois and many other African scholars--African history scholars pay homage to Hansberry, and I was very fortunate to have gotten to know him and studied this history and, as a matter of fact, at a later point we were going to do a series of films on his works, Hansberry and I, But he got away from me. He passed away in 1965.
Story_ID: 7818
Speaker 1: Well, his [William Leo Hansberry] notebooks have been collected and republished I think his major works were destroyed in a fire.
Speaker 2: Was what?
Speaker 1: His major works were destroyed in a fire.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --I don't know if that's completely true. I mean there's a fellow named Kwame Alford and, you know, he's a PhD--doctorate that he did on Hansberry--a dissertation. And I know Hansberry's children, Gail and Kay Hansberry. Some of it may have been destroyed in a fire, but I don't know that very much of it was. I may be wrong about that.
Speaker 1: Only two of his notebooks were published by Robert E. Harris out of--.
Speaker 2: Robert Harris out of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], yes. But did Harris say that his notes were--?
Speaker 1: That's what he used to say the conflict was.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: That's why they, they just had the notebooks.  They didn't have--like the, the major works.
Speaker 2: Well that's unfortunate.
Speaker 1: They had his lecture notes but they didn't have his major works 'cause he was working on a couple of big books.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well--I'm sorry--well simply that--as a matter of fact, I did record some of his lectures because I thought they were just marvelous. As a matter fact, the lectures of Hansberry was the engine that really drove me into film making that caused me to get from behind--in front of the camera and go behind the camera because I realized that a terrible holocaust had been perpetrated against people of color, particularly the African--intellectual holocaust--I meant, we--I realized that after studying with him that, we, as a people, were in a state of mental slavery, and not only were we in a state of mental slavery, white people also were in mental slavery in relation to understanding who the people of Africa ultimately are. We're not the 'Johnny-come-lately's' to human civilization as some anthropology professors at City College of New York [New York, New York] tried to persuade me to think of. But we come from a very distinguished history which was shut off summarily, you know, by both the Arab and the European slave trade.
Story_ID: 7819
Speaker 1: Now, do you, do you remember some of the other figures? This is an intellectual history that we often don't get when we talk about Harlem [New York, New York]. You know, people always talk about singers and dancers but they don't talk about the intellects. Do you remember J. A. [Joel Augustus] Rogers--?
Speaker 2: Sure, J. A. Rogers, I was in the class with J. A. Rogers--with J. A. Rogers, Richard B. Moore, I mean these were--John Henrik Clarke--we were all studying with [William Leo] Hansberry. I mean, cause Hansberry knew more about African history than J. A. Rogers, Richard B. Moore, and John Henrik Clarke, and Gene Hudson, from the Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York Public Library, New York], George Haynes. There were a number of very brilliant people. I was obviously very, very young and I was the--sort of the mascot of the group, and it was a marvelous environment, and after Hansberry would give his lectures, there would be these bull sessions that would take place subsequent to the lectures. And J. A. Rogers and Hansberry and Mrs. Charles C. Seifert--Taiyi Seifert is her name--
Speaker 1: Taiyi Seifert?
Speaker 2: Taiyi Seifert.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Taiyi?
Speaker 2: T-A-I-Y-I. My daughter's name is Taiyi and was named after her and the Queen Taiyi [sic, Tiy] of ancient Egypt was the, I believe, the mother of [King] Akhenaten in Egypt. So anyway, there were these bull sessions. They were wonderful and I, as a young kid growing up--I was a young actor at the time. I learned a great deal about black history and about African history, and so as I was saying, that environment in Harlem and in that Ethiopian Library [Ethiopian School of Research History, New York, New York] and occasionally at the Schomburg, those were the environments that forced me from being in front of the camera as an actor to behind the camera to start to control the images that were being generated about black people, and a lot of them totally misleading.
Speaker 1: Just one more thing about that because it's exciting, but it should be for other people, too. In terms of activities as a youth, did you ever--I've heard from John Clarke when he was alive that they would hold pageants in the Y [Young Men's Christian Association] of Harlem, the Harlem History Club would hold historical dramas and he would play Askia Mohammed Toure [Ruler of Songhai Empire, North Africa, c. 1493-1528] and Dr. Willis Huggins would read the script, you know, about the historical figures. John G. Jackson would come over and they would interview somebody else.
Speaker 2: Well, John Henrik--.
Speaker 1: Did you see one of those?
Speaker 2: Well no, I don't believe I did. I may have. I probably did but I've forgotten it, but John Henrik Clarke, he was learning more about African--he didn't know that much about African history at this time. I'm speaking on 1950, '51 [1951], '52 [1952]. He was in the early stages of learning, and much of what he learned of African history comes out of Hansberry.  But, you know, there was a small group of people in Harlem who were very much aware of who we are as a people, and they did everything they could to raise the consciousness and among them was John Henrik Clarke, J. A. Rogers and so on. It wasn't until, of course, the Civil Rights revolution began to get into full gear that you had a progressive interest in African history, and in Afro-American history--African American history. The true history of Africa, Africa, America, as opposed to the one that is constantly put out in the literature of various educational institutions and so on.
Story_ID: 7820
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you now, this is exciting intellectual story and how did you now--when you were a little kid were you directed to this kind of activity.
Speaker 2: Yeah, actually what happened was my father [Garfield Gilbert Hannibal Greaves], as I said, drove a taxicab, it was his taxicab, and he used to park at Lenox Avenue, 135th Street by the subway station there. And so he preferred to see me as a young kid growing up playing around there and one of my friends was Haitian and his father was a professor of Haitian history and French. Marc Desgraves was his name and so I--.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: Desgraves was D-E-S-G-R-A-V-E-S and his first name was Marc, M-A-R-C, I believe. Marc Desgraves and his father, I think, was Professor Marc Desgraves as well. And his father used to drag us by the scruff of our necks off the street of Harlem [New York, New York] 135th Street up to his apartment at 505 Lenox Avenue, and teach us, you know, black history, principally Haitian history, and so we learned all about [Pierre] Toussaint L'Ouverture, Henri Christophe, and Jean-Jacques Dessalines and [Alexandre] Pétion and all of those people who were connected with the Haitian revolution against [Emperor] Napoleon [Bonaparte I]. They were the only--first people that defeated Napoleon, as a matter of fact. I think it was in 1802, I can't recall exactly, but he would teach us this history, so, which was wonderful. And it whetted my appetite to look for other counterparts of African American history, and African American history like, you know, Denmark Vesey, people like that and of course, Douglass, Frederick Douglass and so on. And so I, and then between that and my mother [Phyllis Emily Muir Greaves] reading to us from Booker T. Washington's 'Up From Slavery [An Autobiography]' and all of that, I was inexorably moved in the direction of who we were, are as a people and became progressively very annoyed and angry with the American media, with American educational system. 'The Mis-education of the Negro,' what Carter G. Woodson writes about was in full force and I consider that whole period, a period in which there was this early beginning to understand and know more about who we are as a people and the fact that we're not 'Johnny-come-lately's.' We predate the Roman Empire. We predate the Grecian Empire. I mean, we're, we're, you know, we've been here, you know, and have raised civilization up to the level that it became the Greek and Roman Empires. I mean the the whole European Renaissance got it's large, largest impetus from the Arab, the Moorish, the Moors revo- civilization.
Speaker 1: Spain.
Speaker 2: When the Moors were in Spain, they were in Southern Italy and Southern France.  I mean, so that all of this information has been suppressed and, and--tampered with in so many different ways that we hardly recognize ourselves in, in these early incarnations of the human animal on the planet. So I became so incensed by the distortion and the attacks in the media on black people, particularly, that I said I just have to--I have the intellectual skills, I have the information, I was an artist, a young artists anyway--you know, painting and sculpting and things like that, growing up at the Y [Young Men's Christian Association],  Harlem in the YMCA that I said, "You know, this is nonsense, you know. Let me get behind the camera and see what I can do." And that's what I've been doing.
Story_ID: 7821
Speaker 1: Okay, back track a little bit.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We always ask people about school, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes, sure.
Speaker 1: You went to PS89 [New York Public School Number 89].
Speaker 2: Yes, I went to PS89. It was a great school. It was One hundred thirty-fifth Street and Lenox Avenue again. Loved it, you know, it was wonderful. As a matter of fact, I acted in some of the plays and that sort of thing that they had there, and recited poems. One of the poems I recited was an Italian poem [by Thomas Augustine Daly] called 'Mia Carlotta' and I think I even remember it. Let's see.  "Giuseppe, da barber, ees greata for 'mash,' heesa lika da girls with the seely mustache--no, heesa lika by da girls for hees seely mustache, but notta my Carlotta." Something like that. But anyway, that was a very wonderful experience because people like Brock Peters--the actor--grew up in Harlem [New York, New York], too, and it was at that school. Albert Popwell and all of these people became actors on Broadway and that sort of thing, and of course, I became an actor on Broadway later on myself. But then I went to Frederick Douglass Junior High School, which was at 139th Street between Lenox and Seventh [Avenue] and that's Junior High School 139 [later Frederick Douglass Secondary School Number 499, New York, New York], and that was a wonderful experience, because there, that's where you had Countee Cullen and Mrs. Sherwood and a number of other people who were very, very much tuned in to the Harlem Renaissance that had gone on some years before. My father [Garfield Gilbert Hannibal Greaves] was very anxious that I get a job when I finished school--get a job in some sort of trade because that's what he understood as being a way to earn a good living by knowing a trade. And I didn't want to learn a trade.  I wanted to, I was more interested in art because I was painting. I was considered one of the seventy-five best child artists in New York State and I was given a scholarship on Saturdays to the Little Red School House [later Little Red School House and Elisabeth Irwin High School, New York, New York] and I studied painting there. And also I was involved in sculpting and pottery on the wheel and that sort of thing at the Harlem YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], and then a wonderful artist named William Artis discovered me and at the age of about thirteen or fourteen, had me join his class at Augusta Savage's art center [Harlem Community Art Center] down on--I think 116th Street and Lenox Avenue. I think it's called the WPA [Works Progress Administration] Art Project [Federal program created to provide economic relief during the Great Depression] or something like that--the Harlem Art Project--Augusta Savage was the head of that and I was the youngest person there. I mean not youngest. There were no young artists there except me and so I was in this class with these older artists, and I was--the first time I ever saw my first naked woman was in this class, because these women would come in and they'd, and I'd see them and then they'd take off their, their clothes, and here's this thirteen, fourteen year old boy looking at--and William Artis realized that I was in deep pain 'cause I couldn't, I didn't want anybody to see me looking at these women.  My father was a minister and the whole business, you know, so he took me by the arm and said, "Now, Bill, have you noticed how her legs go here and her arm is, you know, that's what I want you to capture--," you know, "and this sculpture that you're working on," you know, this kind of thing. I'd say, "Yes, okay, all right," you know.  But I, it was--and then I'd go home and go and get out in the street and start telling these, my friends about this naked woman, these naked women I'd seen. It was a wonderful experience in that sense, but anyway the bottom line of it all is that I developed my artistic capacities. So I wanted to go to music and art school I'd come back to my father and he said, "Music and art?"  He said, "Artists don't make any money. You can't--" so he's like, "Learn a trade, boy, learn a trade," you know, and so I heard of a school called Stuyvesant High School [New York, New York], which is geared towards a scientific career, and I said, "Well maybe if I told my father I was going to be a scientist or engineer that, that he would go along with my going to this school."  So, this was a highly competitive school and so I took the test and got passed and was accepted at Stuyvesant High School. And frankly, had a wonderful time there, learned a lot about science and chemistry, physics, and that sort of thing, and to my utter surprise, just about, eight or ten years ago, Stuyvesant selected me as one of their distinguished alumni, and I learned that I was in the top ten percent of my class at Stuyvesant. I didn't know that, you know, but it was a wonderful experience and then I went on to City College [of New York, New York] from there and studied engineering. Never finished it. Got back into the theater when I was old enough to challenge my father (laughs).
Story_ID: 7822
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're in trans- in your early twenties you were hanging out with the, with the historians, too.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah sure. That's where--as a matter of fact, actually I got into the theater as a dancer. Yeah, I was--my friend, my Haitian friend--Marc Desgraves was a, was also, he was dancing with a group--Belle Rosette [stage name for dancer Beryl McBurnie], he danced with her group and then he danced with an African Asadata Dafora of Sierra Leone, and I--Asadata Dafora invited me cause he saw that I could dance socially, and he felt that I would be a good person to have in his group.
Speaker 1: Spell his name for me.
Speaker 2: Asadata Dafora. A-S-A-D-A-T-A. Asadata Dafora. Asadata Dafora and Dafora is D-A-F-O-R-A, Dafora, and he was from Sierra Leone. As a matter of fact, he was the major influence in African dancing in Harlem [New York, New York] in the forties [1940s] and he--his group--the group--we danced at Carnegie Hall [New York, New York]. We danced at a number of places and it was part of the African Academy of Arts and Research. This was an organization that was set up by African students.  Ajike, [Kingsley Ozuomba] Mbadiwe, [Prince] Akiki Nyabongo [of Uganda], Okala (ph.). These were people who were part of the African Academy of Arts and Research, and the African Academy would put on these various cultural events and we were part of that enterprise. And then Pearl Primus became aware of my work as a dancer with Asadata Dafora, and invited me to become a member of her company. So I left Asadata Dafora's group and went with Pearl Primus, who was much more--how could I say--professional oriented dance troop. And we danced at Carnegie Hall again and Town Hall [performing arts center, New York, New York] and Madison Square Garden [New York, New York], and let's see, Roxie Theater [New York, New York], which is no more. And then from there went into the theater, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you studied at, at the American Negro Theater [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, as a matter of fact, when we, we were dancing at the, at the Roxie Theater when one of the people connected with the dance company, was an actor named Gordon Heath, and Gordon thought that I was a good type for a particular part of a play that had been written by Owen Dodson. I don't know if you know that name, Owen Dodson, who came out of Howard University [Washington, D.C.] up to the American Negro Theater to, to put on a play called 'The Garden of Time.' And so they--Gordon suggested that I audition for this part, and I, I'd done just a little bit of acting in junior high school and that sort of thing, but I went and I auditioned and I got the part, you know, it was a terrific part. It got rave reviews from the New York critics and that sort of thing and so I played at a couple of other productions at the American Negro Theater, one of which was 'Henri Christophe' [by playwright Derek Walcott], and then I played Jean-Jacques Dessalines, you know, the fiery nationalist revolutionary and it was a wonderful opportunity. I didn't know I probably messed it up, the image of Jean-Jacques Dessalines, but I did my best, you know. And that also helped to activate in me an appreciation of black history, and so from there the rest is history. I mean I went to Broadway [New York, New York] and acted and was featured on Broadway in 'Lost In The Stars' [1949] and also in movies, 'Lost Boundaries' [1949].
Story_ID: 7823
Speaker 1: Well, how did the, how did those roles take place? People just came and saw you and--.
Speaker 2: Well apparently I, apparently two things. One, apparently I was considered a talented actor and also--I was a very aggressive person, you know. So I, you know, I didn't have any problem promoting myself to producers and directors and agents and things of that kind. And also, I auditioned at a number of competitive situations. There were a number of competitive auditions given out--presented by various distinguished people, like the John Golden auditions were for actors from all over the New York area, and I was chosen as one of the thirty best contestants and, in the auditions that were staged with producers and that sort of thing. I was selected by the Shuberts [Lee (Levi), Samuel S. and J.J.], which was a major production entity in New York at the time, to play the lead, the title role in a play called 'The Young American.' So, that helped to launch me into a career as an actor. And I was featured in William Alexander's 'Souls of Sin' [motion picture, 1949]. I was featured in 'Lost Boundaries' [motion picture, 1949], Louis de Rochemont's production of 'Lost Boundaries' and so that's how I got, you know, into that whole area.
Speaker 1: So, this is, this is big company. I mean your career has been a dancer with Pearl Primus. That's a big deal (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure, yeah.
Speaker 1: And then in these roles, in these movies and--,
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, yeah. No, I--listen, I was very lucky and then, of course, I was--I auditioned for the Actors Studio [Drama School, New York, New York] in 1948 and, and--I passed that audition, and I was there with Marlon Brando and Anthony Quinn and Shelley Winters and Eli Wallach and a lot of very talented people, you know. As a matter of fact I'm on the board of directors now of the Actors Studio as well as I am on their auditioning committee. And also I used to substitute for Lee Strasberg occasionally when he went out, like, to work on 'The Godfather [Part II, 1974]' and so on. I was one of the people that he chose to substitute for him to moderate, to teach the sessions at The Actors Studio. I taught for Lee Strasberg for twelve years at his private institute [Lee Strasberg Theater and Film Institute, New York, New York] so, you know. I've been around quite a while, you know.
Story_ID: 7824
Speaker 1: Now it was--I believe it was an incident, I guess. There was a play that Jose Ferrer [actor] wrote.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I've forgotten--no he didn't write it--,
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) He directed it--.
Speaker 2: --he was the Director and Gloria Swanson was in there. As a matter of fact that was one of the things that really pissed me off, you know, because the--my manager Max, Max--oh shit--Rosenbaum, Max Rosenbaum was my manager and he had sent, he said, "Listen, Bill, there's a part that's available if you want it, in this Broadway [New York, New York] play that's just going to open up," you know, "soon and they're just starting the rehearsals but they need, you know, a black person, a male to do one of the roles, and maybe you ought to go and see them because I've talked to them and they, you know, they'd be interested in seeing you."  So, I said, "Fine."  So, he said, "I don't know what the role is but, you know, you go and see what it is." So I went there and they, Ferrer decided I could--was the, was the type for the role. Then he gave me this script and the script was about this, this bellhop or porter or something like that, acting something like Stepin Fetchit, you know. And I was, I mean I was, the whole thing was such a revolting experience for me. I was sick to my stomach that they would even dare to give me that kind of a role to play, you know, when I was clearly not that type, you know, and so, and anyway even if I was that type, I wouldn't have played it anyway. So I went to the first day of rehearsal, when I found out what it was. I just walked out of the theater and that was the end of it, you know. I just told my agent, my manager, said, "Tell them forget it," you know, but that also helped me to understand the kind of violence that was being done to the American psyche, and particularly the black American psyche, why these various producers who were putting on these productions that were very deleterious and full of stereotypes of one kind or another. So I just, I just, you know, fortunately was able to studying filmmaking at the City College of New York [New York] at the Film Institute [Institute of Film Techniques] under a marvelously prestigious man named Hans Richter, and there are some other wonderful people there. Muhammad Lee was teaching writing. Lewis Jacobs was teaching history of American film. There were a number of other people. Arthur Knight. These were very--talented people teaching film there. So I studied there and I studied in another place in Brooklyn [New York] called the New Institute for Film and Television. And then when I couldn't get into the industry because of the apartheid nature of this country at that time in American history, I left the country and went to Canada and worked up in the National Film Board of Canada on something like eighty films--and that was a whole interesting experience how I got up there, but--the rest, again, is history.
Story_ID: 7825
Speaker 1: Okay, so, you were with the National Film Board of Canada for '52 [1952] to '60 [1960]?
Speaker 2: 1960, yeah. What happened there was I'd--in the process of going to film school--I read a wonderful book by the pioneer, the major pioneer of documentary films, a man by the name of John Grierson--G-R-I-E-R-S-O-N--and he wrote a book called 'Grierson on Documentary.' It was a wonderful book and it talked about how documentary film could be used as a social tool or as a weapon against ignorance, and how an ideal organization should be setup that produces this kind of information, setup by governments throughout the world to raise the consciousness of people throughout the world. Anyway, the bottom line of it all is that he was the person chosen to setup the National Film Board of Canada during the Second World War and so after the war was over this National Film Board was a flourishing documentary film organization. And I wanted to go and work there as an apprentice--an intern or apprentice. And I didn't have any money, and I applied to the John Hay Whitney Foundation for a fellowship, and they never heard of a black person wanting to get behind the camera and make movies, you know, documentary movies. I mean it was alien to them as an idea. And I was turned down in favor of some grants that were given to people who wanted to be dancers and singers and musicians because it was felt that they should carry on the tradition of the minstrel--minstrel shows of the 1800s and the nineteenth century. Anyway, the bottom line of all of it is that I said, "To hell with it. I'm going to go up there anyway."  So I went up to Canada and worked--took odd jobs in the evenings scrubbing floors, washing windows and all kinds of things just to be at the Film Board, and finally the people at the Film Board decided I was really motivated to become a filmmaker, and said, "Gee, there's a guy that's been on Broadway [New York, New York]," and all that stuff, you know, "He's washing windows and dishes and stuff," and so on, and they took me on as a, first as an apprentice and then as an assistant director, the assistant editor. Then I moved inexorably through the different skills and disciplines. I became a sound editor and then I became an editor and then I became the Chief Editor of its award-winning unit, and then I became a writer and director at the Film Board. All together I was involved in, as I said, something like eighty films. Yeah. Wonderful experien-- environment. Great--a group of people who were very talented and very much in--aware of the social implications of media and how media could be used to raise public consciousness in a progressive way.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a pretty fast pace, too. Eighty films in about eight years.
Speaker 2: Eight, yeah. Well, you know we were--I mean I--don't misunderstand me, I was not directing eighty films or writing eighty films, no, I was--I either was an assistant editor, assistant director, assistant sound editor, an editor, a sound editor, you know. I went through those different--they wanted me to direct almost after the first year that I was there. I mean I said, "No, no, I want to learn how to make this stuff," you know. So, I charted my own pathway, which they were wonderfully cooperative with me through the various disciplines of film production. And as a matter of fact, if you look up any of my films, they have all of the facets of the production very adequately addressed, you know, in terms of sound effects, in terms of music, in terms of editing, montage, the whole Sergei [Mikhailovich] Eisenstein concepts and film montage are very evident in my films, and of course the writing and directing comes out of my Actors Studio [Drama School, New York, New York], you know, background, you know.
Story_ID: 7826
Speaker 1: ...Little over 120 copies of the film and then there, you know, it's--anyway, the bottom line I'm making is that what I'm doing is making sure that we are progressively and positively represented in the media, you know, and I've made a living out of it, you know. I've worked on over, I don't know, two or three hundred films over the course of my career--and most of them are connected with mental liberation, you know, rather than mental slavery. So many of the Hollywood [California] films coming out of Hollywood are destroying the black image of, you know, the black people's images of themselves and this 'Barbershop' [2002] is a travesty, you know, and some of these other films are terrible.
Speaker 2: Now, now you came back to the U.S. in '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Or '61 [1961] I guess.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  '61 [1961] or '63 [1963]. Well why did you come back to the United States?
Speaker 2: Well, are you running now?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, you're running. I came back because I was very inspired by the change, the atmosphere, the climate, the racial climate of America. I was very taken by, you know, [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], the Supreme Court decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas, 1954], then James Baldwin and Harry Belafonte and Sidney Poitier were getting on the tube [television] and talking about the race problem. I mean these are all people I knew and grew up with. And so I felt that, you know, America has possibilities as a country because it certainly was a, an apartheid nation when I left, you know, McCarthyism [extreme anti-Communist political movement] and all that foolishness. And I said, you know, "If this country isn't careful it's going to make it," you know because it was, as Malcolm X says, you know, "Democracy in racist's society is fascism," and that's what America was, you know, as far as I was concerned. So, I was very happy to leave America in 1952. I had a wonderful time in Canada.  As a matter of fact my wife [Louise Archambault Greaves] was Canadian, so the whole business of coming back here came to a head when I had the opportunity to--I left the [National] Film Board [of Canada] in 1960, but I went--worked--I setup some theater groups of my own in Montreal [Canada], Ottawa [Canada] and, and Toronto [Canada]--I used to teach on the weekends there. Then I joined a United Nations agency called ICAO, the International Civil Aviation Organization and I was a public information officer there in charge of film, radio, you know, and working on the magazine--the monthly magazine ['ICAO Journal'] and so on. And then the United Nations wanted to have a film done about the flight of airliner around the world and all the various air navigational, air traffic control services that have to be coordinated for these aircraft, these airliners to travel from one airspace to the next. And they all had this lingua franca, that is they, all the air traffic controllers and so on spoke--had to talk in English because that was the language that they had to learn in order for these aircraft to go. So I traveled around the world making this film about the flight of an airliner around the world and that lead me to go back to America and I was on the staff of the United Nations Film and Television division. So then, I moved my family down--back down here and began making films. I started making films for the United States Information Agency [USIA], one of them being the 'First World Festival of Negro Arts' [World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, FESTAC] which was done at the--I filmed in Dakar, Senegal in 1966, actually. But I made some other films for the United States Information Agency on freedom of individual expression and that sort of thing. So, and then I setup my own company, which actually did the films for the USIA and for other government--United States government agencies, the [U.S.] Labor Department and so on.
Story_ID: 7827
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about the festival [World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, FESTAC] in Dakar [Senegal] that was a big historical event and very few people are even aware that it happened--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In 1966, black artists from all over the black world--.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --brought to Dakar, Senegal.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: To perform (unclear)--,
Speaker 2: (Simutaneously)--Sure.
Speaker 1: --Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee],  Jubilee Singers were there, Langston Hughes--,
Speaker 2: Sure. Sure.
Speaker 1: --and some other musicians.
Speaker 2: Yes, as a matter of fact Langston and I, and--what's his name, the major Russian poet, what is his name--isn't that stupid. Anyway, Langston and myself and couple of other people used to ride around in the limousine of this Russian poet around Dakar and it was a wonderful experience. And Lang- I got the idea of filming Langston walking by the oceanfront, you know, with these fisherman. And if you saw the film it starts off with 'The Negro Speaks of Rivers,' you know, his poem, and it was a very successful filming of Langston watching these fisherman as the--on the soundtrack the narrator, which is myself, recites his poem, and it's amazing that that film, is still today, used continuously and is rented or purchased by our company [William Greaves Productions, Inc., New York, New York] because we distribute our films throughout America. I mean it's amazing how it resonates even today as important film, you know, of that very important event.
Story_ID: 7828
Speaker 1: Okay, and well, you were talking about some of the other films you made during this period of time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you formed your own production company [William Greaves Productions, Inc., New York, New York] in 1964.
Speaker 2: Right. Yes, I was very anxious to make sure that I had total control of these images and I didn't try to get a job working for NBC [National Broadcasting Company] or ABC [American Broadcasting Company] or go out to Hollywood [California] to become some sort of film worker out there on one of the crews or any of that. I didn't want any part of that foolishness because I felt that it was--you know, you go out there and working on the plantation, really, and you have to do what the master wants you to do. So I said, "No, no, you know, we're not going down that street, you know. We're going to make these films on our own." And even the films I made for the United States government, those that related to the black experience have a black perspective or they were films that were progressive in a wider sense. That is not only would black people but people of all colors and ethnic groups have enrichment, psychological intellectual enrichment from seeing our films. Like we did a film on 'Wealth of a Nation, [1964]'  it was called, which dealt with the freedom of individual expression and the right to dissent and things of this kind, which people need to know that they're freedom is part of the American creed, and they're entitled to be able to express themselves in the public arena, you know.  Now that one you almost got in trouble for because you were using some footage of Madalyn Murray O'Hair.  That's right. Madalyn Murray O'Hair and we had a couple of other people in it. It started off, it was interesting, because it started off as a film about the freedom to dissent and the initial title was a 'Nation of Dissenters,' and I said, "Gee, that's a terrific idea," because George Stevens, Jr. who's the head of the USIA [United States Information Agency] Film Department invited me down to have talks with them, to make this film on the right to dissent in American. This is something that the Soviets didn't have and this is what America has, the freedom to dissent. So I got into the project and as we went along, it became progressively obvious that there was some dissenters at the USIA wasn't very happy about. Among them was Madalyn Murray O'Hair, I believe--,
Speaker 1: O'Hair.
Speaker 2: --O'Hair was the name and a few other people, but what happened was we, finally, we went back and forth and back and forth on this, and finally we came up with, "Well, we don't really want a picture on a nation, I mean on, on dissent. It's really freedom of individual expression. That's what we want."  So that's--I said, "Okay, we'll make a film on freedom of individual--" well I felt that that was good, a good enough basis to make the film for them, and so in the film is [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], as a matter of fact, I believe, and some other dissenters but in different disciplines, like in art, in architecture, you know, like I had Lee Bontecou and I had Paolo Soleri in architecture and Martin Luther King in civil rights and so on, so it's, it's a freedom to express. But I've done films for the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, the Labor Department [U.S. Department of Labor] , the [U.S.] Department of Education, the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], the black astronauts in NASA.
Speaker 1: And [Edward] Ed Dwight [U.S. Air Force test pilot and sculptor], was he (unclear)--,
Speaker 2: I beg pardon?
Speaker 1: --was that a story about Ed Dwight when he became the first black astronaut?
Speaker 2: No, no this was Ron McClair--[Ronald] Ron McNair, rather, he was the first black astronaut. He was killed in that blow up of the shuttle--.
Speaker 1: The Challenger [NASA space shuttle accident, 1986]?
Speaker 2: Yes, with I've forgotten the name--[Virgil 'Gus' Ivan] Grissom, he was with Grissom [killed on launchpad of Apollo I spacecraft, January, 1967], I believe.  [sic, U.S. Air Force Major Robert H. Lawrence Jr. was recognized in 1997 as the first black astronaut. Died June, 1967 while testing aircraft for NASA]
Speaker 1: Yes, that's her.
Speaker 2: Yeah, anyway, yeah, for the NASA and then they wanted me to do a film for NASA on women in NASA and women in science, and I did that film for them. Anyway, the point is that were it not for the United States Government, I wouldn't be in film production today because I--the only contracts available for film production for black people were contracts that were let out by the United States Government, the private enterprise, and even private enterprise today is still defective and deficient in their handling of and dealing with black filmmakers, you know. And not only black filmmakers but Latino filmmakers got a rough time and Asian filmmakers. I mean it, they can't do films that really relate to their experience. And, you know, it's kind of messy, really, I mean only through various foundations and, and government agencies do you get--like the National Endowment for the Humanities or the National Endowment for the Arts, do you get these contracts to do films on the experience of these non-white peoples in the United States.
Story_ID: 7829
Speaker 1: Okay, now you did a film called 'Still a Brother [Inside the Negro Middle Class, 1968]?'
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: What was that about?
Speaker 2: 'Still a Brother' dealt with the--black middle class. It was done in 1967, I believe, somewhere around there. And a friend of mine came to me with the idea of doing a film on this subject. And so, the problem was that I had the technical craft, skills of film production and what he had was the idea. And so the problem was he worked on the script and I shot it, edited it, directed it, and so on, about the black middle class. We had got Ossie Davis, his fellow's name was [William] Bill Branch who we worked--we co-produced it together. Ossie Davis was the narrator of it. And we looked at the black middle class in a state of transition in American political history--the geo- the political biography of America was being changed in the '60s [1960s] if you recall as a result of the emergence of the Civil Rights Movement. And then the progressive emergence of the more militant factions of the Civil Rights Movement in Malcolm X and Stokely Carmichael, [Amiri] Baraka [formerly, LeRoi Jones], and all these people so that the--where does the black middle class stand in relation to this? These changes that are taking place--is it going to be still, sort of, acquiescent to a lot of the conditions that are in the country or will it take up a more militant position? And, and the black middle class, of course, was progressively becoming more militant. So there was this kind of reality that we depicted on the screen and it was nominated for an Emmy [award for the television industry] and it also won first prize, the Blue Ribbon Prize at the American Film Festival, which was a big festival at that time for documentaries.
Story_ID: 7830
Speaker 1: Okay, around this time, too, now I don't want to get ahead. Let's see, now you started working on 'Black Journal' [television program] around this time, too?
Speaker 2: 'Black Journal' came about, yeah, it came in the wake of the riots that were taking place in America, urban disturbances and what have you. President Johnson, Lyndon [Baines] Johnson setup a commission--the President's Commission on Civil Disorders [National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders, 1968], the Kerner Commission it was called by Governor Otto Kerner of Illinois was the head of it. And in the process of their investigations, the Kerner Commission concluded that one of the reasons for the unhappiness, shall we say, of the African American in America of burning down 150 cities in just one year, or at least setting fires to these cities. One of the reasons for the unhappiness was the fact that the, the American creed would, did not apply to the African American and it was nonsense. I mean we've invested all this labor and energy in building this country and couldn't get a fair shake, you know, in the courts or in the universities or in anywhere in the media and so on, and in particular the media. And the feeling was in the Kerner Commission report that because of the absence of proper representation in the media, because the African American community had no access to the media, and was not able to express it's concerns to the media, and the media did, was not serving the needs and interests of the black community because of the failure that the media. It needed to be an area that had to be addressed, and the Carnegie Endowment [for International Peace] and Carnegie Corporation [of New York] and Rockefeller Foundation and so on got together and funded this series as, as a public affairs monthly series that would go out throughout the country on the black experience and the issues that it, of concern to the black community of America. And also, by the way, was educating the white community into a different aspect and a different reality that they knew nothing about, and as a consequence, were able to fantasize all kinds of prejudicial notions about who black people are. So that the film served a double purpose of educating both black and white Americans and it became immensely popular. And unfortunately--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) --Produced under the NET? [National Educational Television, renamed PBS, Public Broadcasting Service in 1969]
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the executive producer and the co-host of the series, and I've got to tell you, we had a great staff. We had St. Claire Bourne. We had Kent Garrett, Horace, Horace--oh, shucks--Madeline Anderson, Horace Jenkins, a number of people, Stan Lathan were on the staff of the, the 'Black Journal' staff. The interesting thing is that it was, 'Black Journal' was this sole one-hour film on the black community that was controlled by the black community--public affairs film, in eighteen hundred hours of television programming a month or something like that. And I got to tell you that today, that still is the situation. There is no black program that is network, I'm speaking of the network now. There is not network black program that's controlled by a blacks, executive producer and staff addressing the needs and interests of the black community. Well you have BET [Black Entertainment Television], well that's a cable channel. That's small potatoes, you know, compared to what the networks represent and it's, it's one of the failures of American, you know, media history, you know, that that should be the case.
Story_ID: 7831
Speaker 1: Well 'Black Journal' [television program] was the host always [Anthony] Tony Brown?
Speaker 2: No, Tony, Tony succeeded me. No, when I, when I left 'Black Journal'--'cause I wanted to keep my independent company [William Greaves Productions, Inc.] going and then there was a point there where it became obvious that if I stayed with 'Black Journal' I would have to let go of my company. And I didn't want to do that because I understood that the control of the images and, was essential if we were going to really tell the truth about the black experience. So, I recommended Tony when I just, had made that decision. I recommended Tony as, to be my successor because I had met him in a, at a conference that I and Lionel Monagas of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--he had a local black program there. He was Executive Producer in Philadelphia at WHYY [public television station]--Lionel and I decided to call together all the black producers from all over the country to have a look at what they should be putting on the air, you know, at this particular time. This was in 1969, I think, and so we had people--[Raymond] Ray Richardson came from Boston [Massachusetts] and it was a good meeting, and Tony was at that meeting and Lionel and I were very impressed with Tony. We thought Tony was very smart, you know, and that he was going to be a very good person to be involved in the executive of this National Black Media Producers Association. And as a matter of fact, they wanted me to be the President of it and I decided not to run for presidency, and I, Lionel and I backed Tony to be the president of the National Black Media Producers Association. And then when I was leaving 'Black Journal' Tony came to me and said, "Listen, I'd like to," you know, "be appointed in your place since you're leaving and could you recommended me?" And I, I absolutely did recommend him to the executives of the National Educational Television [NET, later renamed PBS, Public Broadcasting Service] network and he got the part, not the part, but the, the role, the responsibility of Executive Producer. And subsequently, backing was withdrawn, was terminated by some of the various foundations to the, to the show, to the series, and Tony was smart enough to, to get--I think it was Pepsi-Cola [Company] is it, or Coca-Cola [Company], one of the two.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) (unclear) Pepsi.
Speaker 2: Pepsi to, to back him as 'Tony Brown's Journal' and I, you know, the rest is history as far as, I mean he's a very important part of the television system. And he has the largest syndicated, one of the longest lived syndicated programs on television. But it's not network, it's syndicated, but he, it's very, you know, distinguished show and I think he's had me on the show once or twice already over the years.
Story_ID: 7832
Speaker 1: What about, now, now you didn't produce this one, but I know there's a show called 'Soul!' [television program, WNET, New York] that--,
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that Ellis Haizlip was on (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah. Ellis Haizlip, yeah. Concurrent with the 'Black Journal' [television program], I mean, subsequent to 'Black Journal' was this cultural series of films on the culture of black America, art, performance arts and that sort of thing, and Ellis Haizlip was the Executive Producer of that. And, but, at that--I don't know how many years that lasted, it was about for three or maybe, maybe five or ten years, I don't, I don't know what the lifespan of that program was, but it was a good show. And, but 'Black Journal' was a public affairs show, you know, which dealt with the American body politic, you know, what was happening, socially, politically, you know, racially and so on, in American life. But it's very interesting that there's no real public affairs network show on television today that's controlled by black people or Latino people, you know.
Speaker 1: There's some small shows in different localities (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh sure. Oh, no, no as a matter of fact Gil Nobel's, Gil Nobel is, the Gil Nobel show ['Like It Is' television program] is here in New York City [New York], is a very popular show with the black community. But again, the management there at ABC [American Broadcasting Corporation's, WABC-TV], as I understand, is trying to get it off the air, you know, because it's black controlled and it has a black perspective and he's doing a very good job at it, I think.
Speaker 1: Like it is, I would say.
Speaker 2: Like it is, yeah, sure, absolutely. But his show is in ways similar to what 'Black Journal' was except that 'Black Journal' had much more money to work with and so we had a lot of flexibility, I mean, we did programming on African history. I sent, I sent a crew to Asia, you know, to Vietnam to look at the situation from a black perspective in Vietnam during the Vietnam War, you know. We had a crew go to Ethiopia and do a film on Ethiopia or go down South and have a look at a south- a collective--a farm collective--down South and run by black people. I mean it was an interesting--and then we did things that were political with Malcolm X and [Amiri] Baraka [formerly, LeRoi Jones], and so on, so it was a very independent-thinking show, which earned us an Emmy [award for the television industry] nomination the first year, and the second year we won the Emmy for the best public affairs show on television.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because we were telling the truth. (laughs)
Story_ID: 7833
Speaker 1: All right now in, I think it was '72 [1972] you covered the Gary [Indiana] convention [of the first National Black Political Assembly].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we covered that. I lost a lot of money making that movie because I had thought--it was interesting. I thought that this was such a momentous event that all the networks would say, "Oh, Hallelujah," you know, "Let's, let's acquire this film." I did, so we did this film on the, on the Convention and tried to sell it to NBC, NBC [National Broadcasting Company], ABC [American Broadcasting Company], CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System], none of them wanted it, and no matter how--I mean even if we wanted to give it to them they didn't want it. And so it's, you know, my company [William Greaves Productions, Inc.] fortunately, we distribute these films ourselves so we had been distributing it continuously. But the interesting thing is that Peter Jennings [network broadcast anchor for ABC-TV, New York] about a year and a half or two years ago decides that he wanted to do, or somebody decided for him, they wanted to do a film on Gary, and where do you think they turned, who do you think they turned to get the footage for Gary? (laughs) They, they wanted to take some of our--cannibalize some of our material that we had in the 'Nationtime, Gary' [1973] film. That's what it was called and is called. They, they wanted to cannibalize and take little bits and pieces, you know. So, we went, I went through a long, deep soul-searching thing with myself, said, "Do I, do I want to let this, some of this material go out," you know, "and be taken, bits and pieces," and finally I said, "Well, we'll let them have little bits and pieces of it, but it won't be very much." But they sprinkled our show with, they sprinkled their show with pieces from our show.
Story_ID: 7834
Speaker 1: So the film ['Nationtime Gary'] on the Gary [Indiana] Convention [of the first National Black Political Assembly, 1972] didn't get (unclear) we were just talking about that so next I guess. Oh, you made a film in '68 [1968] called 'Symbiopsychotaxiplasm: Take One.' (laughs)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) 'Take One'.
'Symbiopsychotaxiplasm: Take One' is a very weird film, experimental avant-garde. As a matter of fact Steven Soderbergh [film producer] is crazy about the film and he said that, "This is the film that Jean-Luc Godard tried to make, you know, in the '70s [1970s] and so on, the '60s [1960s]." It's a, it's a film that is in many ways a revolutionary film. Revolutionary in it's artistic embrace of styles of, of filmmaking that were, at the time that that was coming, made, very new, that was cinéma vérité [filmmaking style that stresses unbiased realism] very, very new type of filming that had been used in documentaries by and large only and what I dared to do was to bring cinéma vérité style--the cinéma vérité style of filmmaking into the feature film arena. And so that was one aspect of it, but it had a number of other aspects which is very enigmatic for most people. I mean most people are not aware of the improvisational, role, the role that improvisation plays in the actor's performance. Most people are not aware of scientific principals like the [Werner] Heisenberg Theory of Uncertainty [quantum mechanics theory discovered in 1927] where you talk about the fact that we, as human beings, will never know what reality is because the means of perception of the ultimate reality, which is the atom, cannot be seen because of the fact--that that is the electrons of the atom cannot be seen because the means of perception is an electron microscope which sets out a beam of electrons at the atom and it knocks the electrons out of their respective orbits, so it doesn't get a chance to really see the atom, you see. And this, this comes from out of my science background of Stuyvesant High School [New York, New York] and that sort of thing. So there is, there's that plus there's the Second Law of Thermodynamics [theory explained by physicist Rudolf J. E. Clausius in 1850], then there's Hindu mysticism and Sri Aurobindo. There are all kinds of elements that are involved in this production. It's very controversial subject matter that's designed to provoke debate and discussion and most people are not aware of all these elements coming into play, but when you see the film, you can't take your eyes off the screen because it has that quality of drawing you in and you just don't know where you are, but you're watching it, you know. You just can't stop watching it and by the end of the film you realize it was a very interesting film that in the face of all the dissent, if you will, by the crew and rebellion by the crew against the, the content and against the style of shooting, it still is an interesting movie. And it's been at fifteen or seventeen film festivals by now, and we're going to make the sequel to it at some point this year, I guess.
Story_ID: 7835
Speaker 1: Now, now what did you--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That [film titled, 'Symbiopsychotaxiplasm: Take One'] was done in 1968, incidentally.  Yeah, 1968.
Speaker 1: So, now what came next? What films were you working on during the 70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Well you know I did the first fight of Muhammad Ali and Joe Frazier. We shot that cinéma vérité [filmmaking style that stresses unbiased realism] as a matter of fact in 1971, I believe it was. The first fight that they had at Madison Square Garden [sports, entertainment, and convention venue, New York, New York]. And we filmed, acutally we filmed them both, Frazier and Ali, in all the events in their two training camps leading up to the fight.  So we had crews capturing in a cinéma vérité, candid camera basis everything that was going--as much as we could. All of the events that were transpiring, that were taking place in their respective camps,  and then took all this mountain of footage material and edited it down to a two hour film or a ninety minute film. It started off it was a two hour film then we eventually cut down. But it was released into, oh, over thirty theaters in the greater New York area, and then subsequently, released nationwide. It was on public tele- not public, on NBC [National Broadcasting Corporation].  I think it was NBC or ABC [American Broadcasting Company]. ABC, I think it was, ABC. Howard Cosell [sports broadcaster] showed it several times nationwide on ABC and that was one of the films that I'm very proud of, very pleased with because it, it sparked--as a matter of fact, 'Rocky' is based to some degree on the film that we did. 'Ali, the Fighter'--our film was called 'Ali, the Fighter.'  'Rocky' ['Rocky II,' 1980] is, kind  of a take off on 'Ali, the Fighter,' but where Rocky is the white Joe Frazier, you see, and Apollo Creed is, is Ali. And as a matter of fact, so much, they were affected--the producers or filmmakers were affected so much by our film, that they even used some shots from our film in 'Rocky,' and if you go to, if you see 'Rocky' you'll see some of the shots in 'Rocky' from our film. Then [Robert] DeNiro in 'Raging Bull' [1980] they--[Martin] Scorsese and DeNiro asked us to loan them our film to give them some guidance on how they might get 'Raging Bull' to look very realistic, you know, and if you see 'Raging Bull,' you won't see shots of our film, but you'll see shots that remind you of our film, you know. Because the film that we did, the 'Ali, the Fighter' film, we deployed something like twelve cameras in Madison Square Garden on the night of the fight to capture these different angles, and also we had these multiple crews working, multiple camera crews working in the two training camps, capturing a lot of the footage that goes on that had not been seen before on the screen, and I'm very, you know, pleased and proud of the work that we were able to do on that.
Speaker 1: How did the fighters, though, feel about the films.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, Ali didn't want us filming him because he felt that we weren't paying him anything to film it, but what he didn't realize was that the contract that he signed with the promoters of the fight said that you will, you are, you have the right to make a motion picture, a documentary, about the events leading up to and including this fight.  And he didn't realize that until it was pointed out to him by [Andrew Jerrold] Jerry Perenchio, the, one of the promoters of the fight that that's a contract that he signed with [Robert] Bob Arum, who is Ali's lawyer, so Arum had to communicate this to Ali. But he didn't cooperate for the first half of the shooting, but the second half, he was, he cooperated.  And then he hadn't seen the film and he called me up--I've forgotten--about four or five years later saying, "Listen, I want to see this film that you made," you know.  So, we made arrangements for him to come to the studio to see it and he was, he was delighted (with emphasis) with the film.  He said, "You made these--how'd you get this shot?" And, "How'd you get that shot?"  You know. He really was very excited. Actually, we became friends during the time that he was training when he finally realized--the access--and he gave us access to him in some situations. But we really became friends after he saw the film, you know.
Story_ID: 7836
Speaker 1: Okay, well what did you do next?
Speaker 2: Oh, Jesus. I did--I've done so many films, I don't know, I know well the--I guess the Gary, Indiana, Gary ['Nationtime, Gary,' 1973],--the, that film was a very important film for us. But we've done films on the Harlem Renaissance, for example, 'From These Roots.'
Speaker 1: That was a series, right?
Speaker 2: No, that was just one, one film, but it won over twenty-two film festival awards. We've done a film on Ida B. Wells. It's called 'Ida B. Wells: a Passion for Justice,' and Toni Morrison does a fantastic (with emphasis) reading from the diaries and other notes of Ida B. Wells. That won over twenty film festival awards. We've done a number of other films. There's a film that I'm currently finishing, finally (with emphasis) after twelve, ten to twelve years of work--is the film on Ralph Bunche, that is it's not one film. What we've done is we've done fifteen films on the life of Ralph Bunche. Have you ever heard of Ralph Bunche?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well you're one of the few people, today, who are old enough to remember who he was, but he has, was completely (with emphasis) removed from, from the screens of America, from the newspapers of America, from the magazines, from all media, television, you'll never hear his name today. And at one time, you would hear, you would always hear his name. He was more popular than, as John Johnson says in 'Ebony Magazine' in an interview that we do of John Johnson. He says, "We have more stuff on Ralph Bunche than we have on Michael Jackson."  And it was true. At one time, he was an imminently popular individual. We've done fifteen films on his life. Actually, the first film what I call the flagship, is a two-hour special that's been on television, that's been at the Sundance Institute [Sundance, Utah], the film festival--was chosen for their screening at, in competition up at Sundance Film Festival [Sundance, Utah]. It, it's won awards. It's been shown all over the world at the various U.N. [United Nations] agencies and the like. That film is two hours in length. Then the satellite films, the additional films that we've done on those sections of Bunche's life that were left out of the two-hour special, or were insufficiently dealt with. He, as you know, was the legendary Undersecretary General of the United Nations and he was the first person of color anywhere in the world to win the Nobel Peace Prize, and he wrote the major chapters in the United Nations Charter. When they were drafting the United Nations Charter, they turned to Ralph Bunche for leadership in the drafting of those sections of the United Nations Charter that dealt with the decolona-, decolonization of the world, and as a result of his drafting work on the United Nations Charter, it was--became a part of the charter and helped to facilitate the self-determination and independence movements of the so called colonial nations through out countries, through out the world. So practically every African leader who took over their countries from, I would say, 1957 right straight through to 1970, were in close contact with Ralph Bunche. He worked very closely with Eleanor Roosevelt [Chairman of the Commission on Human Rights and widow of U.S. President, Franklin D. Roosevelt], for example, on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, getting it to be accepted by acclamation, by endorsement by the General Assembly of the United Nations in Paris [France] in, I believe 19--the early 1950s. So, and he was the creator of the, the concept of peacekeeping, I mean, he, he pioneered all the strategies involved in peacekeeping. He pioneered strategies involved in conflict resolution, that is, mediation for his work on the armistice of the peace agreements between Israel and the different Arab nations, the neighboring Arab nations, I think, Syria, Lebanon, Egypt and [Emirate of] Transjordan [renamed the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, 1946]. He--for that work that he did in successfully negotiating this peace treaty with what's called an armistice, he won the Nobel Prize for Peace. It's never been--it's a feat that's never been duplicated. He was an amazing scholar. I mean tremendously gifted intellectual who was at the top of his class. When he graduated from high school, he was the class valedictorian. When he graduated from college at UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles], he was the class valedictorian. He won a scholarship to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. He wrote the most distinguished doctoral thesis. He won an award [Robert Noxon Toppan Prize for best Ph.D. dissertation in political science] for the master's thesis in political science at Harvard. And in other words, Ralph Bunche was a tremendously significant individual who played a large role in the biographical history of the American nation and of the world. He played a very important role in helping to configure a world that was much more agreeable to the hu- for human survival, for survival, and I think that the fact the he's not known today is a travesty and a tragedy for us as Americans.
Story_ID: 7837
Speaker 1: Now, now how do you go through the process of putting together an historical documentary like that? Do you have to pull together a team of historians or advisors? How does it get from start to finish.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) How does that work? Well, actually the way it works is that, you know, the research is everything. I mean first of all you really have to know the subject matter, and the best place to get knowledge of the subject matter is from experts. So you, we had on the Ralph Bunche film, we had a team of experts. We had twelve scholars who understood and knew various facets of Bunche's life and of world history and of international relations and so on, who were our advisors on the project. We had, of course, the preeminent authority which is Sir Brian Urquhart who was Bunche's assistant and then subsequently his successor as U.N. [United Nations] Undersecretary General for Special Political Affairs. He had access to Bunche's private papers and so on, and he was, they were very close friends, so he was a marvelous person to know, to get the feel of the man as well as a lot of the factual content of his life. Also, family--you, you have to get the family involved and learn from them various elements of his life, and then you will have to find pictures, photographs, stock footage, newsreel footage. You have to find interviews of Bunche himself that may have taken place. And then what's left is your having the narrator and voiceover speaking some of his lines, some of his words, and we were very fortunate in getting Sidney Poitier to narrate the two hour special, and then Sidney was wonderful, I mean he narrated these fourteen additional half-hour modules on Bunche's life. So all of that and Sidney, as a matter fact, came into our studio and looked at some of the footage and became very excited by, you know, what he saw. So all of that helps you to, to really delve into the subject and we had--I've had a good team of editors who I wore out one after the other in editing and doing revisions and changing the approaches and, you know, trying different treatments of the subject matter to make sure that people looking at it would be interested and wouldn't get bored. Because it's a film about a raving (with emphasis) intellectual, the Michael Jordan, if you will of diplomatic affairs. He was an intellectual athlete, this man.  And, but you know, people aren't very happy to see something on an intellectual 'cause it doesn't seem like it's going to be theatrical. So anyway, you have to overcome those kinds of problems and--.
Speaker 1: You've, you've got to really teach with the movie because people can't see it happen, it's not like watching a guy dunk a basketball.  They have to understand what he's doing.
Speaker 2: Yes, I mean, you, you have to figure out ways in which this thing becomes very clear, you know. And I, that's one of the things that I, I'm so happy about. 'Ralph Bunche: An American Odyssey,' which is what the film is called--is that people are very engrossed with it. We had a screening of it down at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], about six hundred young men, you know, sitting there. And when it first started, they didn't know what it was about, but by the end of the screening they were so mesmerized by the film that they, you know, you knew that it had served its purpose. It had raised their consciousness. It had motivated them to think of scholarship as a way of having power, that intellectual skills are necessary, particularly in the 21st century. If you're going to have any kind of impact on world affairs or domestic affairs, you better know what you're doing. Well, you better know the subject matter that you're working with and Bunche was a master at this. I mean a lot of people don't know, for example, that he wrote the first draft of 'An American Dilemma [The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy],' which is purportedly written by Gunnar Myrdal [Economist and Nobel Laureate from Sweden], and it was. I mean but the first draft of 'American Dilemma' was written by Ralph Bunche who handled it, handed it over Gunnar Myrdal, because he understood that America was a very racist country and they would not accept the critique of American civilization by a black scholar (laughs), you know. So he was on the--he and Myrdal worked closely together on this study, this landmark study that was done on the question of the nature of race relations in America. They worked very closely together. I mean Myrdal was a Swede, was from Sweden, a scholar over there very reputed, but he didn't really know anything about American reality and so the Carnegie Corporation [of New York] put him together with Bunche, whom they knew, knew a great deal about American social, political, cultural reality, and the two of them worked together. And then Bunche did this draft of the 'American Dilemma' which Myrdal then, of course, had his input in. But scholars today are talking about the fact that Bunche was the guy who really wrote 'An American Dilemma.'  As a matter of fact, Brian Urquhart talks about the fact that when Bunche died, he left--there was a safe in his office that he didn't, he didn't, he forgot to leave the combination for the safe in his office. So Brian, so Brian Urquhart had to get a explosive expert into the office to blow open the safe, and in the safe they found all of his private papers, all of Bunche's private papers about his negotiations in the Middle East with the Israelis and the Arab nations, his work with Gunnar Myrdal, and the fact that he was actually the architect of the 'American Dilemma' study, which they didn't know about at the time and so on.
Story_ID: 7838
Speaker 1: Now, you made a film on La Raza ['Voice of La Raza,' 1972].
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Anthony Quinn, yeah. Yeah, well that was an interesting project, actually, because the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission commissioned us to do a film on the Latino experience with respect to employment in the United States, and the--I had put the film together, and then I said, "Oh, it would be a good idea if I could get Anthony Quinn, 'cause he's Latino and he has a crossover capability. It would be interesting to get him to narrate the film."  So I contacted him and he said, "Well, I don't know," he says, "What is this, a documentary?"  I said, "Yes. It's a documentary."  He said, "Well, you know, I'm in features and so on." Anyway, I kept bugging him, I kept, you know, pursuing him and finally he said, "Well, listen--," he said, "you come out here," he said, "let me see some of the films that you've done."  So I had done a film called 'Power Versus the People' [1970] with, and in that film it deal with the transgressions, the abuses of the corporate establishment against the Latinos as well as African Americans. So I flew out to California and I showed it to Quinn, and he was very moved with it, you know, and then I showed him, also, the material that I wanted him to narrate, and he said, "This is fantastic stuff," he says, but I said, "Well, will you narrate it?"  And he said, "I not only will narrate it. I want to be in it."  You know, so I said, "Well, fine," so I got this crew together on a moment's notice and we filmed him in Albuquerque, New Mexico and, as well as Los Angeles [California] and made the film. And it won, I think, four or five film festival awards, I can't remember now. But it was very successful and still is. I mean it still gets called for. My company [William Greaves Productions, Inc.] gets orders for distribution of the film to various, you know, Latino groups as well as non, non-Latino groups.
Story_ID: 7839
Speaker 1: And there's paucity a black film directors in this world and an even smaller group doing documentaries. I can only think of William Miles--,
Speaker 2: Sure. A good filmmaker.
Speaker 1: --and St. Claire Bourne.
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely--good, very good filmmaker.
Speaker 1: There are a few others but what advice would you give to those who want to get involved in film today? It might be too big of a question to ask.
Speaker 2: Well, no, it isn't, I mean 'cause, you know, if you want your mental freedom, if you--let me put it this way--we, as a people, have been enslaved for, you know, almost four hundred years, you know. We got our freedom in 1865 but it was our physical freedom, but what ensued was the attempt to re-enslave us, not physically, but intellectually, mentally, psychologically, and that's where the media comes into play. That is to say, there is this abolitionist's movement which helped facilitate slavery, but there was an anti-abolitionist movement. That's where the movement of the planters and the various oligarchy of the south, the cotton, you know, industry and so on--which was very much against that. Plus, there was also a whole movement to make sure that the black worker was not in competition with the white worker and there were a whole number of factors that were coming into play. So that--there was this anti-abolitionists movement which funded a lot of propaganda against the blacks, that they were savages, they were, you know running around in Africa wild and eating people and blacks were stupid minstrels and Stepin Fetchit types, I mean, 'Wealth of a Nation' was a movies that--,
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: Not 'Wealth of,' 'Birth of a Nation' was a movie that D. W. [David Llewelyn Wark] Griffith made which trashed the black experience and ennobled the Ku Klux Klan and all of that, so that's how our mental enslavement came about, and now we have to become free, and this is the role that a black, any black person going into filmmaking, particularly documentaries, should be in this struggle to free us intellectually.
Story_ID: 7840
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were talking about advice you'd give to young filmmakers.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the advice really is to, first of all, recognize the fact that a tremendous amount of violence is being done to black people, to their self-esteem, to black people's self-esteem--being done to white people to their perception of black people and to their perception of American and world history that they, if they are smart enough to get into the media--into, whether its newspapers, whether its magazines, whether it's the electronic media, in particular, which is mass media--that they have an opportunity to help correct a lot of the misinformation--some of it conscious and some of it unconscious--that it has been going out through the media, particularly the electronic media. They have an opportunity to make a change of that information, I mean, the films that we've done have not only helped on a one-on-one basis individuals who've seen the films, but have helped other filmmakers and other media makers of different--to think in broader terms and in more realistic terms in terms of how they would regard and how they should depict people of color and I think that it's a wonderful realization for a young filmmaker to have because it becomes an engine, an energy source that will power his or her activities in the future. I mean my--people say to me--"My goodness well how come you're, you're still making films?" You bet your sweet life I'm still making films. I'm making films because there's so much untruths out there that it has to be corrected, you know and what little I can do--its not very much--I used to think that I was going to be a hurricane, you know, making these changes, you know, in the media but I've settled to, I've come to terms with the fact that I'm probably more, nothing more than a raindrop falling on a stone, you know, in terms of having the ability to change things. But I think it's the aggregate of raindrops that does make a hurricane, you know, and that's, that's--I would love to see young people motivated in the way I was marvelously motivated by people like [William Leo] Hansberry and Mrs. [Taiyi] Seifert and other people that I have mentioned--[Prince] Akiki Nyabongo [of Uganda], who was a prince in East Africa, from East Africa--or Samuel Countee [sic, Countee Cullen], Sri Aurobindo, the Indian mystic and philosopher. I mean these are people who have really influenced a lot of my thinking--Lee Strasberg of the Actors Studio [Drama School, New York, New York], J. L. [Jacob Levi] Moreno in the field of psychodrama. I mean there are a number of people that I draw on when I make my films and a lot of it has to do with the freedom, the liberation of consciousness, the raising of consciousness whether it's in the field of law, whether it's in the field of politics, whether it's in the field of sociology, social sciences. I mean whatever. There's a lot of work to be done in these fields by way of the media, and these young people have this opportunity to really have a wonderful time in expanding their own consciousness. Like I, I've learned a great deal about so many things because every time I do a movie, it's equivalent to doing either a bachelor of arts or science or whatever report, or it's a master's degree or I like to think of my work of the Bunche project ['Ralph Bunche: An American Odyssey'] as being my doctoral thesis on Ralph Bunche, you know what I mean? And so I've, I've grown as a result of this film and I've grown as a result of the other films that I've made and even though I'm not a wealthy man, I'm wealthy in the knowledge that I have and I think that's much more important than having a bank account with a, you know, a million dollars in CDs [certificates of deposit], you know.
Story_ID: 7841
Speaker 1: Now you said at one point that you were influenced by, of course you were influenced intellectually by, William Leo Hansberry, but you studied the documentary style of John Gruerson?
Speaker 2: John Grierson, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --John Grierson, right. And what would you say is the William Greaves aesthetic? I mean what's your aesthetic?
Speaker 2: Oh boy, that's interest- I've never thought of it. The 'William Greaves Aesthetic,' the William Greaves aesthetic is so multi-faceted that if you see my various films, there's nothing, there's not very much in each of them that will cause you to say, "That's a William Greaves film," because these films don't resemble each other. The styles of these films are a function, the reason why is that the styles are a function of the content of the films. That is to say, the coming to grips with the research that underpins the film and learning all there is to learn, that you can possibly learn about that subject matter, that tells you what the style of the film is going to be. The one thing that you could point to, I think, about my films is that they are invariably conscious, consciousness-raising, you know. When you see my films, you say, "Oh gee, I didn't know this or I didn't know that. That's very interesting, but why did they tell us that such and such was the case when, in point of fact, this is what really happened, you know?" I mean, "Why did they tell us that the slaves were freed because of the white abolitionist's work, solely (with emphasis), only that, or that the, because of the change of the cotton industry--from agricultural to, to northern industrial enterprise and one kind of factory systems and so on. Why didn't they tell us that the slaves were also free because of the resurrect- insurrections and the, the protests and the, the pressure that the slave, the African slaves were putting on, on society with these riots and revolts?" The incipient--they were all squashed but those were constant pressures. I mean the civil rights revolution that we are witnessing today came in the wake of [Dr.] Martin Luther King's [Jr.] non-violent protests and the Malcolm X's more aggressive, and then a lot of the protests that were happening that eventually led to various kinds of urban disorders of all kinds including riots, so that those were pressures that were being put upon the American body politic which had to relate to international, the international community and explain itself--why was this country that espouses the American creed and all that and democracy and so on was not giving it to, you know, a tenth of its population which did not have access to that creed, did not have the creed as a part of its reality? So all of these things are, are very important, I think and I think that a young person going into the field would do well to consider, you know, some of these issues because, you know, when you go to sleep at night, you can sleep a little more easily, you know, that you didn't sell out your soul for a few pieces of silver, you know.  You fought for something that is really worthwhile. As Paul Robeson says--"The Negro artist has to decide to fight for freedom or slavery," and he says that he had made his choice and I certainly made my choice, you know.
Story_ID: 7842
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about some quick reactions to some people that you've probably encountered upon--I'm sure you have by now. Here are some of them--there are a variety of people here. First off, did you ever run into Oscar Micheaux [filmmaker]?
Speaker 2: I didn't run into him. I, you know--he, I was a little boy when Oscar was strong, I mean, I, you know, I am over thirty or over thiry-five (laughs), but I'm not--that's so far over that I wouldn't know Oscar Micheaux. But I will tell you this, that I used to see him because he--at a distance--because he had his studio across the street from where I lived. I lived at 203 West 135th Street and he had his studio on--that's 135th Street is on 7th Avenue and 135th Street and he had his studio on 7th Avenue and 135th Street across the street. And I used to see this man, you know, lugging these two large--well, I thought they were suitcases--over to a bar and grill called The Big Apple which was 135th Street and 7th Avenue and to another place, I think it was called The Bird Cage--I'm not sure about that. But, he, and he would set up these, what appeared to be this projector and a screen and he would show images on the screen and as a little boy, me and my friends--we used to jump up on the railings outside of The Big Apple and look through the window and we could see this movie on the screen that was an Oscar Micheaux movie. So that's my, that's my only memory of him and my only contact with him as a little seven, eight year-old boy.
Speaker 1: And you said earlier that he was related to Lewis Micheaux of the [African National Memorial] bookstore?
Speaker 2: Yeah, of the bookstore--they were--yeah, I think they were either cousins or brothers or what have you but they were both very, you know, that was called--they were race men, you know, basically.
Speaker 1: There's also like, you know, a Bishop Lightfoot Michaux [sic, Rev. Elder Lightfoot Solomon Michaux] was he related to them?
Speaker 2: I don't know if Bishop Lightfoot Michaux--that would be interesting to find out whether or not he was.
Speaker 1: Okay now, what about Marlon Brando when you in the Actor's Studio [Drama School, New York, New York]--.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, well, Marlon and I were in the Actor's Studio at the very beginning and he came in a year before me but, yeah, Marlon and I became friends and--during that period--that was like 1948, '49 [1949] and '50 [1950] and '51 [1951]--or, and beyond that. And then he became Marlon Brando, you know what I mean? He was, he was right at the beginning of his career there at that point and, you know, I would visit him on the [movie] set of 'Streetcar Named Desire' and then also 'On the Waterfront.' And he'd come up to Harlem [New York, New York] with me, you know, and I used to box--or I trained in boxing, I mean, I was not a professional boxer. I was--I did some amateur boxing at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] in the Harlem YMCA, but I kept going to the gym to work out. He would come up to the gym and also, you know, just hang out in Harlem with me because he, he was an interesting guy in that he was interested in people of color, I mean, I'm not, I wasn't surprised that he went out to live in Tahiti, you know, because that's Marlon, you know. He was very much involved with the--he was interested in the United Nations. He's a very good person. I really liked him. I haven't been in touch with him in, you know, in years. The last time I saw him was at the United Nations and this was probably in the '60s [1960s] and we gave him a big hug. I mean, we were--we hadn't seen each for about fourteen or fifteen years but, but he, he's a good person.
Speaker 1: Okay what about Harry Belafonte?
Speaker 2: Harry, again I've known Harry since--before Harry became Harry Belafonte--I mean, when he was a young actor trying, you know, trying to make his way into the field and finally ended up singing at a coffee shop or something down in, down in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York]--I'm just trying to think what the name was. Anyway, oh, 'The Embers' or something like that. He sang some of these calypso songs, I think. But anyway, he eventually became The Harry Belafonte and we, a couple of times we threatened to work together on one project, a film project that he wanted to, he wanted me to be involved in. Yeah, Harry I know very well.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: What about Sidney Poitier?
Speaker 2: Sidney and I go way back. Sidney and I are very old friends and have managed to maintain our contact with each other over the years. He's--as a matter of fact we're very much alike in many, many ways and we identify with each other very strongly.
Speaker 1: What about Gordon Parks?
Speaker 2: Gordon is a great guy. I like Gordon very much and Gordon is a very--wonderful person. He can tell wonderful stories about himself, actually. And he's always been very supportive of me and I'd certainly, certainly support anything that he does.
Story_ID: 7843
Speaker 1: Did you know Norman McLaren?
Speaker 2: Norman McLaren?  Sure. Very good friend. He was a major supporter of mine at the National Film Board of Canada. He and a fellow named Guy Glover, they really supported my getting on staff of the National Film Board, which I eventually did.
Speaker 1: Okay, Melvin Van Peebles?
Speaker 2: Melvin, again, is--Melvin is a trip (laughs). He's, you know, he's a very colorful person and we, we've sort of hung out a bit from time to time. and he's a big jogger. I don't know if anybody's told you. He's a marvelous jogger, I mean. And I must say I always envy how far and how fast Melvin can jog.
Speaker 1: Okay. Langston Hughes?
Speaker 2: Langston Hughes--wonderful human being. I really had a very, very good relationship with Langston Hughes. He was extremely (with emphasis) supportive of whatever I was doing. As a matter of fact I finally was--you know, as I got deeper and deeper into film production I optioned one of his stories that he and Roy DeCarava put together, 'The Sweet Flypaper of Life.'  And we tried to make it into a feature film. And I took it up to Sundance [Institute] Film Lab [Sundance, Utah] and they were--it was very successful at the Sundance Film Lab. Robert Redford [actor and director] and Paul Newman [actor and director] and Karl Malden [actor and director] and [James L.] Brooks [director and producer] and various other people were very taken with the material. And we all thought that we would get a Hollywood [California] studio to put up the money to make the feature film, but again, because of the fact that it was too positive, it put togeth-, put forward too positive an image of the black experience, they weren't interested in it in Hollywood, certainly not in 1980s.
Speaker 1: What about John Cassavetes [actor and director]?
Speaker 2: John?
Speaker 1: John Cassavetes?
Speaker 2: I never met John Cassavetes. I know he was a very good friend of Ricardo Montalban [actor and director] whom I've known and Anthony Quinn [actor and producer], but I never--[Samuel] Sam Shaw [producer], but I never met him.
Speaker 1: What about, well, William Miles is the one person I know you've run across?
Speaker 2: Bill Miles is a very nice guy and a very talented man. Has done work that's, you know, was very much in line with the kind of work that I think black filmmakers should be working on. Bill Miles, St. Clair Bourne and so on. My, my son [David Greaves] was working for a while with me in film production and the kind of films my son, David, agrees I have worked on--well he's now publishing his own newspaper. He's, he shifted from making films into being a newspaper publisher and editor and writer. So he has his own publish-, publication out in Brooklyn [New York, New York] called 'Our Time Press.' And it's very, very progressive and very much in need. It's an activist newspaper, it encourages the consciousness-raising of the black community in Brooklyn.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what about Spike Lee? Do you know him?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Sure. Sure I know Spike. I think Spike is very interesting because I loved his first films, 'She's Gotta Have It,' and 'Joe's Bed-Stuy Barbershop: We Cut Heads,' I like that title. Anyway, and then he went into Hollywood and I liked his 'Malcolm X,' but I really liked the 'Three Little Girls' [sic, 'Four Little Girls'], you know, I thought it was a wonderful piece of work, you know. And it's interesting to see him, he continues to grow. I mean, so far as I can tell in his work. And well, and he's smart about the marketing of himself and the marketing of his work. And I think, I think he's a real, I wouldn't say he's a come-up, because he's already arrived, you know?
Story_ID: 7844
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I hope that the black community can get to the point that it realizes that it is part of a long history of black cultural and civilizational development, that we go back thousands of years, you know, we're not some people that are just arrived yesterday morning at five o'clock [A.M.], you know? We are a very, very significant people and have been for many years and we, in any area that we have any opportunity to show what we really can do we really can do it. I mean, whether it's supports, whether it's music, whether it's literature. Toni Morrison is a marvelous writer, or whether it's in science--Ernest Just-- I mean we have people who have--Ralph Bunche is a prime example who--quite capable of making major contributions to not only the black community but to the world, to America and the rest of the world. And in order to arrive at a height of self-esteem we need people, black people,  in the media and white people in the media who really can appreciate who we are as a people and stop this nonsense about prejudice and racism and all this foolishness because it's, it's very innervating, it doesn't get anybody anywhere really, except a few people who can profit from the racism, the class struggles that are, that take place. And it's important that we as a people encourage within our group young people who can help to raise the consciousness and raise the productivity of the black community, you know?
Story_ID: 7845
Speaker 1: Now, I didn't ask you this earlier, but what did your father and mother think of your deciding to go into documentary films?
Speaker 2: Well, my father, at first--well, by the time I was in documentary films he had pretty well come to terms that I wasn't going to learn a trade, you know, and be a car mechanic, you know--,
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: --But he, when, he really didn't want me to go into the theatre to be a dancer, of all things, and be an actor and so on. And I became a songwriter as a matter of fact. Anyway, by the time I got into Broadway [New York, New York], on the Broadway, featured on Broadway, in the movies, and stage productions, he had come to terms with the fact that I was incorrigible in this regard and also when he was driving his taxi cab every now and again someone would say, and look at the identification of the driver and say, "Greaves," they said, "Do you know an, a young actor named William Greaves?" That's my father, "Yes, I know him, he's my son." (laughs) But it was--by the end of his life he was very pleased with what I was doing with myself, you know. And he realized that the advice he gave me was partially true, because in film, you know, it is something of a trade, you know? Filmmaking is a trade, but what a trade it is. It's a trade that really dominates thinking worldwide. You know, that's the kind of trade that I think more young black people and Latinos and Asians and so on should get into who will want to make this into a better world, you know?
Story_ID: 7846
Speaker 1: Now this question seems, you know, with the body of work you already have passed this, we always ask it. well what do you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy. My legacy is my legacy. I don't--I think what I've been talking about, I mean if, if my films inspire more films like my films and like the, or if not like my films, like the purposes of my films, I would be very happy. And if it inspires young people to become aware of the fact that, you know, freedom and human evolution and consciousness-raising is a full-time job, you know, that you have to work at it constantly. And if you do, it can have an impact on people, as I've seen our films have. And I'm very delighted, I mean it's had an impact on you, I think, to some degree, without your knowing that we had made these films. So I think that I feel very good about that, you know. When you told me you saw the 'First World Festival of Negro Arts' [World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, Dakar, Senegal, 1966] and so on, I want you to see 'Ralph Bunche: An American Odyssey,' because, you know, that, that film and the subsequent modules, teaching modules that will come out of that film that we're finishing now, I think will last for fifty to a hundred years. I mean, and I'd like to get your reaction to it, you know?
Speaker 1: Now, that's a, that's something now that happens more and more with documentary films, there are teaching modules created to accompany them, right?
Speaker 2: Well, no, not particularly. I mean I just, that was just an inspiration that I had. Although, you know, I think, I don't know, maybe 'Eyes on the Prize' [documentary series, 1987] has other films that have been made about it. But I don't know, for the moment, I mean--but I'm not authority on this. I don't know of any film that has been done in recent years out of which a series of modules, teaching modules have been made. But if it is has, I mean it's not an unusual idea. It's just that I don't know of any that have been made like that, you know?
Story_ID: 7847
Speaker 1: This, this is slightly different from legacy, but, Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered? Well, I would like to be remembered for the films that I've done. And particularly the films that I've done, I would--oh, boy, that sort of dates me, doesn't it? Well the films that I've done, I was going to say for the last--I started to say the films I've done for the last ten years, when I've done fifteen of them about, all about one man, Ralph Bunche. But and then I started to say the films over the last twenty years, and then I again find myself involved with Ida B. Wells ['Ida B. Wells: A Passion for Justice'] and some other films. I had a film with Paul Robeson ['Resurrections: A Moment in the Life of Paul Robeson'] and then another film on other subjects during that period. I'd like to be remembered for the films I've done in the last fourty or some odd years, beginning with 'Emergency Ward' [1959]. I did a film for the National Film Board of Canada called 'Emergency Ward' and it was shot in an emergency ward--first time any such film was made in cinéma vérité, an emergency ward. And, but I guess the films that I've done, particularly those that I've been doing with my wife, Louise Archambault [Greaves], her name, in the last, I guess twenty years it's been now, worth looking at. And maybe, and also some before because the 'Ali, the Fighter' was done in 1971. 'The First World Festival [of Negro Arts],' 1968 [film of the World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, Dakar, Senegal, 1966], 'Symbiopsychotaxi-,' 1966--'Symbiopsychotaxiplasm [Take One]' in 1968, the whole 'Black Journal' [public television program] series, it was a wonderful series which our company still distributes. That I think some of those films are very good films. But how, what's the question again?
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: --I'd like to be remembered for realizing that when you start giving the advice--that when you start a career, an independent filmmaker, particularly documentary, you're taking a vow of bankruptcy, (laughs) or near bankruptcy and that you really have to believe in what you're doing. And if you do, that will overcome a lot of things, you know. If you really have that passion for the content of what you're doing, that's the engine that will drive you and revive you as you sink into moments of depression and then you say, "Well, wait a minute, this is very important and if I don't do it," you know--like if I hadn't done this film on Ralph Bunche [Ralph Bunche: An American Odyssey] it is unlikely that a similar project would've been launched of this nature and magnitude and intent for 50--15, 20, 30, 50, 100 years. I mean, it's that kind of film. It's like, who's the man who did the [U.S.] Bill of Rights? Horace Mann? No, it wasn't. there was of course [Thomas] Jefferson and the Declaration of Independence.
Speaker 1: Thomas Paine?
Speaker 2: No, not Thomas Paine. Oh, it's so silly. But anyway, there is--the Bill of Rights is a very important document. You know, a film should be done on the man who wrote the Bill of Rights. Film, films should be done on Thomas Paine, they should be done on Charles Sumner, a wonderful [U.S.] congressman in the nineteenth century, you know, terrific films should be made on this man, of John Brown [19th-century abolitionist] for example. And these films could be broken down into component parts like my film and modules, teaching modules of how this individual came at arriving at that state of consciousness which enabled them, and caused them to become the significant figures in American history. There's a lot of material out there and a young person who's willing to do the scholarship, the research can make these kinds of films. For example, something that's happening to me right now is I'm probably going to do a film on the life of a man who has been one of the central figures in my thinking, a man by the name of Sri Aurobindo, who was an Indian in India who lead this self-determination, an independence movement of India at the beginning of the twentieth century in 1907 it was, and who later on became a mystic.
Speaker 1: So how do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: Aurobindo A-U-R-O-B-I-N-D-O. Sri is S-R-I. But I've got some emails from India asking me if I would--the Aurobindo people asking me if I would do this film and that they will back it, you know, which is marvelous. And that's something I think is very important because he, he is an, not only an egalitarian, he's not only a world spirit, but he, his consciousness cuts across racial and religious and all that. He doesn't subscribe to any of these doctrines to the exclusion of anything else, but he's a, he's a world humanist, you know? And so that project I've accepted, you know, I've agreed to do. And it will keep me energized, I can assure you, for quite a while. Because it's important and it is important to me and it's important to the people who may not know of him and to people who know of him. And it's an important project. And it's worth, you know, someone said to me, "Well, you know, I'll make you a multimillionaire," I would have a problem, you know, walking away from this film. And I think that's, that's the kind of film I think, if you can (pause) do it, if you can try to allow yourself to get into that kind of state it's worth giving up for. I mean if you say, if you have the feeling that you have the skills to make a particular kind of film that people offering you the money to make, that you walk away from it--you're doing violence to yourself because you'll always regret it, you know. You will always feel that you sold yourself short, you know (pause). So those are my thoughts.
Story_ID: 7848
Speaker 1: I was saying that that's me when I was about fourteen years of age. That's when I was a young artist who became one of the seventy-five best child artists in New York State and got this scholarship to The Little Red Schoolhouse [later Little Red School House and Elisabeth Irwin High School, New York, New York]. And that was at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], I was playing basketball, boxing. I became the most perfect boy. I won contests at the YMCA, the most perfect boy contests and won trophies.  And this is--I was--the preceding picture I was, that's was when I was at Frederick Douglass Junior High School [New York, New York], not this one.
Speaker 2: [William Greaves, age fourteen. Class photo from Fredrick Douglass Junior High School, New York, New York, 1940s.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7849
Speaker 1: PS89 [New York City Public School number 89]--was a production--I said I hadn't done any other theatre--but I was in grammar school there. I was probably no more than about eleven. And this is, this is me here. And this is Albert Popwell who was an actor on Broadway and then a dancer. He and I danced together in the Pearl Primus Company, Albert Popwell.
Speaker 2: How do you spell his name?
Speaker 1: P-O-P-W-E-L-L. And also, this was the period when I would see, I guess, Oscar Micheaux [film director] and going with his two suitcases carrying films and a projector.
Speaker 2: [William Greaves, age eleven (far left, kneeling), with Albert Popwell (back row, center) and others after a school play at PS89 Elementary School, New York, New York, late 1930s.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7850
Speaker 1: This is a shot of me at the height of my theatrical career as an actor. And I--this was a period when I was in 'Souls of Sin [motion picture, 1949],' I had the starring role in 'Souls of Sin.'  I had the title role of 'A Young American [theatrical play],' and was featured in the motion picture 'Lost Boundaries [1949]' with Canada Lee and Mel Ferrer. And also of course I was in 'Finian's Rainbow' on Broadway [New York, New York]. I wasn't featured in 'Finian's Rainbow,' but I had the biggest laugh in the whole production for the role that I played in it. And this was the period when I, let's see, well, that's pretty much it. I mean--when I decided--it was at this point that I decided to become a filmmaker and began studying filmmaking.
Speaker 2: [Publicity photograph of William Greaves from one of his acting roles, New York, New York, 1940s.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7851
Speaker 1: I'll get a copy of that text, too?
Speaker 2: I think what they do is--.
Speaker 1: The transcript?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the transcript.
Speaker 1: I know it's possible.
Speaker 2: [Publicity photograph of William Greaves (front row, left) from one of his acting roles, late 1940s.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7852
Speaker 1: So you revol-, you revolve these images on the, Avid [video editing program]?
Speaker 2: Exactly, we export them as a JPEG [digital image file format], put them in [Adobe] Photoshop [brand of graphics software]--,
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --crop them, rotate them.
Speaker 1: Okay, fine.
Speaker 2: --you know, adjust the levels, anything. That's actually that's where we put the captions at.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: [Publicity photograph of William Greaves from one of his acting roles, late 1940s.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7853
Speaker 1: The photographer of this picture was none other than [Sir] Alistair Cooke.
Speaker 2: Alistair Cooke (unclear)--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I flew around the world with Alistair, with these airliners, you know, looking at the various safety precautions and air navigational procedures and all that stuff. And when we got to India we sort of hooked it up with me getting on top of this channel--camel leading the charge, you know. And the camel's standing there passively, not knowing who the hell was on his back, said, "Get off."
Speaker 2: Is that India or Egypt?
Speaker 1: That's Egypt.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: [Sir Alistair Cooke's photograph of William Greaves dressed as an Arab, Egypt, 1950s.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7854
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother who was--used to have me come out on the porch--not on the porch, it's a roof, in Harlem [New York, New York]. And she used to watch over me and she used to tie a string around--I was only about four years old--and she'd tie a rope around my waist to prevent me from jumping over the side. So I was like a little dog, you know, running around. Anyway, that's her. That's 19--well, I guess sometime in the '30s [1930s].
Speaker 2: [William Greaves's mother, Phyllis Emily Muir Greaves, New York, New York, early 1930s.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7855
Speaker 1: This is my wife Louise Archambault Greaves and she's, you know, we've been co-producing for the past I'd say fifteen or so years. Up to that time we--before that time had, raising two daughters [Taiyi Greaves and Maiya Greaves] who have since gone off into the world and seeking their fortune and the like. But she's very smart and very talented. And is a very good collaborator with me. So she was a Co-Executive Producer, Co-Producer on 'Ida B. Wells [A Passion for Justice]' with Toni Morrison and also she was the Co-Producer on the Ralph Bunche project ['Ralph Bunche: An American Odyssey'].  This one here? Oh, I guess--,
Speaker 2: Approximately, if you don't mind.
Speaker 1: Oh, I don't know. I guess sometime in 1995, or something like that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: [William Greaves with his wife, Louise Archambault Greaves, 1995.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7856
Speaker 1: This is my great granddaughter who is cute as hell and I took her to, I think some kind of a circus of some kind and she just loved it. Her name is Lauren.
Speaker 2: Spell it, please?
Speaker 1: L-A-U-R-E-N.
Speaker 2: Okay. Date?
Speaker 1: Oh--,
Speaker 2: We accept decades.
Speaker 1: Well, I don't know, sometime in the '90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: [William Greaves with his great-granddaughter, Lauren, 1990s.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7857
Speaker 1: --Wonderful sense of humor and a lovely personality and very religious, very mystical, poetic mind and explorer of the cosmos. She used to take us all around Central Park [New York, New York] and various other places when we were small kids. Her name is Emily.
Speaker 2: [William Greaves's friend, Emily, ca. 1950s.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7858
Speaker 1: Oh, that's me and Ousmane Sembène, the Senegalese filmmaker. At the beginning, seemed to be the beginning of his career, we threw a big party for him at 'Black Journal,' [public television program] I was the Executive Producer then.  Let's see. Maybe, no, maybe, no this was later. Oh, this was at another party. We did throw a party for him at 'Black Journal' in 1970, but this is, this is much later, this is 1990 or something like that.
Speaker 2: That's you in the middle?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's me in the middle.
Speaker 2: And who's on the left?
Speaker 1: I don't know who that woman is.
Speaker 2: [William Greaves (center) with Senegalese filmmaker, Ousmane Sembène and unidentified woman, 1990s.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7859
Speaker 1: This is a, this is a series of television shows I directed called--dramas called 'Getting to Know Me.'  It was targeted to young people. And I don't know the names of the two people working there, I can't remember now.
Speaker 2: Oh, date? Possible date?
Speaker 1: Oh, I guess in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: [William Greaves (center) working on 'Getting to Know Me' television series, during the 1970s.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7860
Speaker 1: This is me with two of the great filmmakers in the world, Elia Kazan (center) here and over here Satyajit Ray (left), legendary Indian filmmaker at the Museum of Modern Art. That's me in my very obese stage, that would be somewhere around 1975 or something like that, '78. 1978, I think.
Speaker 2: Obese?
Speaker 1: Well, I, I had gained a lot of weight.
Speaker 2: [Skip in tape] S-A-T, Sat-ya, Y-A, Jit J-I-T, Satyajit. And Ray is spelled R-A-Y. And Elia Kazan is E-L-I-A, Kazan is K-A-Z-A-N. He's my teacher.
Speaker 1: [William Greaves (right) with filmmakers Satyajit Ray (left) and Elia Kazan (center), New York, New York, 1978.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7861
Speaker 1: This is me with the Pres-, meeting with the President of India, Mr. Sing, S-I-N-G [sic, Giani Zail Singh], I've forgotten his first name. That's my wife Louise [Archambault Greaves], here I am. And I met him in Pondicherry, India, I think.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It could, or, or New Delhi [India], one of the two.
Speaker 1: About what year is this?
Speaker 2: This would be about 1975, no, 1985 maybe.
Speaker 1: [William Greaves (second from left) with Louise Archambault Greaves (right), the President of India, Giani Zail Singh (second from right), and others in India, 1985.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7862
Speaker 1: All right, this is my production team, part of the production team of 'Black Journal' television series for National Educational Television [later PBS, Public Broadcasting Service]. And in this picture is a young lady who became a very well known filmmaker, Madeline Anderson, she was the Editor. And next to me is the Producer, Kent Garrett, and I was the Executive Producer and Co-Host of the show.
Speaker 2: About what year is this?
Speaker 1: This was 1968, '69 [1969].
Speaker 2: [William Greaves (left) with 'Black Journal' production staff, Madeline Anderson and Kent Garrett, New York, New York, 1968-1969.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7863
Speaker 1: This is Toni Morrison and myself during the recording of her--filming of her for 'Ida B. Wells: A Passion for Justice.'  And the date for this would be 1940--1958.  No, fifty, what did I say?
Speaker 2: Eight, eight, '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: Did you often come to Chicago [Illinois] for that?
Speaker 2: No. Why, why would I be in Chicago?
Speaker 1: Well, Ida B. Wells lived in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: [William Greaves with author Toni Morrison, New York, New York, 1988.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7864
Speaker 1: This is the film crew of 'Black Journal,' [television program], I'm now getting ready to do a voiceover, not a voiceover, on-camera report, that's me here. And this is [Anthony] Tony Batten who is my executive editor, I believe. Yeah. And this is Kent Garret and this is St. Claire Bourne, and this fellow is, oh, I can't remember his name. It'll kill me, but I can't remember it.
Speaker 2: If you could, Mr. Greaves, just give us spellings for Mr. Garrett and Mr. Bourne?
Speaker 1: Garrett is G-A-R-R-E-T-T, I guess.  Kent Garrett. And St. Claire, S-T, Claire, C-L-A-I-R [sic, C-L-A-I-R-E] and then Bourne, B-O-U-R-N-E.
Speaker 2: [William Greaves (center right), Tony Batten (center left), Kent Garrett (foreground right), St. Claire Bourne (far right), and the 'Black Journal' film crew, New York, New York, 1968.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7865
Speaker 1: This is--I don't know where this is filmed. This is--,
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: Filming, I can't recall what I'm filming. Oh, what is it? I can't recall, I can't recall.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But this was filmed around 1990.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it looks like your wife [Louise Archambault Greaves] in the background?
Speaker 2: That's my wife, yeah, in the background.
Speaker 1: And your operator, do you have a name?
Speaker 2: I think it's [Robert] Bobby Shepherd.
Speaker 1: [William Greaves (left) with Louise Archambault Greaves and Bobby Shepherd, 1990.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7866
Speaker 1: Okay, this is, this was shot in 1997, I guess. This is, that's my wife in the background, Louise Archambault, and--Archambault Greaves, and that's a scholar, one of our scholars that we interviewed on camera who was an authority on South Afr-, [Ralph] Bunche's of trips through Africa. His name is Dr. Robert Edgar of Howard University [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: [William Greaves (right) with Louise Archambault Greaves and Dr. Robert Edgar, 1997.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7867
Speaker 1: Must have been around 1995, or something like that, or maybe, yeah, about that. This is Mel Ferrer, this is 'Lost Boundaries' [motion picture, 1949]--this was the reunion for the cast, the crew, all people that were connected with the filming of this 'Lost Boundaries' about this black family passing for white in New England. And he plays the black doctor, that's Mel Ferrer here, and Susan Douglas plays his daughter and this fellow is the boyfriend. And this woman is the wife of the doctor who is deceased now, she was his wife. And then that's your humble servant there, here. We had a great reunion of this production team. And the townspeople, they packed the auditorium for this screening, it was very emotional and very wonderful.
Speaker 2: Okay. Isn't this based on the truth?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, it was 'Reader's Digest' published it. And Louis de Rochemont made the film and he was the man who later on allowed me to be an apprentice and wrote letters of recommendation for me to the head of the National Film Board [of Canada]. And they took me on as an apprentice.
Speaker 2: [William Greaves (far left) with Mel Ferrer (far right), Susan Douglas (left), reuniting with the cast from the movie 'Lost Boundaries,' 1995.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7868
Speaker 1: This is [Anthony] Tony Quinn and that's William H. Brown who was the Chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Committee--Commission and that's me at my heaviest.
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was a hundred and, a hundred and, I'd say I was about 190 pounds there. From eating too much food during my 'Black Journal' [television program] days, I guess I was too sedentary.
Speaker 2: Okay. (Unclear)--.
Speaker 1: Okay, that picture with Tony Quinn was taken at the screening of the film that I directed with him called the 'Voice of La Raza' [1972], and it was done for the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
Speaker 2: [William Greaves (left) with actor Anthony Quinn (center) and William H. Brown at the movie screening of 'Voice of La Raza,' 1972.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7869
Speaker 1: This film was--oh, shoot--I think it was done, this shot was done during the filming of either 'Booker T. Washington [The Life and the Legacy, 1986]' or 'Frederick Douglass [An American Life, 1985].' It looks like it could be either one at their home. I made a film on each of these characters at their respective homes and this shot is, was taken in the home of either Frederick Douglass or Booker T. Washington. I made a film on both of them. So you could use it for either case, no one would know the difference.
Speaker 2: [William Greaves producing the film on either Booker T. Washington or Frederick Douglass, 1985-1986.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7870
Speaker 1: Shucks, about 1995 (pause) during the making of the Ralph Bunche film ['Ralph Bunche: An American Odyssey'].
Speaker 2: [Publicity photograph of William Greaves, 1995.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7871
Speaker 1: This was the same period, 1995 or so. We're shooting of, whatcha-callit, of Ralph Bunche [movie, 'Ralph Bunche: An American Odyssey'].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: [Publicity photograph of William Greaves, 1995.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7872
Speaker 1: Okay, this is a picture from 'Symbiopsychotaxiplasm: Take One' 1968. I was the creator, director,producer, writer, editor of this production and we're now getting ready to edit the sequel to it with a 'Symbiopsychotaxiplasm: Take Two.'  I have it in storage from 1968, but never edited it.
Speaker 2: [William Greaves on the set of his movie, 'Symbiopsychotaxiplasm: Take One', New York, New York, 1968.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7873
Speaker 1: This here is at my studio, my office at 1821 Broadway [New York, New York]. It's during, I would say it's about 1999 and I'm still working on 'Ralph Bunche: An American Odyssey.' I started working on 'American Odyssey' in 1991, '92 [1992], that's when it's first conceived of as a project. And then I worked on raising the money as well as doing the shooting, what we call crash shooting of individuals who were alive and colleagues of Bunche while he was alive, and scholars. And then later on we did the official shooting, about 1996. That's my Emmy [award for the television industry] in the background there.
Speaker 2: [William Greaves in his office at William Greaves Productions, Inc., New York, New York, 1999.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
Story_ID: 7874
Speaker 1: That's a picture was taken of me in 1995 or something like that. But--you have the black and white of that I think.
Speaker 2: [Publicity photograph of William Greaves, 1995.  From the collection of William Greaves.]
