Story_ID: 244155
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Lawrence] Guyot, we are going to begin with me saying that my name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton and I am the interviewer, and Rick Warwick is the videographer and Sam Hyder is running audio and today's date is Tuesday, November 9th, 2004 and this interview is taking place at WHUT-TV at Howard University in Washington, D.C.  Now if you would, for the record, please tell us your full name, including your middle name, and spell it.
Speaker 2: My name is Lawrence Thomas Guyot, Jr., L-A-W-R-E-N-C-E, G-U-Y-O-T, Thomas, T-H-O-M-A-S.
Story_ID: 244156
Speaker 1: Would you please tell us the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: Pass Christian, Mississippi.  P-A-S-S, C-H-R-I-S-T-I-A-N, July 17th, 1939.
Speaker 1: And your occupation please.
Speaker 2: I monitor the after school programs for the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 244157
Speaker 1: Now the next couple of questions are some People magazine-ish type questions, just to kind of help us get familiar with the process.  So, if you could give me short answers to these, that would be great.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Apples.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Pass Christian, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Your favorite phrase or saying?  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: Power is everything.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Story_ID: 244158
Speaker 1: Now if you will, let's begin talking about your mother, starting with your mother's name and where she was born and where she grew up as a girl.
Speaker 2: My mother was named Margaret Victoria Piernas.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  M-A-R-G-A-R-E-T  V-I-C-T-O-R-I-A  P-I-E-R-N-A-S, and when she married my father [Lawrence Guyot, Sr.], her name then became Margaret Guyot.  My mother grew up in a family of nineteen children, lived--was born and raised and lived most of her life in Pass Christian, Mississippi.  Their family was heavy Catholic, heavily independent, born--. Pass Christian, Mississippi was a racially very moderate, almost neutral, on the question of race because of the heavy Catholic influence.  Ingalls [Shipbuilding] shipyard was in Pascagoula [Mississippi] so you had Catholicism in the industry and labor union organizing. And you had a close relationship that crossed racial lines.  My grandmother [Matilda Piernas] looked like she was white, but, of course, she was creole.  My grandmother's father was the mayor of Pass Christian during Reconstruction.  My grandfather's brother [Louis Piernas] was chairman of the Republican Party in Hancock County [Mississippi] which adjoined Harrison County [Mississippi] where we lived for fifty years.  He died at 104.  He was a Repub--my grandfather on the other side, on the Piernas side, well, his brother, the uncle that I described, his brother was the Democratic agent.  His names was Jules Piernas, my mother's father.  He would gather the family to listen to our president, [President] Franklin Delano Roosevelt and his fireside chats.  I was born in a city, my--that city didn't have racial problems.  I could--
Speaker 1: Did your mother grow up there?
Speaker 2: My mother grew up there.
Speaker 1: Did she ever tell you stories about what life was like for her as a girl and her growing up?  Did she ever share stories with you?
Speaker 2: Stories, but they were--you see we had so many relatives in that town that by the time my mother stopped telling me the stories about our relatives, there wasn't anything else to talk about.  I was seventeen years old, ready to go off to Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Where was she in terms of the nineteen children?
Speaker 2: She was one of the first.
Speaker 1: And so did she ever talk about what it was like growing up in such a big family, just how she spent her days as a girl and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, she talked about the scarcity of food but at the same time, their adventurism.  Three blocks away from our house you could get crab, shrimp, oysters.  My-her family raised chickens, cows, pigs, planted okra, tomatoes, had fig trees, had pecan trees.  They were very self-sufficient.  They were also a very industrious family.  My grandfather could build anything.  Most of his children were taught to be a skilled trade.  They could build anything or repair anything.  So my mother was brought up in that kind of atmosphere.
Speaker 1: So did they grow up on a farm?
Speaker 2: No.  We grew up in a small town, a town of five hundred people, everyone knew everyone.  A town where the extended family was a reality.  There was no--I marvel at how far removed we've come from that.  In the town I grew up in any adult could whip my behind and I was guaranteed two things.  By the time I got home, I'd get another one.  But there would be no confrontation between my parents and the person who would administer the good behavior lesson.  As you know, that's gone today.  We don't, we don't live like that anymore, unfortunately.  So I grew up in a town where I was the first person from my family who graduated from college.
Story_ID: 244159
Speaker 1: Let's go back a minute, [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Lawrence] Guyot (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother [Margaret Piernas Guyot]?
Speaker 2: My mother was a very Catholic, very family-oriented, very pragmatic person who was totally committed to her sons-and I have three brothers- survival, stability and empowerment.
Speaker 1: Did she go to Mass every day?
Speaker 2: If there was Mass, she was there.  My mother was the kind of person who was wise enough, that when I told her I wanted to organize my own church-- because everybody we knew was Catholic.  My family was Catholic, Catholic, you understand, I mean, they were heathens who were Catholic, not in my family.  And I told her I wanted to organize my church, my own church, and she said well, you go ahead and do that but just don't talk about it with anyone until you do it.  I later, in later years, I realized how wise my mother was, and the most lasting impression of my mother was her total commitment to us.  I was in the Civil Rights Movement and she caught hell for that.  I mean she lost employment.  They knew who I was and this sort of thing.  But she never said, you know, stop doing that or this sort of thing.
Speaker 1: What kind of work did your mother do?
Speaker 2: Whatever was available.
Speaker 1: Was she a domestic mainly?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes she was.
Speaker 1: And did she ever talk about any of the families that she worked for?
Speaker 2: She talked about various ones of 'em in different ways, what the status was, how she was treated, that sort of thing.
Story_ID: 244160
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit now about your father--
Speaker 2: My father--
Speaker 1: --starting with his name and when he was born.
Speaker 2: My father was born in Pass Christian [Mississippi], Catholic.
Speaker 1: His name?
Speaker 2: Lawrence Guyot, Senior.  I'm a junior.  My father was a brilliant man who got in a contest one time regarding a mathematical problem, and everyone in the town told him he was wrong, and he stuck to his grounds.  So they sent off to the publisher and he was vindicated and he said, but of course I was right.  My father went on a jury one time and said, a woman was--an insurance company wanted to offer her six hundred dollars and my father said, well send out for a lot a coffee because we're not leaving here until this woman gets three thousand dollars.  The woman left with three thousand dollars.  My father was a man who was a gambler, who was a builder, who was a--he would leave the poker game to come make his offering to the Catholic church, then go back and beat everyone there.  My father made whiskey.  My father built houses, bridges, the Bay St. Louis Bridge [St. Louis Bay Bridge], he worked on building it.  He was a politician in a town--he, he could register anyone he wanted to register to vote.  There was no resistance to black people registering in Pass Christian, Mississippi.  When whites ran, they sought black votes, they sought white votes.  And again this is tied to the Catholic labor industry.  My father was a man who had strong political beliefs.  If someone was burned out, they came to him for help.  If someone was accused of raping a white woman, they came to him for help and he got Bidwell Adams [Cayton Bidwell Adam, Sr.], the former lieutenant governor under [Governor Theodore G.] Bilbo.  The two of them were personal friends.  Bidwell Adams would then defend anyone brought to him by my father.
Story_ID: 244161
Speaker 1: Bidwell Adams [Cayton Bidwell Adam, Sr.] was a loyal Democrat.  He was a supporter of John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy].  He was a supporter of--he believed that everyone was entitled to a defense.  He defended black people accused of raping white women, and he defended me when I was seventeen years of age.  I was accused of buying--I bought some slot machines, and at the time I didn't know that they had been stolen, and I was arrested, well I was threatened with arrest, so my father [Lawrence Guyot, Sr.] hired Bidwell Adams to defend me.  So we go down to Bidwell Adams' office and Bidwell Adams talks to Gaston Hewes [ph.], who was a Republican conservative hound dog who had a list of black men he had sent to Parchman prison [Mississippi State Penitentiary, Parchman, Mississippi].  Mine was to be the next one on the list.  And the conversation began that Bidwell Adams called the prosecutor and said, well, I got a young man here, he's on his way to Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi], he comes from a Catholic family.  No, he's not black, he's creole, and I didn't correct him okay, and he says but I want, this is a, comes from a good family, he's going to Tougaloo.  I don't want there to be any problems with these slot machines.  So Gaston said, "Well, I'm going to send him to Parchman," and Bidwell Adams said, "well, okay," and I looked at my father, we must be in the wrong place, but he continued.  He said, "Okay, if I hear any more about these slot machines, I'm a call for a federal investigation of all the gambling on the Gulf Coast and I'm gonna make sure that everyone understands you did it."  Now at the time, I was seventeen.  I'm now sixty-six.  I've never heard another word about those slot machines.  And it drove home to me the power of politics, that everything is political, that everything can be dealt with and that there is no such thing as a forum in which you can't compete if you have the information or the right contacts.  My father and I left that office and he nor I ever heard about those slot machines again.  I went off to Tougaloo, and because I was able to go to Tougaloo, I was able to become involved with the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee [SNCC], become chairman of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party [MFDP], run for Congress, become a delegate to the '64 [1964] Democratic [National] Convention [Atlantic City, New Jersey], and '68 [1968] and really have an impact on that state.  Had I gone to Parchman at seventeen, we wouldn't be doing this.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Story_ID: 244162
Speaker 1: You had mentioned that your grandmother [Matilda Piernas] could have passed if she wanted to.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you ever remember hearing any stories when you were growing up about people who passed, or even did you know, did you have family members who passed?
Speaker 2: There were more black people who left Pass Christian [Mississippi] as black, and stopped being black as soon as they hit the state line of Mississippi.  My family knew them, talked about 'em, but didn't expose 'em.  Yes.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Lawrence] Guyot how far back can you trace your ancestry?  Do you know if your people came from free people, slaves?  How far back can you trace your ancestry?
Speaker 2: Well, I tell you what we got on record.  My wife [Monica Klein Guyot] and I looked at a genealogy segment, and we ran across the interview of my Uncle Louis Piernas done by a WPA [Works Progress Administration] worker, in which he makes these statements.  He said, "I saw the Civil War on Bay St. Louis' [Bay St. Louis, Mississippi] beach."
Speaker 1: So was this part of the [Federal Writers' Project] slave narratives?
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.  Now he was not a slave--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But that's what it was.  It was part of that, and I, and I heard it, I could, I didn't hear it, but I read, read the interview.
Speaker 1: Just for clarification, this was your uncle?
Speaker 2: This was my, that's right, my, my grandfather's [Jules Piernas] brother.
Speaker 1: Wow.  Okay.  Great.
Speaker 2: That's right.  Now he talked about how he had seen the Civil War fight on Bay St. Louis, on the beach.  Now his mother [Adele La Bat] had purchased an original plot of Bay St. Louis, so that family, my family is tied into the State of Mississippi, well in the beginning of that town.  And Bay St. Louis adjoined- was a couple of miles from where I lived.  Bay St. Louis was in Hancock County [Mississippi].  I lived in Pass Christian in Harrison County [Mississippi].  So my grandfather would tell me of times when he had whites living in his house, and one of them told him, said Ju--and he was feeding them.  They were too poor to feed themselves.  But my grandfather told me how one of them told me said, "Jules, you know, the thing that makes me maddest of all is for a black man to give a white woman mail." Because the patronage of the black-and-tan Republicans at that time were postmasters.  They were black, and there was, of course, opposition to this by whites.  And I always was reminded of the irony of here's someone who's eating simply because of the goodwill of my grandfather, but who felt that they could freely discuss racism with him and that somehow he wouldn't be opposed to it.
Speaker 1: Do you think that we, we hear this sometimes, that he perhaps saw your grandfather as the not really black?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no.  My grandfather--we, our family made it very, very clear we were black whether you thought we were or not, whether we looked-- and some of them--. I got a brother who looks more white than white folks.  I mean, but he lived his life like a black man and we lived, that was very clear that, we, well if you were a Piernas or a Guyot, you may look white, but you're black.  You act, you thought, you behaved and expected to be treated like that, period.
Story_ID: 244163
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your grandparents.  Starting first with your paternal grandparents, and would you please tell us their names?
Speaker 2: Their names are Victoria Guyot [ph.] and my father's name was--
Speaker 1: Your grand-Jules, was it Jules?
Speaker 2: Paternal?
Speaker 1: Paternal, yes?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, yes, paternal.
Speaker 2: Paternal?
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: My, Nora Guyot [ph.] and Franklin Guyot [ph.], okay.
Speaker 1: And did you spend a lot of time with them growing up?
Speaker 2: I didn't, I spent time with them, but not a lot of time with them.  I spent more time with the Piernas grandparents [Matilda Piernas and Jules Piernas].  We lived one houses apart, one house apart, you know, and there was the milking of the cows--.
Speaker 1: What can you tell us about the Guyot grandparents?  How would you describe them?
Speaker 2: They were creole.  My grandfather-my grandmother, Nora, spoke Creole all of her life.  She used English but she primarily spoke and thought in Creole.  They were, my, he was a master carpenter.  He was very industrious.  Worked hard, very, very Catholic.  They lived about six houses from the Catholic church and, for all practical purposes, they could have lived next door to it, they were there so often.  But very family-oriented.  Very supportive, very committed to living a life to the fullest extent possible in a non-threatening city like Pass Christian [Mississippi] was.
Story_ID: 244164
Speaker 1: Now let's talk a little bit about your maternal grandparents, starting with their names and just what you remember about them?
Speaker 2: Matilda Piernas and Jules Piernas.  My grandfather was the kind of man who, I guess one of the proudest days of my life was when--he and I both used to read the newspaper together, and we used to both watch a guy named Ronald Reagan [ph.].  We didn't like his ideology, but boy did we love his delivery.  And, I guess, one of the proudest, I was eight years old, and my grandfather leaves me in front of the Catholic church for me to read the Bible, Paul's letters to the Ephesians and the Galatians, right?  Well I think I could have walked on clouds then, because this was something that he and I liked and this was something that I was doing publicly in an ecclesiastical, you know, in an ecclesiastical setting that just sent a mark throughout the community and this sort of thing.  My grandfather used to be the one to make sure he would drive me to Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi], drive me to catch the bus to go back to Tougaloo, or he'd be the one to meet me at the bus stop.  He was very aware of the fact that I was gonna be the first one in our family, both of our families, to graduate from college.  As he lay dying in '68 [1968] with his, with cancer, he talked about, "Well, now that they've killed [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], what are y'all gonna do?"  I said, "We're gonna fight just like as though he were here." And he was very concerned about political advancement.  We got the Chicago Tribune, no, the black paper from Chicago [Illinois], the Chicago Defender.  We got it off the train, delivered to our house and it was past to other houses.  We never discussed that with white people.  Despite the total absence of racial violence or racial (unclear), we just felt that was our business.  But when my grandfather died, there were a thousand people at his funeral.  My grandfather was a man who had a lot of black ministers, black ministers as his friend.  Now, we're in a time now when my grandfather was moving around, there were two kinds of people.  There were Catholics and there were atheists, okay?  But his friends were Baptist and they loved to talk to him, and I felt so sorry for these Baptist ministers, they would meet outside of his house every Sunday, about ten or twelve of 'em, and they would decide what they go and convince my grandfather of.  And my grandfather had this habit of saying, if you said to him, Mr. Jules, we're going fishing.  He'd repeat the word fishing.  And I watched him pulverize intellectually these ministers every Sunday and they leave firmly convinced of what he wanted them to be convinced of, and just as firmly convinced that they had convinced him.  And after a while I couldn't stand it anymore, I said, you're one of the smartest men I've ever known, why do you repeat that word?  He said boy it gives me a little bit more time to think about what I'm gone say.  I never asked him that question again.  But he taught me in that lesson, he taught me the power of listening.  I  never forgot it and anywhere I do leadership training, and the first thing I do is give, give the group a question that deals with listening, 'cause I've learned that in order to work with people, in order to organize people, in order to get people, be organized around their self-interests, you've got to listen to them.  Listen to what they say, listen to what they don't say.  I also learned working from door-to-door, never go into a place--I did a lot of voter registration door-to-door, never ask whose child that is?  Okay, because the answer may be pulverizing, but I--. Go ahead--.
Speaker 1: Was your grandfather a well-educated man?
Speaker 2: No, my grandfather was, well let me put it this way, traditionally, no.  In actuality, whatever he wanted done, he got done.  If it was a negotiation with the bank, if it was making sure that some things were done or not done.  He'd build anything.  He was the most Catholics of Catholics I've ever, he--there was a Catholic Youth Organization [CYO] building in Pass Christian [Mississippi] today.  He built it with his hands.  I mean he got others to feel that it was a part of their commitment and they were, and I'm sure he got them to feel they were going straight to hell if they didn't help him, but that's the way that happened.  And see, when I grew up in those, in that time, if you were building a front porch, there were fifteen or twenty people invited to build a front porch.  There was hams and chickens and beer purchased and it was a collective action.
Story_ID: 244165
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Lawrence] Guyot tell me, what is your earliest memory of growing up [in Pass Christian, Mississippi]?  What is one of the first things that you remember as a child?  Your earliest memory.
Speaker 2: One of my earliest memories--was how big my family was, that there was a lot of people, a lot.  I lived on a street, I could walk from one end of the street to another and never see anyone I wasn't related to.  That was one of my first impressions.
Story_ID: 244166
Speaker 1: Can you kind of describe your community for us, the town that you grew up in, can you describe (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pass Christian, Mississippi was, was and is, a most unusual place.  Everyone knew everyone else.  There was some relationships that transcended race.  I never did quite understand that. The relationship that we had with the the Pavalinos [ph.], I just knew that we had one and there was the Pavalinos and the Piernases, right?  There were the Guyots and the Swanees [ph.].  So it's a, it's a very, very well-read, had very good schools.  I mean I remember adults talking about contests.  You know you got a, you got some feed and the chicken and you got a boat and you got to get, what, what's the transaction, how do you get 'em across the river and all this kind of--I, I was just kind of astounded at how the general level of dialogue and smartness of people in that town.  We had good--my brother who passed recently, remarked of the years after we left there.  We had high school teachers who would, would be able to compete in any college now, who drove us relentlessly, that, you know, you could learn, you will learn and if we have to break your arms, we'll do that, but you're gonna, you're gonna learn here.  The State of Mississippi has a policy.  It has nothing to do with our policy, so we were the beneficiaries of a good education.  We did not have, suffer racial violence.  If you wanted to register to vote, you registered to vote.
Speaker 1: Where is Pass Christian in relation to the state?
Speaker 2: It is on the Gulf Coast.  It is sixty miles from New Orleans [Louisiana], it's twenty miles from Biloxi [Mississippi] and ten miles from Gulfport [Mississippi].  It's a--I'll tell you what kind of town it is.  I was waiting on a--serving a party before I went to Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi]. I'm the only--and we're in a room about the size of this studio.  I'm the only black in there and I'm serving whiskey and what have you, and a lady walks, sits at the bar and she says, "Well [HistoryMaker Lawrence] Guyot, Mr. Guyot, well I want to ask you a question" (unclear).  I said, "All right."  "So now Sammy Davis, Jr. and May Britt just got married, what do you think about that?"  I looked at her and I said well I'll take that Coke [Coca-Cola] case right there and I'd knock those people down and I'd get out that door and everything will be fine, but I'm gonna answer the question directly.  Now you have to imagine now once she's asked that question, no one in the room is saying anything.  They're waiting for my answer.  So I said, "Well, I think if two people get in love they should be the only ones to decide whether or not to get married, regardless of whether or not, what their color, whether or not they have any hands or feet or what have you."  The doctor who's giving the party rushes over to me and I brace myself, I said, "Well let me get my Coke case."  He said, "I want you to handle all of my parties from now on."  I said, "Oh, I can't do that, I'm going to Tougaloo.  Let my uncle do it."  He said, "No, I want you to do it--" he said, "--because I believe in what you just said."  Now this is a doctor operating in Pass Christian, Mississippi.  To his credit, every time I was arrested, and I was arrested a lot, he would call his white friends in the town I was arrested and find out what condition I was in and called my mother [Margaret Piernas Guyot] and let her know that everything was all right, if it was all right.  So I learned the inexplicable lack of intellect and lack of predictability of racism.  I had been and always, and at that time I was an integrationist, I've always been an integrationist, I will always be an integrationist and I was prepared to take whatever consequences there was to that, but I wasn't going to step away from it. Because I think you just don't do that.
Story_ID: 244167
Speaker 1: We were talking a little bit during the break about Ma Marina [ph.], a woman in your town [Pass Christian, Mississippi], tell us a little bit about her.
Speaker 2: Ma Marina was a former slave who described to us in detail what that meant to her.  She was hooked up like a mule to a plow and she was forced to plow ground.  She ate out of a trough.  She was treated in the worst possible way.  She survived.  She became a member of our town and our city.  She was totally respected by everyone.  If Ma Marina felt an urge to use the bathroom at your--and she was walking, she knocked on your door.  And no one said no.  I mean, she was totally accepted and totally treated as a heroine in our town.  Now I don't know of any other experience that we had with an actual ex-slave, but Ma Marina taught us all that about resilience and about--. And Ma Marina to her credit wasn't a very religious person.  She was a very pragmatic person.  And she talked about what she had gone through and she dared that any of us to think that we couldn't do as well.  She reminded me of an old saying: when we all die, we gonna meet our slave ancestors and they gonna ask us, what did ya'll do with your freedom, compared to us, and what did you do to free other people?
Story_ID: 244168
Speaker 1: Would you please give us your siblings' names and their birth order, including yourself?
Speaker 2: My siblings, you mean my brothers?
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: Well, that's easy.  I was born in '39 [1939].  Albert Guyot was born in '38 [1938], Raymond [Guyot] was born in '37 [1937], Jules [Guyot] was born in '36 [1936].
Story_ID: 244169
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Lawrence] Guyot, tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up in Pass Christian [Mississippi].
Speaker 2: What sights?  The water, the sight.  The sound of food being cooked, and the smell of okra.
Story_ID: 244170
Speaker 1: Do you have any other memories that really stand out of growing up in Pass Christian [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Well, I, one is that I was in a Catholic school, Catholic elementary school.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: St. Philomena School [Pass Christian, Mississippi] and I was such a good student that I skipped the sixth grade.  And the teachers were so darned demanding that I was proud to be able to do that.  Then I went to Randolph High School [J.W. Randolph School, Pass Christian, Mississippi] and from, I was the, I went there, I graduated from St. Philomena to eighth grade.  I go to Randolph High School in the ninth grade.  By the time I'm in the tenth grade, I'm the principal of the, I'm the janitor of the high school.  I'm paid four hundred dollars a month.  I keep--
Speaker 1: Four hundred dollars a month?
Speaker 2: Four hundred dollars a month.  I, I cleaned the school, I get other people, hire other people to help me do it, but I am the janitor.  And I'm the janitor because we had a principal named a--Murray [Leon] Creshon [Sr.], and Murray Creshon thought that I had a lot of potential as a leader and he befriended me, but he also challenged me.  He said now if you will do the work, I will hire you as the janitor.  And I did the work and got hired as a janitor and did a good job.
Speaker 1: Four hundred dollars a month.  That was a lot of money.
Speaker 2: Oh, that was a hell of a lot of money.
Speaker 1: What did you do with your money?
Speaker 2: I gave it to my family, which I was expected to do.
Speaker 1: Wow, four hundred dollars a month and what year, this was in early '50s [1950]?
Speaker 2: This was, I graduated from Randolph High School in 1957, so this was from '55 [1955] to '57 [1957].
Story_ID: 244171
Speaker 1: Let's go back a little bit to elementary school [St. Philomena School, Pass Christian, Mississippi].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What type of student were you in elementary school?
Speaker 2: I loved school.  I loved to read.  I loved to talk.  I loved to debate.  I did not like mathematics, but I was good enough in other areas that I did not have to--my, my--you know the irony of it is my brother, Albert [Guyot] was a mathematical genius, and I had trouble multiplying.  But I understood that it was something that I wasn't gone learn and I haven't and I've been able to live without it.  I wouldn't recommend that to anyone, but concentrate where you have strength.
Speaker 1: And when you were in elementary school, do you remember some of your teachers?  Were all of your teachers nuns?
Speaker 2: All of my teachers were nuns.
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of the sisters?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, yes.  Some of them, you have to understand the sisters, the sisters were rigid.  One sister accused me of trying to hit her and I did not try to hit the woman, but she sends for my mother [Margaret Piernas Guyot] and my mother looks at me like I done killed fifteen people.  Here's my best protector in the world, believing this damn nun.  I never quite lived it down, but I did not try to hit her, okay?
Speaker 1: Why does she think you tried to hit her?
Speaker 2: I think it has something to do with throwing a ball and she thought I had done it in an ugly and angry mood, threatening mood.  But I'll tell you, what I liked about school was that that, the Catholic church had good schools and the Catholic church was very supportive of blacks registering to vote, very supportive of blacks whenever they got into racial problems, and was committed to desegregation.  The Catholic church desegregated its schools before anyone else in Mississippi ever thought about doing so.  And made it very clear, if you don't like, it, we'll excommunicate your ass.  I mean if you don't like it, don't, don't bring it to us, I mean just accept it.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Oh, my friends were--I had a lot of cousins.  They were, they were close, certainly friends of mine, and--.
Speaker 1: Did you have a best friend when you were in elementary school?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Story_ID: 244172
Speaker 1: You know one thing I didn't ask you about is when you were growing up, what were holidays like in your house?
Speaker 2: Oh, Christmas was big.  Christmas was something to wait for all year.
Speaker 1: Did you travel from house to house or did you all congregate mainly at one relative's house?
Speaker 2: No, no, it was very clear.  With us it was very set.  Everyone in the family went to midnight Mass on Sunday, the Catholic Church.  Then you could spread out to any house you wanted because the regime was pretty much the same.  There would be gumbo, chicken, ham, potato salad, you know.  Lots of food, lots of gaiety.  And the exchange of the presents would be within each family, but that would vary.  It would depend on how things were doing in the economy at the time.
Speaker 1: And, so during elementary school [St. Philomena School, Pass Christian, Mississippi], during those years, that time frame, did you do your first penance and First Communion?  Do you remember those?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes.  I did--
Speaker 1: Was it a big event for each child in your family?
Speaker 2: Well, let's put it this way, our family was so Catholic that we did it without thinking about it.  I mean, you mean, there wasn't any question, you were gonna go to church, you were gonna go to communion and you were going to get communion and you would, you know, this way, catechism was really teaching the Catholic faith in, you know,
Speaker 1: Were you an altar server?
Speaker 2: I don't remember being an altar boy.  May have on one occasion, but I don't think it became habitual.
Story_ID: 244173
Speaker 1: During the elementary school years [at St. Philomena School, Pass Christian, Mississippi], what type of child were you?  Were you well-mannered, mischievous (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: What type of child were you?
Speaker 2: I was smart, pedantic, ambitious, arrogant.  My father [Lawrence Guyot, Sr.] told me one time, he said, "Boy, there's a right way, there's a wrong way and there's your way."  And he loved me an awful lot, but he just at times found me to be a problem.
Speaker 1: Were you just a little too--did you ask a lot of questions?  Were you very inquisitive?
Speaker 2: I asked an awful lot of questions and once I found out something that I--I learned early the power of information.  I did not hesitate to express my opinion, and I, when I was in high school, I differed with my father on Murray [Leon] Creshon [Sr.] because my father wanted to get Murray Creshon removed from being the principal of the school and I fought with him and all of his friends, Horace Labat and all them.  Very power people, very influential because they had been very-it was always been very clear to me that these were good people, they were committed to my education and to the education of black people, but I didn't understand why they had a problem with the principal, right.  So I learned, there was a, a parting event for him and I got a chance to speak at it and I talked about Murray Creshon was to Randolph High School [J.W. Randolph School, Pass Christian, Mississippi] what Babe--Babe Ruth was to Yankee Stadium [New York, New York], and I saw people start crying and whatever.  And I learned the power of being able to communicate with people, to paint a visual picture for them and have them have to deal with it.  And I never unlearned that.
Speaker 1: During the elementary school years, during that time in your life, did you have dreams and aspirations?  What did you want be when you grew up?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be a doctor.
Speaker 1: Why did you want to be a doctor?
Speaker 2: I just thought that was the best way to help people. And I went to Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] in 1957, convinced that I was going to be a doctor, and then I ran into chemistry, and I decided that of all the things I could be, a doctor wasn't going to be one of them.
Speaker 1: And so, so you went from elementary school from first through eighth grade?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So during like the middle school and the junior high school years, sixth, seventh and eighth grade, what type of student were you?  Were you still the same studious type of young man?
Speaker 2: I was very studious.  I was the janitor, I was--
Speaker 1: The junior high school, like the junior high school years, sixth, seventh and eighth grade.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's not junior, well to me, to me the division is eighth grade and then ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I was a good student.  I was very socially conscious, very politically aware and very, very grateful that the Catholic church made it clear, we don't tolerate discrimination, we don't, and we will defend anyone's right to vote and we don't think anybody should be messed with on, on any question of race.  When I was, when I go to Randolph High School--.
Speaker 1: Hang on one second, [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Lawrence] Guyot.  Let's go back a little bit.  So toward the end of elementary school--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --tell me a little bit about what type of young man you were starting to become and what were some of your interests?  What did you do during your spare time?
Speaker 2: I had my first job when I was seven years old.
Speaker 1: What was that?
Speaker 2: I was selling hot dogs and trinkets on the highway to tourists.  Okay.  The various jobs I've had was that.  I've worked as a longshoresman.  I've cut grass, I've run dice games, I've sold liquor, I made liquor, I've worked as a longshoreman at the age of fourteen.  I became a member of the International Longshoremen's Association at the age of fifteen.
Speaker 1: So, um--
Speaker 2: I have always understood that work was available.  I've mixed concrete.  I've helped people build houses, and I understand that a lot of what I did then is no longer available as work to young people.
Story_ID: 244174
Speaker 1: So, now, let's talk about high school.
Speaker 2: Okay, high school.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Randolph High School [J.W. Randolph School, Pass Christian, Mississippi], and my uncle, Louis Piernas, sat down with me and told me who Mr. [J.W.] Randolph was, why they named the school after him, and all of that. So I have--everything that was happening to me told me over and over and over again that politics is good, these are some people who succeeded in politics.  I know them, I trust them.  They are good people.  Ergo, politics is good and fine and natural, so get, get ready to make it work for you.
Speaker 1: Who was Mr. Randolph?  Who was he?
Speaker 2: Mr. Randolph was a black Republican who had been very, very active and became a hero politically and economically and that's why the name was chosen.
Speaker 1: What was his first name?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's okay.  Do you remember some of your teachers from high school?
Speaker 2: Oh my God, yes.
Speaker 1: Was there any one or two that had a particular influence on you?
Speaker 2: Alberta Sinclair [ph.].  Taught my father [Lawrence Guyot, Sr.] and then taught me and one day she caught me cheating.  And she said, "Oh [HistoryMaker Lawrence] Guyot, don't you worry, I'm not going to tell anyone you're cheating."  And I felt so embarrassed.  I felt like I had, like I had cut my mother's [Margaret Piernas Guyot] leg off because it was this particular woman, right?  And I was cheating and I looked around for an inkwell to dive in and I never forgot that and I never cheated again.
Speaker 1: What were you cheating?
Speaker 2: I was cheating on some kind of test and she caught me dead and loud mouthed me, and this was certainly one of the most respected women in the town.  This is someone who had taught my father, someone who everyone knew, I mean someone who, this is the woman who taught me about the Tigris [River] and Euphrates River.  This is the woman who taught me about we are, we built the pyramids.  Don't let anybody tell you we didn't.  And she catches me cheating?  Oh my God.
Speaker 1: As a good Catholic boy weren't you afraid of cheating?  You think that was--
Speaker 2: I was more afraid of her than I was of God.
Speaker 1: So when you're in high school, you're still thinking you're going to be a doctor?
Speaker 2: I'm still thinking I'm going to be a doctor, and when I'm in high school, I run into some excellent teachers, Alberta Sinclair is one of 'em.  R. T. Brown [sic. T.B. Brown] who read a book every week.  Ms. Godean [ph.] who was my, pardon my express, mathematics teacher.  But then I met some other, I met Felix Dunn's wife.  [Dr.] Felix [H.] Dunn is an institution.  Felix Dunn was involved in the beach sit-ins, wade-ins with [HistoryMaker Dr.] Gilbert [R.] Mason [Sr.].  His former wife was one of my teachers.  I got, I got an excellent education and I understood very clearly how excellent it was when I went to Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi].  I got into Tougaloo College by an academic scholarship.  A.A. Branch came to Biloxi, Mississippi and said okay, we're having exams for people who want to perhaps come to Tougaloo.  I did very, very well.  I got a-- I joined into Tougaloo in 1957, and I found out that if you played football, there would be another scholarship.  So for the first time in my life I played football.  I played it very well.  Tougaloo was--
Speaker 1: Hang on one second, Mr. Guyot.  Let's go back for a second.  In high school, what kinds of activities were you involved in?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was the janitor, I shot dice, I studied very hard, I--
Speaker 1: Was shooting dice an organized--
Speaker 2: Naw, naw, that was not part of the curriculum but you asked what I did.
Speaker 1: Wait, were you any good at shooting dice?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was pretty good.
Speaker 1: What about the debate team?
Speaker 2: I was on, I was very much involved in debate.  I was very good at basketball and I found out that I would not be selected for the all-star team, so my next decision was to make sure that I selected the people who were on the all-star team.
Speaker 1: Politics again.
Speaker 2: I loved it, I played it and I got it--I had some excellent teachers.  I was committed to the fact that I was going to college.
Story_ID: 244175
Speaker 1: How did you know you were going to college?
Speaker 2: Because I knew that I would do everything necessary to do it, regardless--
Speaker 1: But why, why were you thinking you could--
Speaker 2: Because I loved to read.  I loved power, I was ambitious early.  I knew that I could compete with anyone I'd known, and formally, and college was the way to do that.
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your--so when you are in high school [J.W. Randolph School, Pass Christian, Mississippi], were you influenced, who were you influenced by while a high school student?
Speaker 2: Murray [Leon] Creshon [Sr.], a grocer named R.C. Rounds [ph.], my father [Lawrence Guyot, Sr.], Alberta Sinclair [ph.].  I had a lot of people who got me to understand there's power in information and it can be taken by anyone who's willing to take it.
Speaker 1: And what year did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-seven [1957].
Story_ID: 244176
Speaker 1: And let's go back, you had talked earlier about an incident that occurred when you were seventeen.  You bought these slot machines.  What were you going to do with the slot machines?
Speaker 2: Make money.  I was going to open 'em up and calibrate the rates just right and put 'em out for people to play with them.
Speaker 1: And you got the money from your job as a janitor?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 244177
Speaker 1: In 1957 you know that you're gonna go to college and you get a scholarship.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: At this point, actually just tell us a little bit about your first day on campus.
Speaker 2: It was wonderful.  On the first day on campus, I meet Ernst Borinski. Ernst Borinski is a Jew driven out of Germany who has come to work at Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi].  There's been a book been written about him and people like him called 'From Swastika to Jim Crow[: Refugee Scholars at Black Colleges,' Gabrielle Simon Edgcomb].  Ernst Borinski is a friend of Dr. St. Elmo Brady from Washington, D.C. who's one of the best chemists ever that lived in the world.  I meet David Broder from The Washington Post.  He's been invited there by Ernst Borinski.  Ernst Borinski is a guy who brings together blacks and whites and he arranges the seating so that a black is forced to sit by a white (unclear).  Ernst Borinski is a man who was pressured by the [Mississippi State] Sovereignty Commission because they knew--people understood what he was doing.  He had a theory that some institutions are functional only by the absence of function, which fit directly into what the Democratic Party was. I met--on Tougaloo's campus I meet Ed King [Edwin King], who was the chaplain of Tougaloo who later becomes one of the participants in the Freedom Election [Freedom Ballot] as a lieutenant governor.  I met [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] at Tougaloo College in 1957.
Speaker 1: He came to speak?
Speaker 2: He came to speak in Woodworth Chapel, and--
Speaker 1: What was your impression of Dr. King?
Speaker 2: Oh, I thought he was tremendous, I thought--but to be quite frank with you, here's the situation.  We all gathered in chapel, there's Martin Luther King brought by Aaron Henry with one of the most beautiful women I've ever seen in my life.  And she's introduced as his wife [Coretta Scott King].  And after a while, it becomes very, very clear, this ain't Martin Luther King's wife.  So Aaron Henry being the smart politician that he is, said, "Wait a minute let me straighten out one thing now.  The Sovereignty Commission is too active in Mississippi.  This is not Mrs. Martin Luther King." On stage, at the chapel of Tougaloo College.  And we, being the sophisticated group that we were, always said alright, now let's go on, don't nothing happen, and it, it taught me that Martin Luther King was a man of tremendous respect and statute and we did not fall into the trap of saying, oh well, if this is not his wife and he-we just gone leave here.  We're not interested in what he has to say.  And it taught, I begin to understand the power of the black community to separate personal predilections from political function.  A minister can be personal with everybody in his flock as long as he's doing his job and the black community will support him.  Martin Luther King was an example of that, but not the only example of that.  I learned that, it had an impression on me and I was very proud of it.
Story_ID: 244178
Speaker 1: While you were at Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] is this when your interest in civil rights started to develop.
Speaker 2: At Tougaloo I get, I meet [Dr.] John Salter [Jr.] who teaches me everything I need to know about socialism.  I meet [Ernst] Borinski who teaches me that politics must be relevant to people and their time and their reference and it must be about things that they want, land, food, enjoyment, entitlement, power.  I meet A. A. Branch.  A.A. Branch is the dean of Tougaloo.  A.A. Branch also has a lot of other significances.  A.A. Branch says to us, okay, you can go to desegregate libraries, you can go register voters, you can go to jail, just take your books with you because we're going to test you just like--there are only two colleges in the South and if anyone ever tells you anything else, they're lying.  There are only two colleges in the South that persuaded students to be politically active.  That's Tougaloo College in Mississippi and Miles College in [Fairfield] Alabama.  No other (unclear).  At Tougaloo, A.A. Branch is one of the people who challenged the license of WLBT [Jackson, Mississippi] and Kay Mills has written a book ['Changing Channels: The Civil Rights Case that Transformed Television'] recently about the station that changed television.  A.A. Branch walked into the COFO office, the Council of Federated Organizations, in 1964 and I saw him with the papers that led to the challenge because WLBT refused to show positive black programs.  When [Thurgood] Marshall of the [NAACP] Legal Defense [and Educational] Fund spoke on television, he was blacked out.  There were technical difficulties.  And I was able to see that WLBT was turned into the first black-owned television at NBC affiliate by political activity, and I knew the people who did it.  I knew Aaron Henry, I knew Young [ph.] from Meridian [Mississippi], I knew Harding Carter [ph.], and it was--. You have to understand, Tougaloo was a, a desegregated faculty and student body and it was threatened with destruction by the State of Mississippi.  The Campbell College [Bonner Campbell Institute, Edwards, Mississippi] I'd seen destroyed.  Campbell College was a Methodist college that was very committed to civil activism.  The State of Mississippi took it by eminent domain.  What used to be Campbell College is now part of Jackson State College [Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi], so I was very glad to be at a institution that stood for the proposition that radicalism and what is ethical is not only condoned here, it's promoted, it's expected.
Story_ID: 244179
Speaker 1: How did this sit with you?  What was, because it's interesting to me that you come from a town [Pass Christian, Mississippi], a very moderate town in the South where blacks are respected and treated well and that kind of thing, and are very learned, so how does this all kind of mesh together?
Speaker 2: I'll tell you how it meshed.  At Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] I read a front page editorial, not editorial, but an article in The Clarion-Ledger, legislation will be introduced to relocate blacks so that no state will have more than ten percent of their population black.  That actually happened.  It didn't get out of the committee, but it was done.  I also meet people.  I meet the son of Ralthus Hayes.  Ralthus Hayes is one of my heros, but I didn't know that when I met him, his son, but I found out Ralthus Hayes lives in Holmes County [Mississippi], 80 percent black and not one registered voter.  I meet people from Leflore County [Mississippi], 80 or 90 percent black, not one registered voter.  I meet people from Yazoo City [Mississippi] where the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was driven out because they, in 1954, they tried to desegregate the schools, so here I am, I mean voting--what do you mean you don't register, I register anybody I want and my daddy [Lawrence Guyot, Sr.] register anybody, whether they want to register to vote or note.  And nobody interferes with 'em.  It then became clear to me that that's what I was going to concentrate on.  I meet people from SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and I get involved with Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses], [HistoryMaker] Dorie Ladner, [HistoryMaker] Joyce Ladner.  They are NAACP young ones.  They been fashioned by Vernon Dahmer, Medgar Evers, Joan Trumpauer [Mulholland] who lives over in Arlington [Virginia], was a white transfer student.  Now she's Susan Joan Mullholland, but we, Tougaloo was committed to liberation of its students and the rest of the world.
Speaker 1: And what year did you graduate from Tougaloo?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-four [1964] and I was in jail at the time so a teacher named Loyst Chaffey [ph.] accepted my diploma for me.
Speaker 1: And you received your degree in what?  I know it wasn't in medicine because you--
Speaker 2: It was in biology and philosophy.
Speaker 1: And why were you in jail?
Speaker 2: Because I tried to register some voters and that wasn't found acceptable by the sheriff at that time.
Speaker 1: So were you just compelled by the injustice of it all?
Speaker 2: I was, I was compelled by the injustice of it all, but I was so grateful to the people who were fighting because I got strength and courage from them.  I mean everyone that I ever took to register to vote knew a couple of things.  One, their name and address was going up in the newspaper the next day, two if they owed anybody money, if they worked for anyone of this-if they had a loan out or a job, all of that was put at risk.  And I still am impressed and in admiration of the people of Mississippi.  There was no more oppressed state, but yet no more creative state.  The white people took the position that we are gon' control you niggers in every way possible and black folks said, I don't think so.
Story_ID: 244180
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Lawrence] Guyot, when did you first become involved with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]?
Speaker 2: I met Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] in 1961.  And I had been involved in voter registration in my hometown [Pass Christian, Mississippi].  Early we invited Medgar Evers to my home town and Medgar Evers looked at us and said ya'll don't have no problems, relative to the rest of Mississippi.  Wallace [ph.], Rile [ph.], myself and others invited him.  He talked, we told him what the situation was and so I met Moses in 1961.  I didn't go to the founding conference of SNCC, but I was invited to it by Moses.  But I was already there.  I was committed that SNCC was doing the right thing.  [HistoryMaker] Dorie Ladner, [HistoryMaker] Joyce Ladner, we were all headed in that direction.
Speaker 1: You're often referred to as one of the original members of SNCC.
Speaker 2: Well I was as it relates to Mississippi.  There was, the people in Mississippi were Charles McLaurin, Jesse Harris, Charlie Cobb [Charles E. Cobb, Jr.] who was passing.   Charlie Cobb tells a story about he was on his way to a nonviolence training school in Texas.  I said Charlie don't you worry about it.  I'll teach you all that I know.  He stayed for five years and became a legend in Mississippi and as you know is now a nationally-known correspondent.  It was Levon Brown, Lafayette Cerney [sic.], Colia Liddell [Lafayette Clark].  These were Mississippians.  Charles McLaurin said very clearly-Charles McLaurin is one of my heroes.  Charles McLaurin is a native Mississippian who said very clear, he said if the Civil Rights Movement hadn't come along, I would have been killed or would have killed a white man by the time I was twenty-two.  But the Civil Rights Movement allowed him to be able to use his energies to fight (unclear).  Charles McLaurin wrote his own reapportionment plan, argued it before three, a three-judge panel, of the race, most racist judges in the South and I just loved him.  There was a book that recently came out called 'Let the People Decide[: Black Freedom and White Resistance Movements in Sunflower County, Mississippi, 1945-1986,' J. Todd Moye] and it's about the politics of Sunflower County [Mississippi].  Charles McLaurin was Fannie Lou Hamer's campaign manager and he was a delegate to the [1964] Democratic National Convention [Atlantic City, New Jersey].  He was, was and is, I mean today he's one of the leaders in Sunflower County and one of the leaders in the state, and so we had these band of people, eighteen of us and there was this guy named Moses who had gone to Amzie Moore and they pretty much developed that voter registration would be the key in Mississippi, no school desegregation, not lunch counters, not beaches, and I loved that because I believe, I'd learned that politics makes a difference.  I, I was--I never went through the anti-political hysteria that some of my dear friends did.  Nor have I to this day.  I believe that everything is political and therefore you can get things done.
Story_ID: 244181
Speaker 1: We are meeting, we're living at 714 Rose Street, Jackson [Mississippi] and we decide we're going to the [Mississippi] delta.  [Robert Parris] Moses is negotiating with Amzie Moore.  Amzie Moore says well things are not ripe here yet, why don't you go up and visit my friend C.C. Bryant, McComb [Mississippi] and all hell breaks in McComb.  There's a documentary called 'Freedom Song' which talks about that.  [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover produced that.  And--
Speaker 2: Were they expecting you or did you all--
Speaker 1: I didn't go to McComb.  I'm still in Jackson.  See, I'm going, I'm doing my agitating in Jackson and they go to McComb and they pick up Hollis Watkins and Curtis Hayes, [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry comes there and leads demonstrations.  A lot of the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] people move into McComb and they catch holy hell.  But a lawsuit is filed out of there.  Dawkins versus United States [ph.].  This is the first time we get the federal government involved.  We learn in McComb, even though SNCC is driven out, that we can fight, black people will fight with us, regardless of how, you know you have Herbert Lee killed and left out there publicly.  You have a witness [Louis Allen] to his killing being killed at the time that we're talking about whether or not there's going to be a freedom election, I mean a summer project which pushes Moses to say definitely there's going to be a freedom summer.  Dave Dennis from CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] was presiding at the first day of the meeting whether or not there's going to be a freedom summer.  The real supporters for it were myself, Fannie Lou Hamer.
Story_ID: 244182
Speaker 1: Now Fannie Lou Hamer we met in 1962.  She attended a mass meeting at which I was present, [Robert Parris] Moses was present, [Charles] McLaurin was present and others.  So we take, I was--
Speaker 2: Annie Devine and [HistoryMaker] Victoria Adams present as well?
Speaker 1: No, not at this meeting.  This was in Sunflower County [Mississippi].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I helped take her to register to vote, and Fannie Lou Hamer becomes very, it becomes very clear to us early that we haven't produced a leader, we've just found one and we just facilitated her and worked with her and let her natural talents--Fannie Lou Hamer was a religious zealot who firmly believed in Jesus and freedom in that order.  And I intend to believe that she thought the two were inseparable.  She could talk about three different segments of the Bible and then wrap them all up in less than ten words like no one I've ever seen.  Her sense of timing was unbelievable.  She could sing just as well, and so we had--finding people like this and our job was to not build SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] chapters.  You got to understand SNCC had the, a lot of people who were ministers or had been to ministerial school who could work in the church.  The Nation of Islam was trying to organize in the South at the same time we were.  They didn't have access to the churches.
Speaker 2: Where the people were or to be able to reach--
Speaker 1: Ecumenicalism as we know it today did not exist then.  You were either a Baptist or a heathen, a Catholic or a heathen.  You know, I mean, none of this squeamishness about naming the name of the people of the Lord as you saw fit, but there was none of this cross-pollinization down there, you understand?  SNCC was able to move right into that void because it was the black church that provided the legitimacy to protest that funded the buildings, that owned the buildings and had the (unclear) of God, I mean, every society, even those that didn't have it right had the messianic expectation.  Well, it's not stretching it too far to say here was the messianic expectation here.  Someone will come and help God take care of your enemies, and so we had access early and we usually got--you know one of the untold stories of this period is that women run the churches.  Women today run the black churches.  If black women decided one month they weren't going to church, there wouldn't be any black churches.  You understand that?  So, our strategy was to work with the people who led the churches, then work with the young people, then work with the men.
Story_ID: 244183
Speaker 1: We had a firm position that we would challenge every registrar, and as I've said earlier, the registration process was simple.  You had to interpret to the satisfaction of the registrar any of the 285 sections of the Mississippi constitution.  Some of those registrars were illiterate so that became quite an interesting development, and your name and address posted in the local newspaper, and so if you, in effect, declared war on the State of Mississippi if you were black and attempted to register to vote, but thousands of people did because they understood that politics was the answer, politics was both the cause and the answer to their problems.  In 19-, in this period there was no Republican Party in the South.  The Democratic Party was all.  Every elected official was a Democrat.  The Democratic Party existed once every four years they have to go off to a convention.  Otherwise it broke down into you run this county, he runs that county and he runs that county.  Now the policy of the Democratic Party was rabid racism.  If you didn't believe in racism, you couldn't be in the Democratic Party.  Now, we had fought for the right to vote.  We had conducted a Freedom Election [Freedom Ballot] in 1963, we had conducted the Freedom Summer in 1964, and the reason the Freedom Summer was done was because of the large number of FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] agents, press and absence of violence occurred during the freedom election.  You don't have to be a genius to understand we needed those preconditions in order to be able to operate.  The way to bring them in, we had to get that done, was one of two ways, either bring Mississippi to America, or bring America to Mississippi.  It was easier to bring America to Mississippi.  That's why the summer project.  We were being picked off.
Speaker 2: The [Mississippi] Freedom Democratic Party [MFDP].
Speaker 1: I'll get to that.
Speaker 2: That hasn't happened yet?
Speaker 1: That hasn't happened yet.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We took the position that we needed to bring people in to put the spotlight on Mississippi.  This was, this is what is being done in your name.  You say you live in a democracy, this is the part of the democracy we want you to see, so we invited volunteers to come.  People responded.  In 1962, we'd taken the precaution of pulling together all of the civil rights organizations and one organization, NAACP, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, CORE, the Congress of Racial Equality, SCLC, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, and that great institution, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee [SNCC] were all consolidated in a group called COFO, the Council of Federated Organizations which had originally been established in 1954 to meet with--when [Governor] Ross Barnett met with the black leadership of, and attempted to persuade them that we don't need to rush this school desegregation thing and this is graphically covered in a book called 'Local People[: The Struggle for Civil Rights in Mississippi'] by John Dittmer, in which one of the toms, Barnett looked at the back of the room and saw him, said, the meeting wasn't going right, so he decided to call on him.  He said, "Now reverend you agree to this withholding of this."  He said, "Oh no Governor," he said, "I've thought about it and prayed with the Lord, and this is the law and we've got to obey the law," and Barnett is reputed to have left and said, "You can't even trust the toms anymore."
Story_ID: 244184
Speaker 1: So let's talk about Freedom Summer.
Speaker 2: All right.  Freedom Summer, okay.
Speaker 1: And what was happening in Hattiesburg [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Well, Hattiesburg is a little bit different now because we started our activity in Hattiesburg in 1963.  As the leader of the project there, I issued a call for all major religions to send a delegation to Hattiesburg.
Speaker 1: Was that a nucleus of Freedom Summer pretty much?
Speaker 2: It begins.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: See because the National Council of Churches sent a representative from every major religion.  You name a religion, it was a representative in Hattiesburg.  We expected people to be arrested, and this is all covered in 'Pillar of Fire[: America in the King Years, 1963-65'] by Taylor Branch.  Well, the State of Mississippi we can't be arresting all of these religious people.  How do we explain it to--?  They didn't arrest us.  So then, it became a question of mental jujitsu.  People outside the line had to get in the line not to be arrested, so that's what happened.  But, in effect, what we did was involve the National Council of Churches in the Freedom Day in Hattiesburg, Mississippi around the question of voting in which there was no arrests.  That was unparalleled in Mississippi.  So we then decided, well from that flowed a couple of things.  The Delta Ministry was established in the state.  We now had a working relationship with the National Council of Churches.  The National Council of Churches worked with recruiting and training the volunteers for the '64 [1964] summer project and they later on worked with us in the 1965 [Mississippi] Congressional Challenge.  The (unclear)--me and James Forma, [HistoryMaker James] Forman, Forma of CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] got in to see the president that replaced [President Richard Milhous] Nixon because his bishop told him to see us.  And he made it clear that his bishop had told him and he does what his bishop says.  My point is, the National Council of Churches was a very effective ally that opened a lot of doors that we couldn't open.  Now '64 [1964], Freedom, Freedom Summer of '64 [1964] was multi-faceted.  The NEA and the AFT, the National Education Association and the American Federation of Teachers both came to Mississippi to fight for the curriculum of the freedom schools.  It was just that good.  It is still considered that good today.  You had the Wednesday group headed by [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height, in which white women came from across the country to Jackson [Mississippi] on Wednesday.  They were briefed on what was happening throughout the state.  They then left and went and talked to their senators, their congressman and local newspapers because it made a difference if a white person from Minnesota was arrested.  It made quite a few difference if [HistoryMaker] Lawrence Guyot from Pass Christian [Mississippi] was arrested, because you were about building national attention, national mobilization and the Wednesday group was very effective in doing that.
Story_ID: 244185
Speaker 1: What was the reaction in Pass Christian [Mississippi] to your involvement in the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: I'm so glad you asked that question because it is so fascinating.  My favorite uncle, Roy Piernas, who lived right next door to me saw me one day and said the mayor wants to talk to you.  I said okay.  So I was walking up his steps, he said no don't call him from my house.  This is my favorite uncle, okay?  I said okay, so I went and someone else had called the mayor and we went down and talked to the mayor and the chief of police.  They said, "Well now [HistoryMaker] Lawrence [Guyot], we know how ya'll operate and we want ya'll to understand that if any of that happens here, we gonna have immediate arrests.  We're not gone have anything--." I said, "Look, ya'll got to do ya'll job, I got to do my job.  And, you know, you not gon' tell me what you're gon' do and I'm not gone tell you what I'mma do, and we'll just gone and see how it works out."  So we much had that conversation, I pretty much walked away from him.  Now my, my uncle was concerned, you know the mayor wanted to talk to me and this sort of thing, and I was surprised at his behavior, but I'll show you.  That was 1964.  In 1965 we have the Voting Rights Act passed.  In 1966 he runs for constable in that town.  Same uncle, okay.  He didn't win but I'm, I'm showing you how quick the transformation was for people who were afraid to people who were running for political office.
Story_ID: 244186
Speaker 1: When is the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party [MFDP], when is that organized and established, year (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, 1964.
Speaker 1: This is after Freedom Summer?
Speaker 2: This is, this is at the culmination of Freedom Summer, and Freedom Summer we wanted to document that we could get white people and black people living together working together politically, that we could create the kind of tension that would force the federal government to become more involved in the question, making the fifteenth amendment a reality.  As you know, [Michael] Schwerner, [James Earl] Chaney and [Andrew] Goodman were killed at the beginning of the move to Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Actually, you were supposed to be riding with them.  What happened?
Speaker 2: One of the best things that ever happened to me, a young lady made an offer I couldn't turn down and saved my life.  I mean I knew Mickey Schwerner.  Mickey Schwerner was not a volunteer.  Mickey Schwerner had been there.  He had invited me, I visited he and his wife [Rita Schwerner] in Meridian [Mississippi].  They showed me the library, everything and he asked my opinion, should we go back to that church?  I said sure we should.  And my argument was there was so much national attention on this that there's no way anything can happen to ya'll.  I was tragically wrong and I communicated my deep regret to each of their parents, but that's what, I was involved in the discussion with them in Ohio.  I was interviewed by NBC about an Agent X who was also there, who followed them and who communicated with the highway patrol, and we now know who he is.  So--
Speaker 1: When you heard they were missing, did you know?
Speaker 2: I knew, I mean, I knew because he was very well trained and there was no way that they would have not called.  I don't care if they had to, whatever it took to get a call into Jackson [Mississippi], if they were alive, they would have done it.  When they didn't do it, that was it.  Now--
Speaker 1: Okay, so why was there a need to create this organization?  What did you all want to achieve?
Speaker 2: Well, what we wanted to do was continue in our fight.  Well, let me talk about killing of Schwerner, Chaney and Goodman.
Speaker 1: Oh sure.
Speaker 2: The State of Mississippi was mobilizing us as though there was going to be an armed invasion.  They showed pictures of them practicing using the shotguns.  They had the Thomas tank and all of this kind of foolishness.  They passed laws against political insurrection against political whatever, trying to prevent all kind of political behavior.  Well, what they didn't realize was that the camera and the newspaper that followed the volunteers was the real arsenal, and we then simply proceeded to conduct our freedom schools. Hattiesburg [Mississippi] was the most open schools, there were more freedom school students in Hattiesburg than anywhere else in the state but we put them throughout the state.  The [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK] sent its message by burning crosses in sixty-two of the eighty-two counties in Mississippi.  We filed a lawsuit called COFO versus Rainey [COFO v. Rainey, 1964] asking for federal protection.  That was turned down, and we ran the summer project around freedom schools, worked with federal programs, voter registration, political education, mobilization and following on the '63 [1963] summer project, the '63 [1963] Freedom Election [Freedom Ballot], we then decided that our problem in Mississippi was the Democratic Party, its racist policies and we had to fight to get into that or change it nationally.  We fought and where we could, we participated in their precinct elections.  Where we couldn't, we conducted our own.  We established a parallel organization.  We got Joe Rauh [Joseph Rauh] and others committed to defending us.  We brought a challenge and the--the process was rather simple.
Story_ID: 244187
Speaker 1: Each convention can determine who its members are from any state.  We set out to challenge them, we did so and we did it to, we now know from the [President] Lyndon [Baines] Johnson tapes, that Lyndon Johnson personally spent a lot of time stopping us from being successful.  That was one of his major expenditures of energy in the White House [Washington, D.C.].  Lyndon Johnson took the position that if you seated the Democratic Party, he would lose the South.  I didn't believe that then, I don't believe it now.  But he, in a book called Racism--'Racial Matters[: The FBI's Secret File on Black America, 1960-1972'] by Kenneth O'Reilly, he documents that there were twenty-seven FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] agents sent to Atlantic City [New Jersey], and they had two responsibilities.
Speaker 2: This is where the [1964] Democratic Convention is taking place--
Speaker 1: Atlantic City, that's right.
Speaker 2: --in 1964.
Speaker 1: That's right.  These FBI agents were sent to there with two purposes.  One, watch everything Robert [F.] Kennedy does and two, infiltrate the [Mississippi] Freedom Democratic Party [MFDP] and destabilize them.  The White House had dossiers on everyone who was in the delegation.  There was a famous--we were moving out, developing our strength.  Fannie Lou Hamer appealed before the Credentials Committee.  She gave one of the best political speeches ever given.  In it she questioned America if the Freedom Democratic Party was not seated.  Lyndon Johnson attempted to pre-empt her by calling an emergency press conference, simply for the purpose of stopping Fannie Lou Hamer.  Well, at that time there were three networks, ABC, NBC and CBS.  All of them played Fannie Lou Hamer's speech in its entirety that evening, prime time.
Speaker 2: That wasn't supposed to happen?
Speaker 1: None of that was supposed to happen.  Lyndon didn't work that in the equation.  Well, all hell broke loose, because telegrams were coming from everywhere, seat the Freedom Democratic Party.  Lyndon, and I'm quoting him, said we can't have black people from Illinois, California and Ohio voting to seat an all-white delegation and then go to them in November and ask them to vote for us for president.  That's what Lyndon Johnson said.  So his strategy was to stop a floor fight at all cost.  Well, we had thirteen--now remember as chairman of the Freedom Democratic Party at the time, I'm in jail in Hattiesburg [Mississippi].
Story_ID: 244188
Speaker 1: Do you ever feel like, you're in jail in Hattiesburg [Mississippi], and all of this is taking place, in Atlantic City [New Jersey], was there ever a time afterwards when you felt like you didn't really get the credit that you deserved because it took a level of organization to get all, to get the ball rolling, to get the folks to Atlantic City, and here you sit in jail while, you know, Annie Devine, Fannie Lou Hamer, [HistoryMaker] Victoria Adams, they steal the show.  What were some of your feelings about that, personal feeling?
Speaker 2: All right.  Absolutely, contrary to everything you've said, number one, I knew them.  Number two, without the support of Fannie Lou Hamer, Annie Devine, Peggy Jean Connor, Victoria Gray and Unita Blackwell, I would have never been elected chairman of the [Mississippi] Freedom Democratic Party [MFDP].  Number two, I trust them, and number--I told Peggy Jean Conner to tell Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] that there was to be no compromise.  She came to visit me in the jail in Hattiesburg.  Peggy Jean Connor was the secretary of the Freedom Democratic Party, Peggy Jean Connor was the woman who put a razor by the bus driver's neck and said if you stop this bus, I'm a cut your head off.  When white people tried to stop the Freedom Democratic Party coming back from Atlantic City, a nice little petite lady beautician, I believe she'd cut the boy if he had messed up.  Now, these were people I trusted.  I, I, and I'm, I don't think that I could have done any better than Fannie Lou Hamer did, or than that delegation did, because, if you remember, that delegation was phased through--.  First of all, let me tell you about a historic incident.  It was a small meeting between Courtland Cox, who is a very trusted and very well established man in the history of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], and Bob Moses, and Courtland Cox has the list of the thirteen people that we need to have a roll call.  And Bob Mo--and Charles [C.] Diggs [Jr.] walks up and Bob Moses said don't give him the list.  And Courtland Cox said do you think this man would turn the list over to the White House [Washington, D.C.]?  Courtland gives Charles Diggs the list.  Charles Diggs calls it in promptly to the White House and the White House then begins to put pressure on those thirteen people.  The delegate from California called and said look your husband can be a federal judge, all you got to do is stop voting for the Freedom Democratic Party.  A delegate from New York is called.  You're getting a lot of money from OEO [Office of Economic Opportunity].  We're prepared to work with you, stop voting for the Freedom Democratic Party.  So our list, the delegate from California goes into the meeting and she's crying.  She's been told that if she votes with us, that her husband would not be a federal judge, but she comes in, she says I've talked to my husband and federal judgeship or not, I'm voting what's right.  She votes with us.  But our list of thirteen has been cut to eight, which means we can't get a floor fight.  So then there's a question of okay, now that we've saved [President] Lyndon [Baines Johnson] from what he wanted not to happen, we've got to, they had to make it look good.  We'll give ya'll a compromise.  No before we get to the compromise situation, Fannie Lou Hamer is in a room with Hubert Humphrey and Hubert is sitting there trying to explain how liberal he is and how he loves black people and everything and Fannie Lou Hamer says to him, says, "Mr. Humphrey, do you mean to tell me that your being vice president is more important than us helping to change the lives of 600,000 people?"  She said, "If that is true Mr. Humphrey, I'm a pray for you."  She said, "Now if this is what you (unclear) if that's the question, you don't need to be vice president because you're giving up too much to be vice president," and Hubert started crying now and what happened, and he swears he'll never be in the room, never talk to this woman again and he doesn't.  They will never meet again in life.  So what we had was a classic confrontation of a person who really looks at this as an ethical problem and Hubert looked at it as if I don't stop this problem, I'm not gone be vice president because that's what Lyndon told him.  So you then have a fight to define what is--then there's a meeting at the church, where every civil rights leader comes and said, "Look y'all ought," Roy Wilkins comes and says, "y'all have won, y'all just don't understand this.  Declare victory and go home, (unclear)."  [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] comes and said, "Look as the national civil rights leader I think shall should accept this compromise but if I a member that delegation, I wouldn't vote for it."  Bob Moses, of course, said do what you wanna do.
Speaker 1: And meanwhile all of this is being reported to you back at the jail?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, so then the delegation to its credit decides not to accept a compromise which would have seated two people, Aaron Henry and Edwin King.
Story_ID: 244189
Speaker 1: I was very satisfied with how it was going, how it was being led and history bears me out.
Speaker 2: And you were in the loop because you were getting reports and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay, so [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Lawrence] Guyot, the delegation says we're not going to accept the compromise.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Now was it reported though that they had, in fact, accepted the compromise?
Speaker 1: There was an attempt to do that and, and, then that was beaten back.  Then there was the meetings by the various civil rights and political leaders to try to persuade them to accept it.  And then that was turned down.  Then Bayard Rustin led a fight to say that these people are communist inspired.  They don't understand the difference between protests and politics and wrote this in Commentary magazine and he said, you know, they won, they just didn't understand that they had won, and Joseph Rauh and Al Lowenstein [Allard K. Lowenstein] come to Mississippi while I'm in jail and they said you know this is a great victory.  There is nothing wrong with the [Mississippi] Freedom Democratic Party [MFDP].  All we need to do is change leadership.  Because Aaron Henry had split with us right?  Aaron Henry is who, I'm sure, they had in mind as the new leader.  But Aaron Henry was chairman of the delegation but I'd been elected chairman of the Freedom Democratic Party, and we went right on into supporting the election of Hubert Humphrey and [President] Lyndon [Baines] Johnson, went right on into building the Democratic Party and we then, we after that, we, the president calls a conference to secure these rights in Washington, D.C.  Michael Thelwell writes the White House [Washington, D.C.] a letter saying, on behalf of the Freedom Democratic Party, you know, we don't understand how we, those of us who fought for you in Mississippi and delivered you most of your votes have not been invited to the White House inaugural.  And the president, the White House caves in very quickly and they invite us to the inaugural.  Hartman Turnbull [Hardiman Turnbolt], who was a legend.  Hartman Turnbull is accused of burning his own house and some white people went there and he just shot 'em out of the way, defended his home.  They arrested him and I had the honor of getting him out of jail because Hartman Turnbull was Hartman Turnbull, the sheriff of Leflore County [Mississippi] signed a reciprocity bond that the sheriff of Holmes County [Mississippi] had to recognize.  So I got him out of jail and Mr. Turnbull, once Michael Thelwell had forced the White House in inviting us to the inaugural, called Michael.  He said, "Michael I want you, the little man with the, in the post office carrying around these big envelopes and they inviting us to the inaugural."  Said Michael, "I got something I want you to do for me."  Michael said, "Mr. Turnbull what do you want me to do?  I'll do whatever you ask me to."  He said, "Look, I want you to find out what ball the governor, governor's wife is going to.  I wanna dance with her."  And I thought, and I said, you know, this is so much like Mr. Turnbull, and he was one of the bravest men I had ever met.  Whenever he put his pants on, he put a gun on and his wife carried her gun too.  They just felt that nonviolence was fine for those fools who wanted to practice it, but they weren't gone participate in it.  But the, there's no question he was a legend in Holmes County.  Holmes County was clearly the best organized county in the Freedom Democratic Party and in the, in Mississippi, there's a recent book called 'Freedom is a Constant Struggle[: The Mississippi Civil Rights Movement and Its Legacy,' Kenneth T. Andrews] with him on the front page, and there's nobody more worthy than him.  So what the Freedom Democratic Party was, was a combination of people who had fought, a combination of people who understood what fight was, and a combination of people who were committed to bringing about fundamental change in the Democratic Party.
Story_ID: 244190
Speaker 1: So in 1965, we look around and we say, well, the congressional delegation that represents us does not represent us.  Section II of the fourteenth amendment is clear.  It says if you do not allow people the right to vote, you cannot sit in this Congress.  So we met with a congressman named William Fitts Ryan and we started opening up a challenge and he stood up, and when he stood up 162 congressmen stood up with him.  Because people originally thought, we can't get people to support this congressional challenge.  We were represented by Arthur Kinoy, Morton Stavis, and they did a brilliant job of writing a legal brief that supported our political activity but the political mobilization was done by Michael Thelwell and Jan Goodman.  They organized, and a book has been written about this called 'The Challenge' [sic. 'Mississippi Challenge'] by Mildred Pitts Walters and what they did was get support for us and it finally came down to a vote on the day of the full congress, and in the end, before that vote was developed, we had the right to subpoena anyone we wanted in the State of Mississippi, so we subpoenaed the governor, we subpoenaed J.P. Coleman [James P. Coleman], we subpoenaed everybody.  We'd bring them in the black community and sit 'em down, swear 'em in and we have somebody who was in the Civil Rights Movement there interrogate 'em.  They were under federal subpoena.  They had the answer, we made the record and we, that was our way of empowering our people in our community that you can be a part of this, that you can play a major role, that this person has a relationship of power elsewhere but not in this setting.
Speaker 2: What happened with the [1965 Mississippi] Congressional Challenge?
Speaker 1: What happened with the Congressional Challenge was a congressman named McCullough [ph.], a liberal Republican said, on the floor of the house, you go in the Congressional Record and find it.  So we have a choice, we can either unseat the congressional delegation or we can strengthen the Voting Rights Act [of 1965], and that's how Section Five got put into the Voting Rights Act.  Now Section Five is what really made the Voting Rights Act the most important piece of legislation ever passed because under Section Five, it's very clear, it says if a political subdivision considers a change in the voting pattern, in the voting laws that has the potential of diluting the power of the vote, it must meet two tests.  One, they can either go before a three-judge panel in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.] or they can be pre-cleared by the [U.S.] Department of Justice.  Now if it does not do either of those, it's null and void.  Let me tell you about the power of reading.  I read a book called 'Gideon's Trumpet', written by Anthony Lewis, it's about the right of indigents to have, be represented, but in that book Lewis paints [President] Lyndon [Baines] Johnson as a pure thief.  He stole his election to become senator and once I realized that, I said I better go back and read the '65 [1965] Voting Rights Act again.  That's how I found Section Five, and once we used it in Mississippi, took it before the [U.S.] Supreme Court, civil rights lawyers throughout the South used it, and there's a book called 'Political Participation[: A Report of the United States Commission on Civil Rights]' which is the 1968 report of the Civil Rights Commission that documents how we began that, how we got the idea, what we did in Atlantic City [New Jersey] and what we did in the courts, so the [Mississippi] Freedom Democratic Party [MFDP] was fighting on every front to make sure that we opened up the Democratic Party to people who would not have been able to get in. Now, today whatever this day is, 50 percent of every delegation to the Democratic National Committee [DNC] wherever it's held, has to be female.  We won that fight by changing the delegation process so that the political bosses could meet in a private room and select who the delegation was.  That, that happened because of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party.
Story_ID: 244191
Speaker 1: There were a lot of very prominent women in the [Mississippi Freedom Democratic] Party [MFDP].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Very much out front and can you just talk a little bit about like the role of women in the Civil Rights Movement and particularly in politically, in MFDP.
Speaker 2: The Freedom Democratic Party had some very strong women.  Fannie Lou Hamer, Annie Devine, Unita Blackwell, Peggy Jean Connor, Miss [Hazel] Palmer, people who were tremendously strong, who had a constituency and at one time I even asked them, you know, hold your horses a little bit, let some men come in here.  I wish to God I'd never said that because I, I, it became clear to me that these women had fought for and earned their status, their profile and I knew that the largest number of people in the party were female, that there was a whole psychology in politics but not in the Freedom Democratic Party that says the political institutions like the church, and like a lot of other civil rights groups were predominately based, financed and supported and the members were female, but the leaders were male.  Here's an instance where the leaders were both male and female and no one questioned Fannie Lou Hamer, no one questioned Annie Devine, no one questioned [HistoryMaker] Victoria Gray.  They had risked their lives on their own.  When Fannie Lou Hamer, Victoria Gray and Annie Devine are on the floor of the house when it's voting, Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] gets pissed off.  Adam said well if y'all go on the floor of the [U.S.] House [of Representatives], it's just gonna antagonize people and we gonna lose votes.  Well, they came to me and to Ella Baker and they said what decision, what should we do?  Both Ella Baker and myself said y'all make the decision.  Whatever y'all make, we said we back you up.  So they decided to go sit on the floor, right?  And we had the McCollum [ph.] speech saying we got to strengthen the '65 [1965] Voting Rights Act and we lost the vote technically, but we won the Voting Rights Act so Fannie Lou Hamer didn't make it any better.  She went into Harlem [New York, New York] on WABI and she blasted Adam Clayton Powell, called him a Tom who wasn't befitting of life.  Adam to his credit, called the station and apologized.  I mean most people wouldn't have taken Adam Clayton Powell on directly.  Fannie Lou Hamer didn't hesitate.  She was just waiting for the opportunity and when she got it she used it.  So I think that what we were able to do with the Freedom Democratic Party was, make the case that you can organize people around their own self-interest and they would take on anyone just so long as they see the connection between the fight and their interests as they define it.
Story_ID: 244192
Speaker 1: One thing we didn't really talk about but we did mention.  How, how many times were you jailed and collectively would you say how much time have you spent in jail?
Speaker 2: I spent two months in Parchman [Farm; Mississippi State Penitentiary, Parchman, Mississippi] naked and my crime there was simply registering people to vote.  There were sixty-eight of us.  I've been arrested in Hinds County [Mississippi], numerous occasions in Forrest County [Mississippi], Greenwood [Mississippi] on quite a few occasions, but I, my, my thing is this, I think at that time it was an empowering experience to be arrested.
Speaker 1: Empowering?
Speaker 2: Empowering.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: Well, because we were about the job very clearly of changing the body politics in the state.  I believe, and I've always taught people that the value of something can be showed not by its monetary, not only by its monetary value, but the extent, time, money and energy that will be used to prevent you from using it.  The best way to, we concentrated in the Mississippi movement only on the right to vote, the right to organize political parties, the right to run for office.  We did so because we understood that that determined everything else.  The board of supervisors usually five of them that controls the counties, that board can determine whether or not a plant comes in, whether or not there's a hospital there, whether or not people eat, who eats, whether or not the roads are paved.  The road can be paved right up to your door, stop there and start on the other side of your property, so we were able to graphically point out that politics is about results and politics determines who gets one, what, for how long, under what conditions and what are the conditions under which it stops.  If you defy, if you can name it, it's a political determination that either provides it or denies it.  So what we had was an excellent legal team combined with the courageous political team that took on the State of Mississippi.  Peggy Jean Connor filed a suit.  A beautician from Hattiesburg, Mississippi filed a suit too.  Connor versus Johnson [Conner v. Johnson, 1971] to reapportion the State of Mississippi.  Fannie Lou Hamer filed a suit to turn over the election in Sunflower [County, Mississippi], overturned it.  It had been conducted, she had it overturned.  Had to do it again.  [HistoryMaker] Victoria Gray filed a lawsuit that stopped the payment of poll tax in Mississippi.  Clifton Whitley filed a case of Whitley versus Johnson [Whitley v. Johnson, 1966], which went before the [U.S.] Supreme Court which expanded Section Five to mean that if you did anything that had to do with the voting rights, voting at all, it was covered.  We did that.  So we, the [Mississippi] Freedom Democratic Party [MFDP] not only did with the right thing in Atlantic City [New Jersey], we didn't give up when we came back to Mississippi.  We supported the re-election of [Vice President Hubert] Humphrey and [President Lyndon Baines] Johnson, but we also made sure we supported other people like Fannie Lou Hamer, like Annie Devine, like Victoria Gray.  We challenged the congressional delegation.  We were moving in the challenge of the congressional delegation at the same time that the federal government was suing the State of Mississippi in the case of United States versus Mississippi [United States v. Mississippi, 1965], attempting to declare all of their laws with voting illegal.
Story_ID: 244193
Speaker 1: And so in 1966, you decide to throw your hat into the political arena.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about what led up to your congressional bid.
Speaker 2: I was against the war in Vietnam.  I thought that we could register people to vote to do that.  I thought that we, I would run against a guy named Eddie Khayat so it was [HistoryMaker Lawrence] Guyot versus Khayat, and we had fun.  I went to one television program and I gave blistering anti-Vietnam speech and I walked out to the car and there were five white men out there waiting on me.  I said well, God, it's about time for me to go, and they were out there waiting to congratulate me, that they had agreed with me on Vietnam and this sort of thing.  I felt that this was a campaign that it really didn't matter to me whether or not I won, but it did matter to me whether or not I made the fight, and I was very proud of it.
Speaker 1: And what were the results of that?
Speaker 2: I got 15 percent of the vote.  In Mississippi being against the Vietnam War.
Story_ID: 244194
Speaker 1: So at this time when did you begin thinking about going to law school?
Speaker 2: Most of my life.  I thought that I saw some great lawyers.
Speaker 1: Throughout your civil rights activities?
Speaker 2: Met 'em personally, worked with 'em.  In 1963 myself, Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses], and Dave Dennis met with Arthur Kinoy, Morton Stavis, Benjamin [E.] Smith from New Orleans [Louisiana] and we, these were left lawyers.  These were lawyers at the lawyers guild, but they were brilliant.  And we, there was this whole thing, if you can't work with them, they had been tainted with red-ism, you know the anti-communist thing, right?  My question to them was if we work with y'all, will y'all follow the decisions we make.  And they said yes.  And that's all I needed.  I'm not in, I wasn't interested in, you know, political affiliations, I was interested in pragmatic delivery of legal services to us as we saw it when we need it, and they did that.  They stuck to it and we, they stuck to their part of the agreement and we stuck with theirs.
Speaker 1: So in 1968 you make the decision to go to law school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You go to Rutgers [Law School, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about what your experiences are like there and what are your experiences like at Rutgers.
Speaker 2: I'm [gonna] tell you why I go.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I'm a delegate to the 1968 Democratic [National] Convention [Chicago, Illinois] and because what has happened is the [Mississippi] Freedom Democratic Party [MFDP] has hooked up with the loyalist.  They get 50 percent of the delegation and we get 50 percent of the receded.  And I go to visit my doctor, he says well, if you go back to Mississippi, you got about five months to live.  So I decided, well, hell what am I gonna do now?  I said I'll go to law school.  Arthur Kinoy gets me into Rutgers Law School.
Speaker 1: Why did you only have five months to live?  Why did he--
Speaker 2: Well I had a lot of physical problems.  I was overweight, I had high blood pressure, my kidneys were failing, you name it.  I was in bad shape.  Subsequently I've had a kidney transplant seventeen years ago.  But, so I decided to go to Rutgers Law School and I loved it.  Arthur Kinoy was one of my teachers.  I had very, Ruth [Bader] Ginsburg who now sits on the [U.S.] Supreme Court was one of my teachers.  It was a heck of a educational experience for me.  But I got a chance to learn some of the theories that I had so admired at a distance and I got a chance to meet some of the people who had made the law a reality and I got a chance to, I shocked some of the people who was in a corporation class with me when we were talking about what is the role?  I said the role of corporations is to make money, get power and extend its sphere of influence and everyone was shocked.  [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Lawrence] Guyot, you're such a liberal radical.  I said but that's the answer to the question because I've always been able to separate political reality from my political beliefs until I can change my political beliefs into political reality.
Speaker 1: What was the, did you have a favorite course in law school?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, constitutional law with Arthur Kinoy.  Arthur Kinoy was a historian who then became a lawyer.  So in Arthur Kinoy you had some of the best legal talent in America.  Arthur Kinoy defended Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] successfully before the Supreme Court getting him reseated.  Arthur Kinoy in a case called Jones versus Mayer [Jones v. Mayer, 1968] pointed out the connection between the thirteenth amendment and the badges and the (unclear) of slavery, so he's a brilliant man.
Speaker 1: What about evidence?  Was that a favorite course, evidence?
Speaker 2: (Sound).
Speaker 1: Not really?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: And so what were you thinking that you wanted to do with your law degree?
Speaker 2: Well I wanted to do was to develop a skill and use it to train other people and that's what I do.  I don't practice law. I work with Operation Understanding which is a combination of young Jews and young blacks. I work with Close Up [ph.] that bring people from all over the country and I get a chance to work with them and talk with them.  I work with the Columbia Heights Development Corporation.  I work with a group called Teaching for Change that has just put out an excellent, one of the, what I consider the best book ever written about the Civil Rights Movement.  The title of it is 'Putting the Civil Rights Movement Back into Civil Rights Teaching' [sic. 'Putting the Movement Back Into Civil Rights Teaching,'].  I worked with a group called The Conference, the Council on African Affairs.  They just produced a documentary and that documentary goes to getting young people committed to civic engagement.  It's an excellent documentary.
Speaker 1: Let's go back a little bit.  Tell me little about what the climate was like at Rutgers--
Speaker 2: At Rutgers?
Speaker 1: --in the late '60s [1960s]?  Was it pretty liberal or what was the climate like?
Speaker 2: It was very liberal, very exacting.  Political education was there.  They were the, they were one of the first law schools to use computers to work with the law.  The political program was one of the best in the country.  I mean the standard of, I mean I remember in the case of the [President Richard Milhous] Nixon tapes, most of the law school closed down and came to the Supreme Court.  That's the kind of atmosphere you had.  We had some of the best lawyers in the country, and the other good ones came there to conferences and to work with the, with Kinoy or Stavis or--
Speaker 1: So the exposure to legal minds was very high?
Speaker 2: Very fertile, very open and very, yes, very productive.
Story_ID: 244195
Speaker 1: After you earned your law degree [from Rutgers Law School, New Jersey] in 1971, what did you do next?
Speaker 2: I came to Washington, D.C.  First of all I went to work for Mary Holmes Junior College [West Point, Mississippi].  I raised money for them and then I came to work for Pride Incorporated [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: This is in 1971?
Speaker 2: That's 1971.
Speaker 1: And you said Mary Holmes Junior College?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: In (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: No, a Presbyterian school in West Point, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Mississippi?
Speaker 2: And then I came to Washington and began to work for a group called Pride Incorporated which was a CEDA funded program located at 16th [Street] and U [Street] and I, I found while working there that most of the young people, and we had young men from thirteen to nineteen, I forced Pride to give them medical examinations, right?  We found that a lot of them had never been to a doctor, never been to a dental--I'm talking about Washington, D.C.  So then I began to understand that there was two, there were a couple of Washingtons, one of 'em was very much like the Mississippi I left, and others were sort of, you know, well-placed nice homes, two family incomes, but the two didn't have very much to do with one another.  In the end, later on, [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry gets elected to the city council and Marion Barry gets elected to the mayoralty and I didn't support him in that race because I thought that he could not beat Walter Washington.  My advice to Marion was run for the chairmanship but you can't beat, well he beat (unclear) Washington, and then I went down for a job and he gave me--
Speaker 1: Do you remember Marion Barry from your civil rights--
Speaker 2: Of course.  Marion Barry not only is from Itta Bena, Mississippi.  But Marion Barry played a key role in helping us pull off the summer program because there were some in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] who said well, you know we not really sure, so Marion, we could've, we could have done it without his help, but his help was very useful.  So he passed a resolution saying that SNCC should support the summer project in Mississippi and that SNCC should use whatever number of students it wishes, it deems necessary.  Well, we felt that we had the power to make that decision in Mississippi but that, that cut off all of the discussion, okay?  It was very helpful, plus Marion had been to Mississippi.  He worked in McComb [Mississippi], he had led demonstrations there when he and lot of other people could have been killed, he had proved his--he had earned his spurs in Mississippi at a time when death was a possibility.
Story_ID: 244196
Speaker 1: Let's go back to Pride Incorporated [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now tell us a little bit about what the goal of the organization was and what your role was.
Speaker 2: Pride was a CEDA funded program.
Speaker 1: What is that?
Speaker 2: It was a training program funded by Willard Wirtz who was the [U.S.] Department of Labor to contain young people.
Speaker 1: It was just for young men then?
Speaker 2: It was for young men, yes, and women, young men and women.  And this was a political fight and they Mary [M.] Treadwell and [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry was smart enough to get the money, get the funding and my job--
Speaker 1: Is Marion Barry's wife at this time?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  This was before, but anyway yes.  So my job was to make sure that these young men were both involved in the job training.  We also wanted to add the health dimension and the political dimension to their growth.  So we invited Chuck Stone [Charles Sumner "Chuck" Stone, Jr.], politicians in there.  We talked about politics but I also wanted to push them into getting these health screenings and I was met with reluctance you know because they build a record made of 'em, but I think we got more out of that than they would have gotten otherwise.
Speaker 1: And what years did you work with Pride?
Speaker 2: I worked for Pride from I think '70 [1970] to '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: And what did you do next?
Speaker 2: Next I went, I became a city employee.  Marion Barry was the mayor.  I went down to Marion Barry and I said look, I want a job and I got a, I began working for the district government at a grade [General Schedule (GS)] 11-7.  It takes people a lot, at that time, it took people a lot of years to earn a grade 11 without the 7, so Marion Barry was good to me and I've been very good to Marion Barry.
Speaker 1: What were you doing as a district government employee?
Speaker 2: I worked in the department of employment, no I worked in DHS, the department of health and human services, and I was able to work, we had a good time, what's called an emergency rent assistance program.  Marion Barry once introduced me to a man.  He said this here is the most independent employee in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.].  They were two people who ran the department of housing and one of them said we gonna kick the people out of public housing because they're not paying their rent.  And I thought that was the most idiotic thing I'd ever heard, so I said okay I want two other conditions imposed on that.  Number one, we give each one of them individual notice of this fact, and number two, we let them know them that they are all eligible for the emergency rent assistance.  So we took the emergency rent assistance, paid the bill and shut the people up but kept 'em in those houses, so I was able to influence the lives of people because not only did I believe in that, I felt that what I was doing was very consistent with what I'd done at SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].  I was just paid better and I had insurance.  But I also was confident that I had the support of Marion Barry.  Now when we disagreed, it was on the question of homelessness.
Story_ID: 244197
Speaker 1: We're going to begin [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Lawrence] Guyot with me slating the tape by saying that my name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton and I am the interviewer and Rick Warwick is the cameraman, Sam Hyder is our audio technician today. And today's date is Wednesday, November 17th, 2004, and this interview is taking place at WHUT-TV in Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 244198
Speaker 1: Now when we last left off, [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Lawrence] Guyot, we, you had gone into the [HistoryMaker Marion] Barry administration and said that you, your biggest difference was when it came to dealing with the homeless.  What were the differences with you and Marion Barry in terms of home, the homeless?
Speaker 2: Marion Barry and I agreed on 99 percent of everything else.  He's a man I admire.  I was working in his government and I was, he was open enough for me to openly disagree with him politically, campaign against him on this issue.  It turned on the question of 3.2 million dollars that was available for the homeless that Mitch Snyder did not want the city to accept.  Mitch Snyder was an advocate that worked with a group that committed itself simply to housing advocates, homeless advocacy.  That meant that in order for us to get the money, I set up a group called the Coalition for the Homeless.  We met at my house and we were committed to getting, accepting the money, buying houses and running a homeless program.  That meant that I had to fight [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory, [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson, Marion Barry, Dave Clarke [David A. Clarke] and Mitch Snyder but we fought them because we took the position that it was one--first of all, we thought that it was totally irresponsible, regardless of how well-intentioned, to allow 3.2 million dollars for the homeless to go back to the treasury as a form of protest.  We would much rather spend that on the homeless.  We fought that fight, we won it.  Marion Barry and I have always remained close politically and it was a time when we both had a difference, we fought it out publicly.  I won.
Story_ID: 244199
Speaker 1: You know, speaking of [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry, just, I wanna get some of your thoughts about first, and we'll kinda go backwards chronologically.  What are your thoughts on his political comeback?  He has once again in 2004 made a political comeback.  What are your thoughts about that with the D.C. City Council [Council of the District of Columbia]?
Speaker 2: Well, I'mma shock you and then I'mma tell you some other things.  When Marion Barry first ran for mayor in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.], I did not support him.  I supported Walter Washington.  I did not think it was possible for Marion Barry to win under the conditions, but I also understood that there's no better politician who has ever participated in electoral politics than Marion Barry.  He's thorough, he knows how to use the television, he knows how to use the personal meetings, he knows how to develop mantras almost instantaneously.  And I'll give you an example.  I went to him one day and I said Marion we need to put more money in 2802 14th Street.  Instantly he said, there is no 2802 14th Street.  That's how thorough his knowledge is of the city.  He is a man who has been very fortunate in that he's been underestimated quite frequently and with a Marion Barry you never ever do that.  So I think that the way he handled himself when in office by providing fire trucks to small towns in Mississippi, by really becoming an advocate and elected official for people wherever they were needy, regardless of whether or not they lived in the District of Columbia, and the fact that he delivered for people in the District of Columbia.  I was registering voters one day and I asked a man, do you support Marion Barry?  He said oh, yes, I support him.  He got my wife a first job, my daughter her first job, my son his first job.  If they put him in jail, I'll vote for him in jail.  So, and then you see in the last election, he runs the entire city council, endorses his opponent, thousands of dollars, hundreds of thousands of dollars the way it used to beat him, he targets turning out four thousand votes and he turns out 4,012, and he had young people going to the polls to vote just for him.  Not anyone else.  They come to vote for Marion and you had elderly people who said don't give me any of the literature, I come to vote for Marion Barry, so, and I think what you have is a classic example of a guy who knew how to use power to empower others and they did not forget it.
Speaker 1: And what do you think about his political fall, the whole scandal with the drugs and secret--
Speaker 2: We were planning the announcement of his campaign and this hotel situation occurred five days before that.  So, what I think of it is that I'm so proud of the fact that people of this city and people who know him throughout the country have made a sharp demarcation between his personal life and his political life.  I'm reminded of the fact that ministers can sleep with everybody in their parish and nobody is gone ever question them about it, just so long as they're delivering in what is their public responsibility.  It's one of the things that I'm most proud of black people in America, and that, that doesn't happen just in Washington [D.C.], that happens throughout the country and what we, and I think that is something that is now open to inquiry, open to discussion and I welcome it.  I don't have to defend Marion Barry's personal life, but I am very, very eager with, to defend his public life with panache and (unclear) and without caveat.
Speaker 1: Do you think that it tarnished the city though at that particular time?
Speaker 2: I think a city that does not have congressional representation, that does not have senatorial representation, that is in effect America's plantation, cannot be tarnished.  Every American watching this tape has the right to vote for a senator and a congress except those of us who live in the District of Columbia, so, you know, it's the old thing of, is the old story of the, of peasant in Russia, his wife had been raped, his crop had been ruined, and he said, oh if the czar only knew.  The czar is a good man if he would change all of these conditions.  Well, America knows and America is responsible for this political aberration.  You can't talk about democracy as long as there is no democracy in the District of Columbia.
Story_ID: 244200
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your efforts in terms of bringing statehood to the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.].  When did you first begin your efforts of trying to bring statehood to [Washington] D.C.?
Speaker 2: When I first moved from Washington, D.C., from Mississippi.  I, I thought it was quite ironic.  I was fighting for the right to vote and fighting for representation in the District of Columbia where even there I could vote for congressmen and senators.
Speaker 1: Fighting for representation in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And then I come here and I, and in Mississippi I could vote, once I got the right, I could vote for them.  I come to the citadel of a democracy, the capital and I can't vote for them.  It's just ludicrous, so I have the right to travel, but I also, I don't have the right, I shouldn't have to experience disenfranchisement by expressing my, of the way I wish to live.  Until we get the right to vote, no one in America should talk about democracy.
Speaker 1: Why do you think D.C. doesn't have the right--?
Speaker 2: Because it's black.  Because it's Democratic and I think that it's very clear that that is how that election would go, but that shouldn't matter.  I mean we have, if we're talking about fairness, and if we're talking about political equity, there is no rational reason why we should not have the same rights as every other American, except race.
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about the District of Columbia itself.  We're seeing a lot of gentrification taking place in the city now, and some have said that once this process is complete, D.C. will probably get statehood.  What are some of your thoughts on that?
Speaker 2: There's no way to argue with that.  One month after it's a white population, D.C. will be voting for senators and congressmen period.  The whole question of race and the political ramifications of it begin with, before the Constitutional Convention.  The Constitutional Convention could not deal with the question of slavery.  It almost broke down three times.  If you will notice the, slavery is not in the constitution, but contraband is.  Your and my ancestors were contraband and the agreement was if we were caught in Idaho, we could be as contraband the federal marshals could then return us to Mississippi.  So what we had was a national policy implementing slavery.  We also had a national policy that said for twenty-seven years after the passage of the [U.S.] Constitution, slavery could not be discussed on the floor of the [U.S.] House of Representatives.  We were living in a time, in that period, the states had jurisdiction over slavery and if you remember, in 1800 a guy named Thomas Jefferson was elected president.  Well there's a brilliant book's been written.  It's called 'Thomas Jefferson, The Black President' [sic. '"Negro President": Jefferson and the Slave Power'], written by Garry Wills, because he shows that when Jefferson was elected in 1800, he was elected by the House of Representatives.  The majority of people sitting the House of Representatives then were from majority slave holding states, and incidentally, the majority of people who elected [President George Walker] Bush were from slave holding states.  Now isn't that a, now, you know the irony of the situation is that is a fact that we now live in a period in this country where we can't really talk about race openly, so when you mention that fact, you're attacked, but I am one, I go on the right-wing television stations and I deal, I defend the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson on 'Hannity & Colmes' and on [Bill] O'Reilly, but I've learned one thing.  Until this country has an open dialogue on race, we will continue to have the problems that we have, we will continue to have the problems of the non-utilization of talent and expertise.  We shouldn't, we should have settled the question of affirmative action.  We've just elected a fool who equates affirmative action with quotas, and quotas are illegal.  Now someone should tell him that.
Story_ID: 244201
Speaker 1: So let's go back a little bit, [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Lawrence] Guyot to when you first went, came into the [HistoryMaker Marion] Barry administration, what exactly were you doing within the administration in the [Washington] D.C. government?
Speaker 2: I worked with Pride Incorporated [Washington, D.C.].  I left Pride Incorporated then I came to work with the district government, and there was a break when I raised money for Mary Holmes Junior College [West Point, Mississippi] and I left them and I came to work for the Barry administration.  And I worked in the [D.C.] Department of Human Services and I dealt with young people who were incarcerated and I dealt with volunteerism, getting people to volunteer to do things in the government.  I liked working with young people because I was able to find some talent that was locked up and we were able to get them out, put them in a program where we ankle them, insured some stability, some continuity, and some concern and just watched some of them blossom, and just by exponential progression.
Speaker 1: And how long did you work with the young people?
Speaker 2: I did that for about six years.  And then I moved to where I am now.  And what I do now is monitor the after school programs of the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.] public school system, the [D.C. Department of] Parks and Recreation system and another group.  I find it fascinating because I get a chance to see firsthand what's working, because what we find is that the reason after school programs are so successful is we get a different order of prioritization.  For instance, Johnny who may be a hell-raiser from 8:15 [A.M.] to 3:45 [P.M.] understands he's now in a smaller class, he has to concentrate on getting his homework done.  He gets more attention and it's about really doing things that empower him, and we get a different, get a different kind of behavior.  I really think that until we get to the question of where we fund education federally, because as long as my, the value of my house determines the taxes spent on my kids' school and the same is true of you, we're never gonna have adequate education in America.  But that's a fight that needs to be fought, and we should be about fighting it.
Story_ID: 244202
Speaker 1: And let's talk a little bit about your tenure within the [Washington] D.C. government.  You have worked for three administrations, the [HistoryMaker Marion] Barry administration, the Kelly [HistoryMaker Sharon Pratt] administration and the Williams [Anthony A. Williams] administration.  Can you kind of compare and contrast for us a little bit about some of the differences and, and just, you know, just what it was like working in the various administrations.
Speaker 2: Well, in the Barry--Marion Barry introduced me to one of the heads of one of his agencies, the freest D.C. employee in the, in Washington [D.C.].  And what that meant was, I was able to take programs and really see that they're utilized.  Two people who ran the [D.C.] Department of Housing [and Community Development] once threatened to put people out of public housing.  I knew that there were thousands of dollars available in an emergency rent assistance program, so I insisted on two things, one, that everyone in the public housing received notice, and two, that all of them were eligible to receive the emergency rent assistance.  I thought it ludicrous that a city was kicking people out of its houses because of nonpayment of rent.  But that was the way to deal with it because of my close relationship with Marion Barry, I was able to make that happen, and I'm, what I found with Marion Barry was here was a man who really was committed to making government empower people. Marion Barry had power.  Marion Barry was not interested in power for Marion Barry's sake.  Marion Barry didn't steal a quarter, otherwise we know he'd be in a jail from which there could be no entree.  But I was proud to work with him and I was proud to be able to use that power to empower others.  With Sharon Pratt Kelly, I was able to maintain my independence because I have an independent base.  I'm known, I know all of the politicians in this city.  I'm regularly in the press.  I advocate before the city council on what I want regardless of how popular it is, and with the Williams administration, Anthony Williams presented me with the [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] living the, living the legacy of his life award, publicly.  Now he and I agreed on very few things and, but I've been very open, but I also remember when Jim Graham killed because I was an ANC commissioner and a member--
Speaker 1: What's an ANC [Advisory Neighborhood Commission] commissioner?
Speaker 2: In Washington, D.C., we elect individuals, one for every two thousand people and we're the ombudsman for citizens when they deal with the government.  You want a liquor license, support it or closed, you come to us.  You want a variance to build in a historic district, you want to put a carport and no one else has one, you come to us.  You want any, anything you want the government to do, you come to us, we take a public vote on it and the government has to respond with specificity.  So we made some recommendations to bring, to select some developers for Columbia Heights [Washington, D.C.].  Jim Graham opposed that and got the city council [Council of the District of Columbia] to vote against it.  The mayor sided with us and vetoed it.  And if you look in Columbia Heights now, it's going up.  Well, I'm proud to have been a part of that, to have selected developers and see that they actually-- because I think that the nexus between economic development providing affordable housing and make, really making government relevant to people, that increases voter participation more than anything else.  I was also very glad to be involved in the campaign, September 14th in Washington, D.C., there was a political revolution.  It happened in the ballot box.  Three incumbents were turned out.  There was one young man, Kwame [R.] Brown, who started campaigning two years ago.  He got 151,000 votes.  He captivated the support of all of us who had been in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].  Marion Barry, of course, was running.  Marion Barry was a shoo-in.  And later there was another gentlemen, Mr. [Vincent C.] Gray, from Ward Seven, who had served a long time in serving people.  So, I think there's no better way to restore faith in people than having them deliver what they haven't said they were intended to do.  [Winston] Churchill said it best, it's nothing more exciting than to be shot at and missed.
Speaker 1: And now, in terms of Mayor Williams, weren't you involved in the recall effort?
Speaker 2: No, I was not involved in the recall effort.  I have been an enemy of Mr. Williams on a lot of issues very publicly.  He knows that, I know that.  But we've been able to talk even despite that.  I think that, I, I, I'm quoted in The Washington Post as saying it is quite possible for him to be forced into glory.  And I still have hope for the boy.
Speaker 1: So you don't think he should be recalled?
Speaker 2: Well I think he should have been recalled.  I think that on the merits he deserves being recalled.  I think Anthony Williams is a failure as a mayor.  I think that he is uncomfortable around black people.  He is very, he does everything white people want and even what he thinks they wish, and he's committed to that, and he--I think that he's a good Republican and I wish that [President George Walker] Bush would appoint him to something and get him out of here, very quick as possible.
Story_ID: 244203
Speaker 1: --An advisory neighborhood commissioner is a person elected by two political segments divided by numbers.  Every two thousand people elects an advisory neighborhood commission.  An advisory neighborhood commissioner sits on a commission.  Great weight has to be given by any agency.  If a citizen comes to us and asks our involvement, we take a public position, either to give them a grant or to support their request for a variance or to oppose a liquor license or support a liquor license, or to support economic development.  The selection of a developer comes to us.  We then make choices.  We then follow those choices on and city agencies have to react.  I was fascinated by this and I would encourage other cities to do it because it's really government at the neighborhood level.  We are funded on the basis of population and we must spend all of our money on public votes.  All of our issues that we support has to be done in a public meeting which we hold monthly and people, we hear both sides and then take a position and communicate that in writing to the other agency and then send one of our members to go and testify in support of it.  It works.
Speaker 2: Some have said that you received some criticism from some who have said that you're way too brash and you play the race card way too much.
Speaker 1: Let's put it this way.  Let me be very candid with you.  I'm an integrationist.  I always have been an integrationist.  I received the [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] award from a man who is not a political friend of mine [Mayor Anthony A. Williams], but he publicly gave it to me based on recommendations from his committee.  I've spent my life, I'm married to a white woman [Monica Klein Guyot], okay.  I believe in integration because of my political and pragmatic views of life.  However, when twenty-five white people come into a meeting that I'm in and say we're not interested in the law, we want this license taken away from this person because we don't want those kinds of people here, I don't need to hear anything else.  In every instance, I can say this unequivocally, I've applied the law and I've forced with every power of persuasion that I have that we treat everyone equally.  For that I plead guilty.  Other than that I make no concessions.  And to those who beat me in the ANC [Advisory Neighborhood Commission] election, I have but one comment to say, I'm sorry I didn't do more of what I did.
Speaker 2: This past election, were you surprised it was such a tough election?
Speaker 1: I knew it was going to be a tough election.  I knew that the city council [Council of the District of Columbia] person who had come to quite a few of our meetings and who had campaigned at the polls against me, and that's not supposed to be done, two years ago, and I won that one very closely.  I lost this one, but I'm proud in the way that I lost it.  The person that they described, I wouldn't have voted for 'em.  My record is clear.  Howard University [Washington, D.C.] needed a $50,000 bond issued, I got it for them.  UPO [United Planning Organization] needed $10 million, I got it for them.  When we leave this building, we going to walk past the medical center.  When they came to us and said we're going to build, there were no glasses on 4th Street [Washington, D.C.].  No glass at all.  We said put glass on 4th Street, we'll support it.  If you walk on 4th Street, you'll see glass on the [Louis] Stokes [Library, Washington, D.C.] building, so I've had an impact.  I live at 507 U Street.  When I moved there in 1971, 85 percent of the houses on that street were uninhabitable.  Now, I supported the Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] and Howard University initiative there.  Now we have teachers, policemen and firemen living there.  I'm proud of what I've done and would do it again (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 244204
Speaker 1: Do you think you play the race card too much?
Speaker 2: I never played the race card.  I deal, I encourage people to talk about race because no one else does.  There's more discussion of oral sex in Washington, D.C. and in America than there is of race.  I don't, I don't want, I believe that until we have a open discussion on race, that's raw, that's real, we're adults, we can deal with it, but what we can't deal with is it's still being a part of everything that we do, everything we do or say in America is viewed from the prism of race, but we can't talk about race.  It's ludicrous.  We've, we've got to grow up as a country and I'm not gonna act like an imbecilic regarding, even if those around me continue to do so.  I'm a deal with race whenever it occurs and I'm a deal with it as confrontational as necessary and I would be consistent as necessary.  I believe in applying the law to everyone in the same way regardless of the consequences.  The white people who are attacking me are concerned that I didn't allow them to destroy some black people who had licenses and they, somehow I'm the racist?  I don't think so.
Speaker 1: But your critics say that, and this is what your critics say, that everything is racial to you.  You know race is always a factor involving issues.  Do you think that, do you think that race is always a factor?
Speaker 2: In America, find me an exception?  I dare you to and I'll give you a month.  If I try to buy a house, I came over here, I caught a cab coming over here and I watched patiently as eight white people stood four feet from me and got cabs.  I didn't get angry.  I'm black in America, so I waited until I got me a cab and I came over here.  I went on, I debated quite a few black conservatives and I tell, I use that example, I use another one.  My wife [Monica Klein Guyot] is white.  We lived in Atlanta [Georgia].  My wife brought my daughter [Julie Guyot] to day care and she caught particular hell.  My wife being as smart as she is said why don't you take her?  So I go on with my afro and my bush.  Julie talks about how much she loves school.  What I'm saying to you, young people even at that age, line up on the question of race.  Now why should we be so stupid as to ignore it?  Again, I'll give you a month, find me something in America that is not viewed through the prism of race.  I don't care if it's income. I don't care if it's affordability.  I don't care if it's location.  I don't care if it's education.  Race is a factor.
Story_ID: 244205
Speaker 1: As a long-time Washingtonian, what do you think are some of the biggest changes that you've seen take place in the city?
Speaker 2: Biggest changes that I've seen taking place in the city was, one of 'em has to be September 14th.  I'm a politician.  I spend a lot of time and energy persuading people to get involved in the system.  I wanted September 14th to happen.
Speaker 1: September 14th which was the primary in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 2: Primary in Washington, D.C. that turned out three incumbents.  All of whom deserved being turning out, but the people did it and they were lead, this movement was lead by Kwame [R.] Brown because once people saw him, they started thinking--because I was, I, originally before I saw this movement evolving, I thought the city council [Council of the District of Columbia] was in better standing with the community than it was.  I'm very glad to see that.  I'm very glad to see the kind of economic development that's going on that is geared toward building low and moderate income housing.  I'd do that.  I'm going to leave this interview and go to a meeting tonight of the Columbia Heights Development Corporation.  And that's what we do.  So, and I've been able to make recommendations for developers in that capacity and make recommendations for developers as a advisory, maybe a commissioner and all of them have been cleared and okayed by the people, by the National Capital Revitalization Corporation or by the RLA [Redevelopment Land Agency Revitalization Corporation] here in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.].  Our record is 99 percent.  So when it comes to being able to produce creatively and really turn dreams into reality, I've done that, and I'm very proud and very grateful to the people who've elected me and allowed me to do that.
Story_ID: 244206
Speaker 1: Mr. [Lawrence] Guyot, we were talking a little bit about some of the changes in Washington, D.C.  What about, what are some of the changes that you've seen in terms of crime, and of course, race?
Speaker 2: Race, the race again is nothing done in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.] that isn't done through the prism of race.  Police, police, we got a police chief who is one of the best in the country for televised interviews.  When it comes to functioning as a police chief, he is terrible.  Now how do you, how do you juxtapose that?  Well, so much of politics is what is televised and how it's televised and how do you communicate what you're doing and what you're not doing.  We got a terrible police force, there's a racial division going on in it and some of that has been documented by some of the statements picked up on the radios and so we have a terrible situation that will get, get better as this city gets whiter.
Speaker 1: And are you concerned a little bit about the gentrification that's taking place?  What are your thoughts about that, how, you know, we're seeing a lot of the people in the city who are, are, being displaced, and you know, they're, they're, the homes in their areas are selling for, you know, almost a million dollars?
Speaker 2: Let's put it this way.  Of course, I'm concerned about gentrification, but I have to congratulate this city.  We're doing some good things to turn gentrification around.  Some of them, we're giving tax breaks to the elderly, straight up and down.  Also, we're doing, we're allowing the purchasing of houses, of housing by first-time purchasers.  We give them five thousand dollars, we give them tax breaks, we train them how to do that, and we try to move people out of, we're also allowing, facilitating the purchase of buildings by tenants.  As you know, Section 8 is on its way out.  The building that was involved in Section 8 for twenty years, the owners now have a chance to decide whether or not to continue that.  You're aware of what Section 8 is?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: So now, what we're doing is spending time and energy training the tenants how to take over the building, and making them aware of where the money is available for them to purchase the buildings, and that's working.  Look at Fairmont I and II, we've been very successful in doing that.  When we went to 14th Street, which is not very far from here, most of that would be buildings like I've described in some level of that Section 8 relationship.
Speaker 1: But, also if we went to 14th Street, we'd see $300,000 condos where realistically someone with a $5,000 down payment is not going to be able to afford that, and not to mention the monthly mortgage.  So what are some of your thoughts about the housing prices in [Washington] D.C. and how we're seeing many neighborhoods where predominately African American, that were predominately African American, are no longer because they cannot afford to live there.
Speaker 2: Well, that is a problem.  And I think it is a problem that is being dealt with and is getting more and more support in how it's being dealt with and it is getting more and more support in how it's being dealt with.  We have some groups who are doing some fantastic work on that.  The Columbia Action Development Corporation.  I'm a member of that.  MANNA [Inc].  We have a group of people, a group of organizations that's committed to that, and we attempt to come up with as many, we forced the city council [Council of the District of Columbia] to put up money for that purpose.  And they put up money for that purpose.  And now we're trying to get more.  So, it's not as though we have capitulated on that because we understand that while [Mayor] Anthony [A.] Williams wants a hundred thousand people, a hundred thousand white people here, we understand exactly what that means.  While we welcome everybody, we are just as concerned about those who are here as we are about those who Anthony might be able to bring here.
Story_ID: 244207
Speaker 1: You know, one of the things that we didn't talk about initially that I'd like you to just talk about briefly is some of your experiences when you were jailed and we didn't really talk about that at all and I know that you had a particularly terrible experience when you were nearly beaten to death in jail.  Can you just talk a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Why not?  I went to Winona [Mississippi] to get Fannie Lou Hamer and June [E.] Johnson and Ivesta Simpson out of jail and they had been arrested. And I got there and I was arrested.  They beat me.  Twelve people beat me for hours.  I knew that I had to stay conscious or I wouldn't come out of there alive.  After beating us while we were in jail in Winona, Medgar Evers was killed, so, you know, they turned off the radio.  I knew something had happened to someone I knew, I just didn't know who.  And we were able to go through all of that because we understood we were right.  We were fighting for the right cause at the right time for the right reason.  You know it was the, it was the other side of the story.  Show me how much effort, time and money and effort would be done to take something away from you and I can explain the value of it to you.  We knew we were right, so I was arrested numerous, on numerous occasions.  I've been trailed by people with shotguns.  I got out of the car one time and walked up to him, looked him in the eye and told him, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] was following us and if they did anything to us they were going to jail for ten years.  I was bluffing but they turned around and left us alone.  We were in a car with old tires, couldn't run very fast, so I decided to take the control of that situation and I did it, I bluffed and I won.  I'd rather do that than have died a coward.
Speaker 1: And what impact did Medgar Evers death have on you?
Speaker 2: It was absolutely uncanny.  We had met with him three weeks before he was killed.  He had come to Greenwood [Mississippi] and seen five hundred people in a meeting in the Delta [Ministry] talking about voter registration, and he made a commitment that he would work with us and we would work with him.  Now Ruby Hurley had told them not to work with anyone but the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the NAACP was treating Medgar very terribly at the time of his assassination.  He was considering establishing his own organization.  So we had a chance to know him and work with him.  The Counsel of Federated Organizations [COFO] was established in 1954 to meet with [Governor Ross] Barnett.  It was disbanded and it was reorganized in 1962 by Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses], Dave Dennis, Aaron Henry and myself and that made up, but we talked about COFO--
Story_ID: 244208
Speaker 1: You know, with all of your voter registration efforts what are some of your--back during in the '60s [1960s], what are some of your thoughts today and in terms of voter registration numbers among African Americans?
Speaker 2: I'm just as proud as I can be that 88 percent of black people voted in this presidential election.  I am fantastically proud.  I'm glad that young people got involved, I'm glad that music was used, I'm glad that a group called the Council on African Affairs has put out a documentary which I would encourage everyone to get.  It's called 'Stand Up' ['Stand Up! An Active Discourse on Civic Engagement'].  I'm glad that there's a book out now called 'Putting the Civil Rights Movement Back Into Civil Rights Teaching' [sic. 'Putting the Movement Back into Civil Rights Teaching'] so that we can, the momentum that we've unleashed around this presidential campaign, we've got to continue for our own benefit because I think we've sort of gotten away from the, from the richness of organizing ourselves in our, from our frame of reference.  I don't care if it's a bingo game. I don't care if it's a poker game.  I don't care if it's the preacher's meeting.  Wherever black people meet, we should be talking about political enfranchisement, because I think, we should also be talking about economic enfranchisement.  We have the right and the power to save money.  We spend millions of dollars.  We ought to start thinking about saving it, utilizing it as a group.  When I once worked for a CEDA program, every payday, ten of us would circulate fifty dollars.  We'd give each, that meant you had five hundred dollars to do whatever you wanted to do with, and there was enough trust that we could do that.  We need to have that widespread.  We need to start trusting in one another, consolidating our money and making sure that we get people to learn, get our people to learn that we need to take books like 'Putting the Civil Rights Movement Back Into Civil Rights Teaching.'
Story_ID: 244209
Speaker 1: About that book ['Putting the Movement Back into Civil Rights Teaching']. Tell us about that book.
Speaker 2: It is, it is one of the most fantastic books I've ever seen.  I sit on the board of advisors and it was written by three people and we spent three years writing it.  We wanted to be very careful.  We were on the book that could teach people how to teach about the Civil Rights Movement from K [kindergarten] through 12 and what I have been most, The Journal on Negro Education has come out with an excellent book review.  There's another group that deals with multiculturalism.  They have come out with an excellent review.  I've taken the book to Atlantic City [New Jersey] to Sunflower County, Mississippi.  I reached, a couple of weeks ago, I spoke to two hundred teachers, black and white in Jackson, Mississippi.  They are very excited about the book.  I talked to Susan [M.] Glisson who I challenged to establish a council on racial reconciliation at Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi] because I told her that Ole Miss is known nationally and internationally as a racist hell hole.  You ought to be doing something about racial reconciliation.  To her credit, she and William [F. Winter] went on to establish The William Winter Center on Racial Reconciliation [sic. The William Winter Institute for Racial Reconciliation] and she's going to be holding a conference in Mississippi in the next two months, so the book is picking up, but I want everyone to understand there has never been a more powerful book.  What we've got to, see the unfortunate story of civil rights goes like this, there was [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].  He worked with about twenty-five people.  They had actions at about twenty-five cities, summer one was a bus boycott.  He liked to register people to vote.  He gave a speech, and he was killed and the movement stopped.
Speaker 1: And there was a lady named Rosa Parks.
Speaker 2: And there was a lady who was one of his helpers.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Now I don't mean to disparage anyone, but I'm simply saying we can teach the history better than that and in teaching the history we get people excited because they transcend the--they are learning to read into something that relevant to them.  See I think it makes a fundamental difference when people understand that ordinary people did astoundingly extraordinary things that--
Speaker 1: It's empowering.
Speaker 2: See and that to me is what makes the difference.  I know that the way we are wired, if you can get people to do one thing, it is impossible for them to say to themselves I will never do anything like that again.  So then the question becomes what are the options, what are the alternatives and what are the options that we present and create.
Speaker 1: In terms of the book 'Putting the Movement Back into Civil Rights Teaching,' what do you think is the biggest misconception people have about the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: The biggest misconception is that somehow you had to be educated to be a leader.  There were very few of them and Martin Luther King was the best that somehow you could not be an ordinary person and lead.  Well the civil rights, especially Mississippi.  The reason I'm so proud of Mississippi is there was no movement that compares to, what we taught was that there is no relationship whatsoever between certifiable credentialed education and the ability to lead.
Speaker 1: Cause look at Fannie Lou Hamer.
Speaker 2: Look at Fannie Lou Hamer and look at thousands of people in Mississippi where we had the most creative political movement in America and yet we had the highest rate of illiteracy.  So, now what we got to do is say okay.  We need to take that movement and its success and get people to understand that if we can do that kind of organizing of Mississippi under those conditions, please don't try to explain to me why we can't educate people and get them to read and be excited about reading and get empowered because I think once you empower people and convince them that they can learn, they can do things and make things happen, you're talking about different people and that's what we need.  We cannot afford to have to continue to produce an underclass.  See right now the people with money look at a school system and say okay, whose, what's the grades in the third grade.  If they're bad, they say this is the place for us to look around.  Let's find the building and start building now.  They coming to us.  You understand what I'm saying?  Now I'm not, I'm saying this is hypothetical.  This is what happens and what we've got to do is say okay, we've got to expand our concept and get people, blacks with money to start saying we need to build community centers.  We need to start teaching people how to use the computer, but first we need to teach 'em how to write.  We need to teach 'em about political affairs.  We need to get them, we need to break away the myth that this is somehow white people's business.  It's our business.
Story_ID: 244210
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Lawrence] Guyot, when you look back at your life, what stands out the most to you?
Speaker 2: What stands out the most to me is I have been raised by heroes.  I am a hero. I have fought for what I wanted.  I've never asked any quarter.  I've never given any and I been heard.  I made change.  I met Marvin Kaplan and Clarence Mitchell, the Clarence Mitchell, Armond Erfin [ph.] and I met to talk about extension to the Voting Rights Act [of 1965] because the Voting Rights Act was passed in 1965 but it was only to last until 1970, and Clarence Mitchell said well we're gonna just get Section 2 extended.  I said no, no, no, we gonna get it all extended.  We convinced [Senator Edward M.] Kennedy and [Senator Bob] Dole, Senator Dole and Senator Kennedy to lead the fight to extend it.  We got it extended for twenty-five years and we gone it extended whenever we need to get it extended.  See I believe that what we've got to do and what I've been able to do is understand that in politics you can make anything happen, and that's what, I've lived my life that way.  I made the motion that the development rights of the Columbia Heights Development Corporation would be turned over to the Urban League.  If you go look at the Hines Building now, it is beautiful, but I made that motion.  I made the motion to select the developers of who would do Columbia Heights [Washington, D.C.] and then had to fight the city council [Council of the District of Columbia] to make that real.  I decided that we would accept that $3.2 million dollars.  I have been, was honored this year along with other members from the [Mississippi] Freedom Democratic Party [MFDP] at the [1964] Democratic National Convention [Atlantic City, New Jersey].  I'm proud of that.  I'm proud of the fact that I come from the most rabid, racist state in Mississippi, in the world.  We took it on in its terms, we didn't run, we fought against those odds and I'm proud of the way I've lived my life.  I'm about, I work with young people, I work with Operation Understanding which is a combination of Jews and blacks and we trained them vigorously, and every year I'm picked as the best educator for them, right?  Because I challenge 'em.  I speak to them in their frame of reference and I challenge them on the question of race and they don't call me a racist, but they go out and they fight racism.  I work with the Columbia Heights Development Corporation with young people.  I work with Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi].  I believe that we have the ability to really take the Civil Rights Movement, use it as a teaching model, not, see I believe it's more important to support and espouse leadership rather than leaders and if you make that flip we can then apply to everyone because I firmly believe that if you're old enough to be oppressed, you're old enough to be a leader.
Story_ID: 244211
Speaker 1: What do you think of the leaders in the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I think that Afro--the leadership as we know it is changing.  I think that, I still think that [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson is the best political leader in the country, warts and all.  I, I don't think there's anybody that comes close to him on his ability to lead, his ability to synthesize, his ability to consolidate power and I like what he does.  He's almost as good as I am.  I don't have a problem with his personal peccadillos.  I think that what we are finding is that the fight now is not only about how do you define leadership and its function, but we have a right-wing rising in the black community that is making an effort to undercut everything we have fought for.  See I'm not proud of Condoleezza Rice any more than I am of Uncle on the [U.S.] Supreme Court.  That's too flies out of the same ointment, okay?  And we got to understand that.  So, but whether we like it or not, they're part of the black leadership and what we've got to understand is black leaders not operating in our interest are not black leaders.  They're simply blacks who are leaders.
Speaker 1: But don't you think that Condoleezza Rice is a good role model in terms of showing young African American girls that you too can grow up to serve in a president's administration and that as African Americans we should be proud of her because of those personal accomplishments she's made.
Speaker 2: I am extremely proud of [HistoryMaker General] Colin [L.] Powell.  Colin Powell went to the Republican [National] Convention and said, look, I support affirmative action.  I know y'all don't and he was booed. I love, I respect him.  I respect the fact that when he was sent to the U.N. [United Nations].  He sent his personal aide, said go and scrub those, that information, I don't want to be caught in any misinformation, and they still farouched him, okay?  But he made every effort for it not to happen.  I would support Colin Powell on anything he did.  I am repulsed by Condoleezza Rice.  Condoleezza Rice has made it very, very clear she is very comfortable in advocating against the interest of black people and so she will now be doing it internationally.  I don't think she'll be doing it very diplomatically.  I really make a distinction between--I was on a conservative talk show and I was asked this.  Well aren't you proud of the two of them, and I made the distinction, I'm very proud of him, not of her.
Speaker 1: What about her personal accomplishments--
Speaker 2: Her personal accomplishments?
Speaker 1: --as an African American woman.
Speaker 2: The beautiful thing about that is I'm not interested in who gets the contracts for the ovens in which black people are burned.  I'm not interested in that.  When that deal is cut, she'll be in on it.  See, let's be very clear about what's going on here.  The Republican administration has said we need us some black people--
Story_ID: 244212
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Don't you think blacks should be everywhere though?
Speaker 2: Absolutely not.  I think, and let me tell you why.  The Republican Party in 1964 made a decision when it met in San Francisco [California].  They kicked out black delegates.  They selected [Senator Barry] Goldwater as their nominee and they made a commitment to white racism.  This boy named [Ronald Wilson] Reagan went to Philadelphia, Mississippi, Philadelphia, Mississippi where [Michael] Schwerner, [James Earl] Chaney and [Andrew] Goodman were killed to announce his presidency.  We got a president who says well look, I'm for diversity, but I'm against, and I'm even for affirmative action, but I'm against quotas.  Any fifteen year old kid can tell you that quotas are illegal, so please don't run that game on us.  He says sure I'm for Leave No Child Behind [No Child Left Behind Act of 2001], I'm just not gone give it any money.  See Johnny Reb said look, we need to do away with the federalism.  So Johnny Reb whose president now says I'm the head of the federal government, I can't do away with the federal government but I can break it.  When you all come to me talking about social security, about education, we spent it on the arms, aren't you patriotic.  Well I wanna speak out against the president.  No, not now.  We got laws to handle people like you.  Can you imagine as we sit right here today, the law, the benefits that we won out of the '64 [1964] Public Accommodation Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964].  The recent [U.S.] Supreme Court decision that said only the attorney general can enforce that.  Can you imagine some black person being silly enough to wait for the attorney general to support their constitutional rights?  That's where we are.  Now Condoleezza [Rice], God bless her, has sold out.  She has a right to sell out, but let's understand that the issues are very clear, the Republican Party is against affirmative action, it's against a strong federal government, it's against medical benefits for the elderly.  It's against helping poor people.  It's for the rich.  Where does this tax breaks go?  To the upper one percent.  What are they talking about now?  Let's accelerate that.  They're talking about the need to cut, but it won't be that one percent that's cut, it will be us.  So, I don't see how we could have a better enemy.  The question is will we use our forces as we have in the past.  Remember we survived slavery, but [President] George [Walker] Bush in four years can be worse than slavery.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: Well, I think he can decimate the right to dissent.  I think he can cut off organizing.  I think he can ruin labor unions.  I think he can say, okay, you will either have charter schools or no schools.  I think that when we start looking at the--I'll give you a good example.  [HistoryMaker] D'Army Bailey, the head of the [National] Civil Rights Museum in Memphis, Tennessee, got a grant from a corporation to do a program about Brown versus Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  He puts out a picture of a black and white person in that program and he said we're gonna be talking about Brown versus--the corporation that gave the $50,000 withdraw it's money.  They said we don't want to talk about the past, we thought y'all was going to be talking about how you gonna educate young black people.  That's where we are today.  Now Birch [ph.] will be utilizing that to the fullest extent possible.  You wanna deal with me, corporations, don't deal with them.  The lines are clearly drawn and what we always got to do is understand it.  The most patriotic people will be the people speaking out against Bush, and Condoleezza.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Lawrence] Guyot about some of the new leadership that's emerging in the African American community.  Jesse number two [HistoryMaker Jesse Jackson, Jr.], Harold Ford [Jr.], Obama, [HistoryMaker] Barack [Obama].  What does Barack Obama.  What are your--
Speaker 2: I like Jesse, I like Jesse a little bit, I like Obama a hell of a lot and I find Harold Ford repugnant.  Harold Ford does not want to be associated with black people.  He does not want to be associated with race.  He goes hunting with the white farmers.  He said look I want to be senator.  He has a right to do that.  I remember there was an event given for children of the Civil Rights Movement and it was a television interview like this.  He didn't come.  His position is he's beyond race.  Now, so he has all of the benefits of being black with none of the liabilities.  White folks will find no opposition from Harold.  They ain't even got to worry about him.  Harold Ford is Anthony [A.] Williams in the [U.S.] Congress.
Story_ID: 244213
Speaker 1: You know, I also want to ask you, tell me how would you like to be remembered?  What is it that you want people to say about Lawrence Guyot, Jr. [HistoryMaker Lawrence Guyot]?
Speaker 2: I want them to say that he was a Catholic, that he lived his religious belief in the political arena, that he fought to feed the hungry, to clothe the naked.  He never bowed down to anybody and the only person who frightened him was Jesus.
Story_ID: 244214
Speaker 1: And what do you believe your legacy will be?
Speaker 2: My legacy is pretty much, I'm in fifty books right now.  I do interviews like this all the time.  My legacy is being written and I want it to be written as someone who understood that my job is to facilitate the empowerment of as many people as possible, to get people to understand they can make anything happen, to get people to understand that everything is political and that we can do anything we put our minds to regardless of the circumstances.
Story_ID: 244215
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you'd like to add [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Lawrence] Guyot that perhaps we didn't talk about?
Speaker 2: The power of books.  I think there are some excellent books coming out right now.  'Pillar of Fire[: America in the King Years, 1963-65'] by Taylor Branch, 'Let the People Decide[: Black Freedom and White Resistance Movements in Sunflower County, Mississippi, 1945-1986'] by [J. Todd] Moye, 'The Summer That Didn't End: [The Story of the Mississippi Civil Rights Project of 1964'] by Len Holt, '"Racial Matters"[: The FBI's Secret File on Black America, 1960-1972'] by Kenneth O'Reilly.  These books open up dimensions that are just unbelievable because it, I think they present alternatives, they present options and they give us a frame of reference.  If we combine 'Putting the Civil Rights Movement Back into Civil Rights Teaching,' [sic. 'Putting the Movement Back into Civil Rights Teaching'] if we combine the documentary 'Stand Up' ['Stand Up! An Active Discourse on Civic Engagement'] put out by the Council of African American Affairs [sic. National Council on Black American Affairs], we're on to something and I think that we have the right, the responsibility and the power to reclaim this country from the right wing fascist that now govern it.
