Story_ID: 24906
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interview today with The HistorMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Okay, Joseph Grover Gordon II.  That's J-O-S-E-P-H, G-R-O-V-E-R, G-O-R-D-O-N, Roman numeral II.
Speaker 1: All right, and, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay, I was born in Nashville, Tennessee in Hubbard Hospital on December 25, 1945.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: Right now I'm the senior director for the Advance Technology Group at Applied Material, Incorporated in Santa Clara, California.  And I'm a scientist and research manager, basically, I work for the CTO, chief technology officer, looking for new opportunities for the company.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is November 8, 19--I mean 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in my home in my living room in San Jose, California.
Story_ID: 24907
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight, "People's Magazine-ish" type questions we always ask, and they only require a short answer.  They're kind of a warm up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Black-eyed peas and rice.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Probably summer.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Anywhere, where I have friends.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I thought about that, and I don't really have, have one that I would propagate around (laughter).
Story_ID: 24908
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, I'm gonna ask about your family history--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your father--your mother's side first.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's Juanita Elizabeth Tarleton Gordon.  That's J-U-A-N-I-T-A, E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, T-A-R-L-E-T-O-N, and G-O-R-D-O-N.  Now, Tarleton is her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back--oh, I'm sorry.  What is her birth date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Sumter, South Carolina on November 5th, 1923, I think.  I'd have to, have to check that again.
Speaker 1: In Sumter, South Carolina.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, is she related, is the Tarleton related to the British Tarleton's in the--
Speaker 2: Most likely, yes.  Her father is, is mixed ancestry.  His father was a white Tarleton and his mother was an American Indian woman, Mrs. Rivers or Mrs. Roberts.  I'm not quite sure.  My grandmother wasn't, seemed to interchange those names pretty, pretty regularly.  I never knew, knew either of them.
Speaker 1: Okay, but Tarleton's were back in the eighteen, early part of the 19th Century were, there was a Tarleton who was a member of Parliament who actually served here in the Revolutionary War [1775-1783], I think that was actually, he slashed Andrew Jackson with a sword or something--
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, I don't know any of the Tarleton family history.  All I know is that Mr. Tarleton lived across the street from, from my grandfather's, my great grandmother, okay, and had a whole family by her and another family by his wife.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there're like a lot of, you know, they were in South Carolina, and the Carolina's primarily, the Tarleton's.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, yeah.  Yes, my mother would tell a story that they would, the children would play together until they got to be about ten or eleven.  And then one day she went to visit her grandmother, and she was told she couldn't play with the kids across the street anymore.  They just reached the age where sex was important, and I think that--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the age of puberty, they say--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you sort of shut down the social interaction.
Speaker 1: There's quite a few stories like that, yeah, about those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, what do you know about your mother's side of the family and how far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: Well, that's as far as I can go for my, my grandfather.  For my grandmother, however, there's quite a bit of oral and, and written information, although I'm not quite sure how much of it is accurate.  She, and my grandmother's father was a Delainey, or Delaine, and they certainly came over some time in the early 1700s.  We think they were, the family legend is that they were Berbers either from Morocco or Algeria, we're not quite sure which.  And there's a large clan of Delaine's, Delainey's, various spellings in South Carolina, Florida and Alabama, who, presumably, are all, all related.
Speaker 1: How do you, how did she spell it, I mean--
Speaker 2: She spells it D-E--capital D-E-capital L-A-I-N-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And her mother is a Keane, and I could not find the, the Keane history that I have somewhere.  And they're from somewhere else, somewhere in Africa also.  I don't quite, I don't remember where.  And I don't know when they came over, but certainly during, during the slavery period.
Speaker 1: Okay, so tradition that your mother's father, mother's side were Berber's actually from--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, are there any stories associated with that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there're a few little anecdotal things.  They lived in Stateburg [South Carolina] for a while.  They built a church there.  The church looks like a mosque.  I haven't actually visited.  It's one of the things on my "to-do" list.  The family was, were, the men, at least, were big and long lived, don't know very much about the women.  And that's really the whole, the only, the only thing that we know.  I know that one of them supposedly was a millwright.  We think he was a slave, had been to France to learn how to make a screw and came back and was, apparently, he was fairly successful because he had a horse and buggy.  But other than that, I don't really know, know very much.
Speaker 1: So he's sent to France to learn how to make a screw?
Speaker 2: Yeah, some fancy screw for going, holding in the mill.  I don't know quite what it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we know that he visited family in Alabama.  That's, that's about it.  I have a, a transcript of an interview of, of one of the men in the family by his granddaughter in, around 1900, 1910.  He was 99 at the time.  So a lot of the, a lot of the--it's very difficult to follow because a lot of people were named George, and I wasn't sure which, clear which George he was talking about.
Speaker 1: So, but there's a transcript though of this interview?
Speaker 2: Yeah, actually, I have a transcript of the interview.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's something.  He's talking about events.  He was 90-some years old so he was talking about events in the early 1800s.
Speaker 2: Early 1800s, but the, the time sequence is all--it's completely unclear.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: The science of oral history hadn't been perfected at that point.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and this was an amateur interviewer, and then I think--and he didn't know many times, apparently, the preface is that he was feeble at the time, and, and it just wasn't clear who he was talking to.
Speaker 1: Well, it was a good idea to try to interview him anyway, whoever did it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I actually tried to do that with my grandmother, but she won't tell me anything.  There's too much illegitimacy in the family and stuff like that, so.
Speaker 1: I think a lot of families, that's the case.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of families, that part of the country, and, and--I try to tell her, it doesn't bother us now, so (laughter).  But it didn't matter.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there still seems to be a sensitivity that people have about that.
Speaker 2: Very (unclear) (simultaneous), yeah, right.
Story_ID: 24909
Speaker 1: Okay, so now, so was your mother [Juanita Gordon] raised in Sumter [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was raised in Sumter, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: And did she have a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: Yes, she started college at Morris College in Sumter and eventually transferred to St. Augustine's College in Raleigh, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: So Morris College, okay--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that's one I haven't heard that much about.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's still there, and it's still active, actually.  It's part of the state system now, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, St. Augustine's is an Episcopal college, right?
Speaker 2: Correct, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did she, what did she major in?
Speaker 2: She graduated in English.
Speaker 1: Now, did she teach school or did she--
Speaker 2: No, she never actually taught school.  When, after she got married, dad was stationed in Chicago [Illinois], at the University of Chicago [Illinois], and she was a secretary for the, for the Manhattan Project [The Manhattan Project was a research and development project that produced the first atomic bombs during World War II] for a while, but then once the kids were born, she basically stayed home and took care of us.
Speaker 1: So secretary for the Manhattan Project.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, it's interesting.  We interviewed a woman in Tidewater, Virginia who was a secretary for Project Matterhorn in Princeton.
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: Yeah, a black woman, yeah.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: It's a, I think one of, I think Ron Mickens saw her in a photo and said, who in the world is that?  The only black person in the photo, you know.  So, and here I find out your mother was a secretary for the Manhattan Project.  So, these are things we just never, you know--
Speaker 2: You never think about, yeah.  Yeah, dad was in, when he enlisted in the Army, he had tested out on some exam.  So he, they decided to turn him into a physician.  And so he was at the University of Chicago taking, I guess chemistry and other courses, to, pre-med courses.
Speaker 1: So about what time was your mother the secretary for the Manhattan Project?
Speaker 2: Let's see, it probably had been 1943 to '44' [1944], something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, '43' [1943], '44' [1944], J. Robert Oppenheimer, and all those people.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Something, okay, well, let's see.  Well, I'm gonna leave your mother's story here, and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 24910
Speaker 1: --I'm gonna ask about your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, the same--
Speaker 1: Same as yours?
Speaker 2: --the same as mine without the, without the second [II].
Speaker 1: Okay, and, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in Jamaica, British West Indies on March 6, 1921.  Okay, no, I have the dates backwards.  My mother [Juanita Gordon] is 1921.  He's 1923.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Well, we, I can only go back one generation.  His parents were, or his father was born in Chantilly in, near Manchester on the Island.  And his family had been there for at least the previous generation.  Beyond that, I, I don't know.  His mother was from the same area, and that's, yeah, that's basically all I know about her also.  I mean I know her maiden name was Dunne, but that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay, she's a Dunne, okay.  Do you know your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's Grover Glevland, with at "G", G-L-E-V-L-A-N-D, Gordon.  Now, I don't know whether that's his birth name or whether that was changed when he entered the U.S.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Grover Cleveland Gordon?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, it's Grover Glevland Gordon.
Speaker 1: Glevland?
Speaker 2: With a "G".
Speaker 1: With a "G"?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was supposed to be Cleveland, but it ended up with a "G".  Either the midwife wrote it wrong or at Ellis Island, they changed it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so, so he came over, what 1890--'80's [1880s] or '90's [1890s] or?
Speaker 2: No, he came in, he was born in 1885.  But he came to the U.S. in 1911.  My father actually was born in Jamaica, but his parents were already citizens, and they were just there on vacation.  So, he came back I don't know, three weeks later or something like that, whatever, however soon they could travel.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did your father have any stories about Jamaica?
Speaker 2: Well, no, he never grew up there.  He grew up in Queens, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he didn't know very much about Jamaica until he was an adult, although he had, he still had family there.  I remember his, his older sister actually married a Jamaican and lived there.
Speaker 1: Now, did your grandfather talk much about Jamaica?
Speaker 2: Not very much.  No, we don't have any stories about Jamaica at all, actually, except that his brother was very large, Bubba, was six feet [6'0"] tall and lived on a farm.  And his father was a farmer.  I have a short autobiography that pop had started to write that indicates, you know, common things, like there was no water so they collected water in cisterns just from rain water.  He went to school until he was thirteen and then, that was the end of schooling 'cause he'd have to pay to go to high school after that.  He went to, call sixth standard or sixth form in the British system.  He worked a bunch of, of manual jobs and servant jobs in Jamaica.  Finally, he decided he needed to do something different and immigrated to the U.S.  and then worked a whole bunch of, everything, construction, butler, you know, basically a whole bunch of things until he got a job at the Post Office in 1927, which actually was extremely fortunate.
Speaker 1: Right, that was a good job.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had a job during the Depression [1929-1939] which was, you know, made a big difference in the family.
Story_ID: 24911
Speaker 1: Okay, so that kind of stabilized things for your father [Joseph Gordon] when he was coming up?
Speaker 2: Right, and they were, there were six children, so they weren't well off.  I mean they were, I think with that many children, it could actually be called poor, but that they weren't destitute in any way.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your father went to high school in--
Speaker 2: He went to high school in Queens [New York]--
Speaker 1: --in Queens?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he told me what they were, but I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Now, was he a good student in high school?
Speaker 2: He was a middling student.  He was not a particularly good student in high school.  But he was very smart, and he took the Regent's exam and scored extremely high on the Regent's exam.  And so he got into City College [CUNY].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the story he tells is when the exam scores came back, one of his teachers just chewed him up and down for not getting better grades (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter), he wasn't--
Speaker 2: He didn't study very hard and the test, the teacher's view was, look, you're really smart enough to have gotten much better grades if you just worked a little bit (laughter).
Speaker 1: So was he drafted into the War [World War II], is that how that happened?
Speaker 2: I don't know the full story.  He enlisted, but he may have enlisted before being drafted, you know, being drafted.  I'm not sure what the, it was.  He enlisted in the War, in the Army out of college.  He was also at St. Augustine's College [Raleigh, North Carolina]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at the time.  That's where he and my mother met.  And then after boot camp was sent to the University of Chicago [Illinois] for pre-med classes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well, did this kind of surprise your father?  Did he ever, did he have any ambitions to become a doctor?
Speaker 2: No, he wanted to be an electrical engineer, and he was studying engineering.  I think he'd probably been, you know, I don't know how long he had been at St. Aug [St. Augustine's College], one or two years.  He wasn't close to graduating at the time.  But my mother actually signed him up for whatever, the equivalent of the MCATs was at the time.  And when the Army saw that, they were desperate for physicians, every Army is desperate for physicians when they actually go to war.  And so they were just, anybody who would, who had the qualifications, they were sending to medical school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he wasn't even, he didn't even finish St. Augustine's yet?
Speaker 2: No, he doesn't have a college degree.  What he has is two years of pre-med classes.  And at the time, that was, that was normal actually.
Speaker 1: Okay, and two years of pre-med and then medical school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, so did he finish medical school at University of Chicago?
Speaker 2: No, no, when he finished the classes there, he went to Meharry [College].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he got his MD from Meharry?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, now, that's probably why you were born in Nashville [Tennessee], right?
Speaker 2: I was born in Nashville while he was in medical school, that's right.
Speaker 1: All right.  Is there a story about how your parents met?  I know they met at St. Augustine's, but is there any kind of little story about--
Speaker 2: Not, not really.  The only story that I know is that, my mother [Juanita Gordon], his girlfriend at the time, always thought he had to be a physician (laughter).  In fact, she told me, oh, probably twenty years ago, we were talking, she says, you know, she didn't know what I was gonna do with a chemistry degree.  As far as she's concerned, if you wanted to be successful, you were a doctor or a lawyer or an undertaker (laughter).  And I think in the black community, that was, that was about right.
Speaker 1: That's true.  And I think a lot of communities see an MD as the highest level of professional attainment--
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, which scientists don't seem to agree with.
Speaker 2: There were very few black scientists.  I have a story from one of my friends when I was growing up in Winston-Salem [North Carolina].  His father had gone to Rensselaer [College], had finished in the top of his class at Rensselaer, and when he got out, the only job he could find basically, the facilities' engineer for a college in North Carolina.  You know, normally, someone in the top of their class from, from Rensselaer would go to a design job or a research job, a development job somewhere.
Speaker 1: So he went to Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute [Troy, New York] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 24912
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you grew up in Winston-Salem [North Carolina]--
Speaker 2: I grew up in Nashville [Tennessee] for three years, and then I went to, we moved to New York. I don't remember that as a child, we lived, lived for a year in New York while dad was in, was doing his residency.  And then we moved to Sumter, South Carolina, right around his, he opened an office right around the corner from where my grandmother lived.  And then the Korean War [1950-1953] broke out, and he was called up for the Korean War, and we moved to Fort Bragg [North Carolina] and I think we were in Fort Bragg for probably two years.  It's really, that, that period, I have memories of going to school, but I don't really have any time, good time sequence.  When the war ended, and he was, he was discharged, he went to, he decided to go and get a, do a residency in radiology, and went back to Meharry [Medical College] to train as a radiologist.
Speaker 1: So this is about 1952 or so?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he must have left in '52' [1952], yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, so then you, but you were basically, you--let's see.  So you, so where would you be at this time?  Were you and your mother and the rest of the family--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we all went with him--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --on all of those places.  We moved with him basically.
Speaker 1: So you're about seven or eight years old then?
Speaker 2: No, I was five or six in Fort Bragg [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went, I started first school, first grade in Fort Bragg, North Carolina.  And I, I did second, third and fourth in Nashville, while he was doing his residency--I'm sorry, second fourth and fifth. I didn't go to third grade.  And then we moved to Winston-Salem [North Carolina] in 1956, I think we came.
Story_ID: 24913
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their character, their, the way they walk and talk and their interests, the way they look, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My father [Joseph Gordon].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I sound like him and look like him, and, apparently, people tell me I have a lot of his mannerisms.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But we are, we're different people.  He was a very outgoing person.  I'm much more introverted than he was.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, do you have siblings?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have three, two brothers and a sister.  My brother, Eric, was born in 1947, April 9, 1947.  And my brother, Craig, was born on July 4, 1948, all while we were in Nashville.  And the my sister was born in, you know, nine years later in 1954 in, also in Nashville.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now, oh, what was your mother [Juanita Gordon] like?  I guess I didn't ask you really what she was like.  When you said you take most after your father, you think, but what was your mother like?
Speaker 2: She was very nurturing.  Her whole life revolved around her children and her husband.  She was a teacher, and she had very strong views on how we should behave and how we should speak and things like that.  So the story my dad tells is that she had a deep Southern accent when they married.  When I came home from the hospital, she dropped it and switched immediately to this flat, Midwestern accent, you know, radio newscaster speech.  And so when we were growing up, we actually had diction lessons and correction every day because she didn't want us to sound Southern or black.  She said, it's really important to, to make a good first impression.  And at that time, the way you did it was talking on the telephone.  So we actually had, I remember in, in Fort Bragg [North Carolina], we didn't have a telephone in the house, but we had a toy telephone.  And we would practice how you would answer the telephone, how you'd introduce yourself on the telephone, and this is like, like five years old.  And her view was, if you make the first impressions, it'll be hard for people to change it.  And, you know, that's the way we went through life basically.  Education was always really important for both her and my dad.  And, you know, I, I never made a choice to go to college.  It was just assumed that I would go to college.  So she basically was a nurturing mother, with a lot of teaching.  You know, when I wanted, got interested in science, she bought things of science and she bought science textbooks and things like that even though she didn't know anything about it.  And she did the thing for all of, all of my, all of us, basically.
Story_ID: 24914
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would guess my--let's see, so it that in Nashville [Tennessee]?  Now, my earliest childhood memory was probably my grandmother's--after dad [Joseph Gordon]had opened his medical office in 1950 or '51' [1951], okay, I remember the office.  I remember we could walk around the house to--around the corner to my grandmother's.  And I remember we lived in a place that we called the "projects" which was a multi-family brick building.  And so that, yeah, that's my memory, first memory I think is that, that era.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, you lived a number of different places.  You basically grew up in Winston-Salem [North Carolina], would you think?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, well--
Speaker 2: From fifth grade on I grew up in Winston-Salem until I went away to prep school.
Story_ID: 24915
Speaker 1: Okay, I guess it doesn't make that much difference, how many times you moved.  But we always ask the question, what are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights and sounds and smells?  Well, the things that I remember are, are family picnics in Nashville [Tennessee], walking on Fisk [University] Campus, and there must have been some parks we had picnics in.  And then family gatherings, typically at my grandmother's for Christmas or Thanksgiving.  We visited my, my father's family about once every couple of years in New York.  And I don't think there're any particular smells that I recall as, you know, except, you know, dinner food and stuff like that.  Mom [Juanita Gordon] was a very good cook, so we always had nice meals.  But there wasn't any sort of standard sort of thing that I recall.
Story_ID: 24916
Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about sights and sounds and smells.  Now, Winston-Salem [North Carolina] has a pretty active black community there.  Did you live in, I mean what was, how was Winston-Salem situated?  I mean what--
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, actually, it was a characteristic smell there every year.  It was cured tobacco.  And we actually used to put the stalks on the lawn for fertilizer.  So the whole place smelled of, actually, it's a quite nice smell, I think, of, curing and cured tobacco.  Winston-Salem at the time was about, slightly less than 50 percent black.  It was, it was, quite physically divided.  We lived in East Winston, which was the black part of town.  We built a house on a, you know, in a circle [sic, cul-de-sac] at the end of 14th, 14th Avenue.  The neighborhood was quite mixed.  So in our circle, we had, the guy up the street from us was a, was a barber, next door was a physician, next door to him was a, were two college professors who taught at Winston-Salem, but TC at the time, now Winston-Salem State.  There was a high school teacher, another high school teacher, a high school football and tennis coach, the high school music teacher and the elementary school music teacher.  And then up the street further, you know, there were people who were, you know, there were a couple of policemen, you know, other--I'm not quite sure exactly what jobs, but they had nonprofessional jobs, the head of the [National] Urban League lived on the street, and it was, it was actually a fairly, fairly mixed sort of, sort of neighborhood, which was characteristic I think of black neighborhoods at the time.  You couldn't, there wasn't enough space to have isolated, actually, you know, only professional people in one, in one area.  And so we were able to walk to the school.  We went to a Catholic school, and I was able to walk to high school.  There was one black high school in town, one city high school and there was a county, black county high school.
Story_ID: 24917
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We basically lived in the black community.  I mean we had very little contact with the white community.  My father [Joseph Gordon] did 'cause he was in the medical area, and was pushing quite hard at that time to get involved in, to basically integrate the medical societies.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, did that happen at all during your childhood?
Speaker 2: Yes, it did.  It happened, there were stages, as I remember, and, you know, I didn't pay a lot of attention at the time.  So I don't know, I won't know the dates.  But I remember at one stage, we're saying, you know, he'd gone to the State medical association, the State chapter of the AMA [American Medical Association].  And initially, blacks were allowed.  Then blacks were allowed to go, but only attend the technical session.  They weren't allowed to attend any of the social functions.  And then it was some time later when one or two social functions were opened up, and this sort of happened gradually.  He made friends with, with some of the, of the white physicians.  And I don't know if, I don't remember any particular interactions at the time.  I do remember that, let me see.  When did this happen?  Okay, at some time the, they were forced to integrate the hospitals.  And so what the, what the city did was to build another hospital far over on the white side of town.  And they tried to close down the black hospital.  And that was no successful.  There were too many complaints.  It was just too far.  There were some whites who lived in East Winston.  It was too far for them to go to the, to Forsyth, which was the new hospital.  So they had to convert Meharry [Medical College] back, not Meharry, convert Kate, (unclear) Bitting, Reynolds and Reynolds back into a, into an emergency room and clinic.  This was when I was in college, I think.
Speaker 1: What's the name of the hospital again?
Speaker 2: Kate Bitting Reynolds [Memorial Hospital].
Speaker 1: Kate?
Speaker 2: K-A-T-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Bitting, B-I-double-T-I-N-G, Reynolds.
Speaker 1: Is it named after a black person or (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, it's named after the wife of R. J. Reynolds who donated the money for it, apparently.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right.  Yeah, how could I ask that question in Winston-Salem, R.J. Reynolds--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: It had to be a Reynolds associated with that.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And he had a, Reynolds had a large number of black employees in, in the tobacco factories.  And so I think the family did a number of things to build infrastructure in the black community.  And, dad [Joseph Gordon] was the chief of radiology there and chief of staff for many years, until the hospital was closed.  And there was a lot of politics that went along with that, and I don't, I don't recall all of the machinations that happened at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did that close while you were there?
Speaker 2: It closed while I was, I was in college, I think when it closed.  So on my guess, it was around 19--well, I would have been out of college.  It would have, between '66' [1966] and '70' [1970].  I don't remember the exact date.  I'd have to, I probably have the information here, but I'd have to dig up a lot of stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it closed in the late '70's [1970s]--late '60's [1960s].
Speaker 2: Late '60's [1960s] or early '70's [1970s], yeah.
Story_ID: 24918
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, where did you start school, going all the way back to--
Speaker 2: I started, I did, well, I was in pre-school in Sumter [South Carolina], and then when we went to Fort Bragg, I started first grade in Fort Bragg [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: And do you remember the name of the school?
Speaker 2: I don't know the name of the school.  I remember the name of my first teacher, Ms. Peale.  But I don't remember the name of the school, and it's one of the things I have to actually look up because I think I integrated that school.  But at the time I didn't know I was black.  I knew I was different.  That was it.  And my mother [Juanita Gordon] never just, never let on.  And there were problems, but she said, well, those are just bad boys, don't worry about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, did other people know you were black or did they have any idea?
Speaker 2: The people we lived, in the, in the officers' housing, yes, did know.  I remember that we lived in a duplex.  The couple next door was another black couple, Captain and Mrs. Stovall.  And if there were other people, most--everybody else I think was white in the, in the area of the--my, my zone was the playground.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my mother tells stories that there was a, one of the guys was a school superintendent from Mississippi.  And that I was always correcting his English, which didn't go over real well (laughter).
Speaker 1: This is a grown person (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yes, a grown person (laughter).  Now, I don't remember any of this, so I (laughter), so I don't know.  That's an anecdotal story that my mother told.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, so you were in first grade at Fort Bragg, and then you all moved to--
Speaker 2: Then we moved to Nashville [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have no recollection of second grade.  So I don't know whether I went to second grade or whether I did it in Nashville or whether I went in Fort Bragg.  I remember third grade and I remember fifth grade.
Speaker 1: In Nashville?
Speaker 2: In Nashville.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to the fifth grade there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Where did you live in Nashville, when you lived in Nashville?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I don't know the address.  We lived fairly close to Fisk University [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and Meharry [Medical College], within the same area.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I want to say we lived on North 9th Street, but I don't have a house number, and I think we moved a couple of times.
Story_ID: 24919
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so in the, so in the early days of grade school, did you have any indication that you were inclined toward science or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think from the beginning I liked to fix things and take things apart.  At some stage, I don't know, it may have been while we were in Nashville.  It may have been after we moved to Winston [North Carolina], I'm not sure.  I had a number of science books and mom [Juanita Gordon] subscribed to something called "Things of Science" which is a little kit that would come once a month with an experiment.  And we would do the experiments together.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did you ever have a chemistry set?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had a chemistry set.
Speaker 1: So was it a Gilbert?
Speaker 2: A real one actually.
Speaker 1: Oh, a real one, okay.
Speaker 2: Not that, you can't get 'em today.  It had a whole bunch of chemicals in it.
Speaker 1: Is this the Gilbert Chemistry set?
Speaker 2: Yep, it was a Gilbert Chemical set.  And I would do stuff downstairs.  Sometimes I would do it in the kitchen till the smells got to mom, and she sent me back downstairs.
Speaker 1: Did you ever try to blow anything up?
Speaker 2: No, I never tried to blow anything up, at least until I got to high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause it's always, you seem like, it's always a story of a--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, yeah, so I joined the rocket club.  So we made rocket engines in high school, but under supervision.  One of the science teachers was supervising us.  So we never actually made bombs.
Story_ID: 24920
Speaker 1: Okay, so you remember Ms. Peale from Fort Bragg.  Any teachers in Nashville [Tennessee] that you remember?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't, I don't remember the teachers specifically.  I, there were nuns, but I don't remember their names.
Speaker 1: And did you get involved in scouts or anything or--
Speaker 2: Not in Nashville.  I did, I was a boy scout when we moved to Winston-Salem.  And it might have been boy scouts in Nashville too.  I'm not sure.  I was certainly in the boy scouts when we moved to Winston-Salem [North Carolina], Cub scouts first and then Boy scouts.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, Winston-Salem, and you're in the sixth grade, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, started sixth grade there.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so, were any special teachers in Winston-Salem?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember two of the nuns, Sister Reva Jean (unclear) who must have been my sixth grade teacher, and Sister Ursula who was both seventh and eighth and also the school principal.  And in high school, two teachers stand out.  One was Mr. Parker who was the general science teacher, and was very good.  And the other was Togo West, Sr., who was the Algebra teacher and also the assistant principal.
Speaker 1: Okay, Togo West, Sr., and he's the father of Togo West, the General, right?
Speaker 2: Let's see, yes.  I think Togo's not a General.  He's, he was Undersecretary of the Army.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he was two classes ahead of me at Atkins, actually.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, he talked about, he talked about a black bus company in--
Speaker 2: Yes, there was a black bus company--
Speaker 1: --in Winston-Salem.
Speaker 2: --in Winston-Salem that was actually profitable.  You could take it downtown, and it went into the white areas basically, to transport domestics to and from, from the white areas.  At some stage after I left, it was forced to amalgamate with the white bus company, which was not profitable, and then they both became unprofitable.
Speaker 1: And they both lost--
Speaker 2: Yeah, both lost money.  You know, it was one of these classic things.  There just weren't enough whites to take the bus.  But a lot of blacks didn't have cars, and this was the way you got around.  And so, you know, of necessity, you took the bus and so the bus could make money.  And they designed their routes to go where people needed to go (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's the most classically, crazy, in a lot of ways--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's one of these very, well, it's one of these economic dislocations that happens because of social--I'm not sure what the right word is, social forces.
Story_ID: 24921
Speaker 1: Okay, so were you in--now, when you were in the sixth grade, you were eleven, would that be correct unless you skipped a grade, I guess?
Speaker 2: No, I did skip a grade.
Speaker 1: You did, okay.
Speaker 2: No, let's see, I was thirteen when I went to high school, so I was twelve in eighth grade.  I was thirteen when I finished, no, I was twelve when I finished eighth grade.  So I'd have been ten, nine,in sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Ten in the sixth grade.  So this would be--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, ten in sixth grade, right.
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-five [1955] when you started sixth grade?
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-five [1955], okay.  This is just before the Montgomery Bus Boycott [1955-1956].
Speaker 2: Yes, that's correct.
Speaker 1: And did, now, how did that affect the, did the people talk about the bus boycott in terms of Winston-Salem having its own black bus company?
Speaker 2: Not in that context.  But certainly, you know, we, we remember discussion around the 1954 Supreme Court decision, the "Brown v. Board of Education", and after that there was significant talk about integrating the schools, but integration didn't happen in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] until 1961 or--at least the schools didn't integrate until 1961 or '62' [1962].
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was your father [Joseph Gordon], were your parents involved in the NAACP or any of the--
Speaker 2: Yes, they were NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], they were, yes, they were NAACP members.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember whether we, I don't think we were involved with the Urban League.  And, of course, the churches were very active in, in--they were the focus of the Civil Rights activities of the time.  And high school students participated in the, in marches starting in 1960.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, did you, let's see--I had a question and it just flew out of my head.  So, well, I'll just go on.  So when was the black bus company merged with the white one?
Speaker 2: I would, I don't remember exactly, but I would guess it was probably in the early '70's [1970s].
Speaker 1: Okay, so it did, it went through the period of the Civil Rights period.
Speaker 2: It went through the Civil Rights period.  This was after, after integration.
Speaker 1: Yeah, as an independent company through the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the immigration was quite, it wasn't particularly violent in Winston-Salem, but there was a lot of, of action.  There were a lot of marches and, and demonstrations and things like that.  I, I had, I left to go to prep school in 19--in September 1960.  So I didn't, I, I missed the sit-in in Greensboro at Woolworth's.  You know, I was actually quite disappointed about that.  But when I came home for Christmas break, the marches had already started, and so all of the high school students and college students were involved in the, in the marches, basically run by, I think at the time it was the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].
Speaker 1: SNCC?
Speaker 2: SNCC in North Carolina, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so basically, you're saying the demonstrations were kicked off by the, the lunch counter sit-in's in Greensboro [North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, in 19--
Speaker 2: And I think that was September or October of 1960.
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty [1960], right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 24922
Speaker 1: Okay, but, okay, so let's go back to grade school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you're like, you finished, you went to Catholic school.  What was the name--
Speaker 2: St. Benedict the Moor.
Speaker 1: St. Benedict the Moor, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, this is interesting.  Were they calling it St. Benedict the Moor then?
Speaker 2: Yes, that was the name of the school--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --and the church.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's interesting because I think some of the St. Benedict's didn't start saying that until after, you know, the '60's [1960s].
Speaker 2: Oh, is that right?  Oh, I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) in Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, this was St. Benedict the Moor when we, when we first moved there.
Speaker 1: Right, so a lot of the black Catholic schools are St. Benedict or St. Augustine, you know.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Because I think, I think because these Saints were black.
Speaker 2: Were black, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, St. Benedict the Moor Catholic School.  So are there any teachers at St. Benedict's that you remember that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, Sister Marie Vergeen (unclear) was, was, she was a, let's see, heck, I've forgotten the Order now.  I've forgotten the order, was my sixth grade teacher and Sister Ursula was, the seventh and eighth grades were taught together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So these were Irish nuns, so we were would Irish jigs for courses.  We learned Irish lullaby's and stuff like that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Just what young African Americans need to know.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, right (laughter).  Well, that's what they knew.  So, you know, it's (laughter), that's what we did.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so were your parents Catholics or did--
Speaker 2: No, we were Episcopalians, but that was considered one of the best schools in the area at the time.  And it was, it was reasonably nearby.  We could, we could walk to it.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your mother [Juanita Gordon] went to St. Augustine.  Your father [Joseph Gordon] had the West Indian tradition of the Anglican church, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes, they were, they were both Anglican.  They're both Episcopalians.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother's family, my--the whole family's Episcopalian in Sumter [South Carolina].
Story_ID: 24923
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, and so, now how did you come to go to boarding school?
Speaker 2: Well, okay, when I finished elementary school, I went to the local high school, Atkins High School.  And some time in tenth grade, I was called into the principal's office and said, there's a gentleman here that would like to talk to you.  I, and Leonard Cobbs, another student, were called in.  And so we sat down in front of this guy, and he says, "How would you like to go to Exeter [Phillips Exeter Academy]?"  And I said, well, I don't know.  What's Exeter?  And so he proceeded to tell me.  When I got home that night and told my dad [Joseph Gordon] what had happened, he says, well, you know, we should look into that.  I've been thinking about this for a while, and he actually had a whole list of, of schools, you know, already in his head to consider.  But he just hadn't, nothing had happened to, to sort of force it.  So we visited a bunch of schools, visited St. Paul's, I remember and probably two or three others.  I don't remember the others right now and, and applied, and I got in and after a lot of discussion decided that I would go.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so now, Exeter is located in New England?
Speaker 2: Exeter, New Hampshire.
Speaker 1: New Hampshire, okay, in New Hampshire.
Speaker 2: Yes, Phillips Exeter Academy.
Speaker 1: Right.  All right, so were you excited about going or--
Speaker 2: I was quite excited about going.  I, I saw it as a opportunity to, sort of get a deeper education.  And it actually, I think, turned out well that way.
Speaker 1: Now, were you engaged in school when you were in high school?  Was, did you find it challenging?
Speaker 2: I found some things challenging, and I found some things not challenging.  Yes, certainly there were classes that I can say well, they were quite challenging.  The, the Algebra classes were, were very rigorous, and as you could get anywhere I think.  The other classes were not as accelerated as they were at Exeter when I went.  So the challenge when I went to Exeter was basically English.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In math, I didn't fit in the, in their curriculum well, but I was put into an accelerated class, so I ended up finishing ahead of most of the students who had entered normally.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was it a cultural shock going to Phillips Exeter?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was a cultural shock.  There were three black students in my class of 240, I think.  It was the first time I had been away from home for a significant period of time.  But I found the students friendly.  I was able to make friends, you know, quite easily and the faculty were quite supportive.  The thing that, that was positive for me was that for the first time I wasn't, I wasn't a freak.  Everybody else was as smart as I was, whereas in Winston-Salem [North Carolina], there were, you know, a few of us who were regularly at the top of the class, and, you know, I was called professor.  And I was also pretty small, so I had other names like pee wee and squirt.  And I was also able to participate in, in sports actively because there were a wide range of sports that didn't require size.  Now, at Atkins [High School], I was on the tennis team.  But the real sports were football, basketball and baseball.  And at Exeter, I made the varsity wrestling team.  I was in JB soccer, played squash regularly.  So it was actually, I, from that point of view, it was a quite good experience for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did people, you know, resent the fact that you were a smart guy in class in Winston-Salem?
Speaker 2: There were a few, not very many--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This was in the days of track systems, so there were three, of the 12 classes in high school, and in say ninth grade, there were three college-prep classes and three manual arts classes.  And so I basically, you know, hung around with the college-prep classes.  So everybody had the same sort of aspirations.  The only funny thing, there was one guy who was, you know, obviously, you know, smart enough to be in these classes, who was going to be a plumber.  And he says to me one day, you know, I'm going to be a plumber.  I'm gonna make a lot more money than you will 'cause all you'll be able to do is teach (laughter).  But that was, that was basically the only, the only thing.  I didn't sense any, didn't sense any resentment at all.  But there was a sense of being different.
Speaker 1: Okay, usually doctors' kids are treated with a little deference because your father [Joseph Gordon] is physician.  Did, were there other black physicians in Winston-Salem?  I know there had to be some more--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, there were a lot.  I mean Dr. Davis lived next door to us, and let's see, his son was, Bud must be behind me by a year and Dr. Walker.  Let's see, Joe, his son, Joe, was much younger than I am.  And, oh, yeah, there were a whole bunch of black physicians in town.  How many that sent their kids to Atkins?  Some, many lived, (unclear) several of them must have gone to Atkins too.  I don't remember other physicians' kids in my class.  But we just might not have been in the same class.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But there was only one high school, so everybody went to the same, same high school.
Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't ask you about the scouts in Winston-Salem.  I know Togo West, Jr. talked about being a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was an Eagle Scout.
Speaker 1: --Eagle Scout, right.
Speaker 2: Right.  So the, the, the troops were typically associated with a church, were sponsored by a church most of the time.  My father and Dr. Malloy were the scout masters for our troop.  I don't remember who our sponsor was.  And, you know, we would do the usual things that scouts did, you know.  We worked on merit badges.  We would, we would do camping trips.  We would have a annual retreat, big tents in a scout thing somewhere.  I don't remember any, any particular incidents associated with scouting.  Oh, yeah, I know, we would make sassafras tea every now and then from sassafras root.  And I remember camping trips.  I don't really remember any other, nothing else sort of sticks out, sticks out right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, I left before being advanced enough to get anywhere near the Eagle Scout stage.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, were there any--what teachers were, are there any special teachers at Phillips Exeter in terms of because I know you don't have, you had smaller classes and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were much smaller classes.  I don't think any had a particularly strong influence on me.  I remember my first English teacher whose name escapes me right now, who was, who was supportive.  That was the first class I ever got a "D" in so I was, that was a big deal.  But, so I made it through that and got a better grade at the end of the year.  I don't remember what it was right now.  I remember Mr. Snook who was the physical science teacher and Kutzma (ph.) who was one of the physical science teachers and Gault (ph.) who was a Latin teacher and Mr. Fish and Mr. Thomas who were French teachers.  That's really all I actually really remember except for the people who were the dorm masters.
Story_ID: 24924
Speaker 1: All right.  So, okay, so, now, were there any, well, who were some of your fellow students?  You probably had met some students there associated with some famous families at Phillips Exeter [Academy]?  I mean I don't know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the first guy I met right after my parents left was Rickey Taft.  And a tall, thin, red-headed guy.
Speaker 1: Is he related to the (unclear) (simultaneous) Heinz (unclear)?
Speaker 2: As a joke, I asked him, says, so are you related to President [William Howard] Taft?  He said, yes, I'm his grandson, okay.  And Dwight Eisenhower, grandson of Dwight Eisenhower was also--I'm sorry, was also in the class.  He was a pitcher for the baseball team.  Other famous people?  Oh, there probably were, but I don't, I don't recall right now anything that sticks in my name, in my mind right now.
Speaker 1: Well, this kind of gives us some idea who was there, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: The regular tuition payers are--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, the biggest surprise, new thing for me was there were a whole bunch of boys who were, I'd say the sons of New York socialites, and would talk about things like whether they were gonna get invited to some cotillion or not, okay.  To me, that was completely, completely foreign.  But it was a big deal to them.  And there were kids who were very wealthy.  One of the guys in the, in the dormitory I lived in would take off and go to France for the weekend, come back.  And for him, it wasn't, wasn't a big deal (laughter).  But there were, there were, you know, Exeter had a wide range of socio-economic groups.  So there were some not rich kids there also.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was a mix.  But, yeah, it was, it was a different experience for me to, to get to know, to know these people.  But by and large, they were very, people were quite nice, actually over solicitous in my opinion.  And there were only a few comments of, you know, you must have come in through the back door or something like that.  There were a few kids who said that, but that was very rare.  Most people were exceptionally polite in my presence and wouldn't even tell ordinary jokes for fear of offending me.  So, that was a little bit uncomfortable.
Speaker 1: That might have dulled down life a little bit, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it did dull down life (laughter), quite a bit.
Speaker 1: Now, what about foreign students.  I know, sometimes, like foreign--
Speaker 2: There were, there were a number of foreign students.  So one of the other black guys was Chege Morgangee (ph.) who was from, you know, one of the African countries.  I can't, I can't remember right now.  And there was a guy from, well, Puerto Rico's not actually a foreign place, and he spoke Spanish.  He won the Spanish prize, and there was a big, a big question about whether he was eligible to win the Spanish prize since Spanish was his native tongue (laughter).  There were, there were a fair number of foreign students.  I don't remember any, any particular ones.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were a bunch of kids I made close friends with and Paul Chang was a guy from New York City.  We hit it off.  His father's also a radiologist and it turns out that we had similar sort of experiences growing up and I used to hang out in the room with Bill, Bill Reed and Hank Merrill.  Bill became a, he's an engineer, and went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] and Hank went to, I've forgotten where now.  And I think he's, he's in education.  The other person I remember is, was Chester Finn, Chester A. Finn, who is a educator or education columnist.  I'm not quite--I see editorials by him periodically today.  And he was sort of the, the senior guy in the, in the dorm the year that I--his senior year, who sort of kept things in order.  And so I, I became good friends with him.  And the other guy was Jim Zetzel (ph.) who we spent a lot of, lot of time together, who was a polymath, could pick up languages just like that, and he taught himself German one summer and taught himself some other dead language the next summer.  And I think he's a professor of classics at Columbia [University] now.  There weren't very many other people who ended up going--oh, one other person went into science, Ralph Duvall.  I didn't know him very well when I was there.  But it turned out, he and I were both employed in the research lab at IBM.  So it was rather funny coming, coming all the way out West and finding a high school classmate in our class of 240 working in the same place.
Story_ID: 24925
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what about your social life?  Now, it's high school, and you're--Phillips Exeter [New Hampshire] is all male, but isn't there a sister college, I mean a high school around there?
Speaker 2: No, social life consisted basically of some of the, some of the boys would meet--we had to go to, go to church every, every Sunday.  And we could go to any place we chose or the one (unclear).  I would go to the local, you know, Episcopal church.  And there was a youth group in the church.  So some of the boys would meet a girlfriend at the youth group there.  But that was very rare.  Every now and then we'd have dances with some girls' school where the girls would be bussed in or we'd be bussed there.  I think most people sort of, most of the boys had just acquaintances, so the girls they knew from home, if there was a big deal.  So for graduation, I invited Melanie Walker, who was a girl I knew in high school in Winston-Salem [North Carolina], and she came up for the, for graduation.  But other than that, no, there wasn't much social life with girls at the school.
Speaker 1: Now, this is, you're in school from 19--was it 19--
Speaker 2: I was there from--
Speaker 1: --sixty [1960] to--
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960] to 1963.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is a time when Motown starts up, and everything, you know, in the black community--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you suffer from music deprivation in the--
Speaker 2: No, I don't, I don't remember that.  No, not really.  I don't know why.  Now, the only thing I remember was going downstairs to listen to the Beatles when they got on the Ed Sullivan Show.  Other than that, I don't remember any particular musical group or anything like that.  There wasn't, you know, there wasn't a lot of discussion about musical groups.  I think we didn't have a lot of time to listen to, to music.
Story_ID: 24926
Speaker 1: Okay, so, you came out of Phillips Exeter [Academy] that same year in '64' [1964], right, that--
Speaker 2: I graduated in '63' [1963].
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963], okay--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: -- all right, all right.  So you graduate in '63' [1963], so you started--now, you ended up going to Harvard [University]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so, how did that, I mean I don't know why you wouldn't chose Harvard if you could, but--
Speaker 2: Well, I mean the school had a very, you know, had very good guidance counselors, and we talked about schools, and I talked about 'em with, you know, with my father.  And I applied to Harvard and to Amherst [College].  I visited a couple of schools.  And in the end what triggered my accepting Harvard.  I was actually waffling between the two, but my grandfather gave me a call and says I see you've been admitted to Harvard.  I don't know quite how, but apparently the admission list was published in the "New York Times" or something like that.  That seemed sort of weird to me, but he seemed to know.  And, you know, I went.  About a significant fraction of the class, something like thirty or forty of us went to, went to Harvard.  So there were a bunch of classmates at Harvard.  So Paul Chang went to Harvard with me, and, let's see, who else?  There were a few others that went.  I think of their names, Pat Conway ended up going to Harvard.  So that was a pretty normal, normal thing.
Speaker 1: All right, so, so Harvard, you know, was, wasn't, you didn't have to do a lot of adjustment, I guess, to go, you know, to Harvard?
Speaker 2: No, no, in fact, my, my Harvard roommates told stories years later that they were, this guy came in and he knew exactly what to do.  We had to get a refrigerator.  We needed to get a couch.  We had to go do this and (laughter) 'cause I'd been through all of that at--I didn't have a refrigerator at Exeter, but, you know, I knew we had to set up a dorm room.  You had to get curtains for the windows and things like that.  So, yeah, moving, moving to another, to a college wasn't a big deal at--I was basically living the, in a dormitory room, you know, with all the, all the fixings and stuff.  So.
Speaker 1: This is fall of '63' [1963], I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Fall of '63' [1963].
Story_ID: 24927
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, that summer, there's the March on Washington in D.C., right, with--
Speaker 2: Yes, that's correct.
Speaker 1: --Dr. King [Martin Luther King Jr.].  Did you--
Speaker 2: I did not participate in the March on Washington.  What time of year was that?  That was during the summer--
Speaker 1: It was August, it was like August the, it was late August, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't--
Speaker 1: Just before school starts.
Speaker 2: I don't think it ever came up that I would participate.  I actually think there were things going on in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] at the time, although I don't, I don't remember specifically what was, what was happening.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then later on, in September, the bombing of the 16th Street Baptist Church?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And then the Channey--
Speaker 1: Now, that was the next year in '64' [1964].
Speaker 2: That was the next year, okay, that was '64' [1964], yeah.
Speaker 1: But JFK [President John F. Kennedy] was assassinated in--
Speaker 2: Yes, so that, so that's one of these things that I remember too, and I can tell you exactly what I was doing and where I was.  I was studying, listening to the radio, and the announcer came through and it didn't register, and then he said it again.  And then, I said, I asked my roommate, says, "Doug, is that right?"  Did he just say that [President] Kennedy had been shot?  And then for, you know, for my generation, there was a lot of adrenaline, not quite like a family member dying, but it was clearly a big, a big event for us and for the entire school actually.
Speaker 1: I think he was the youngest president elected in years, so he was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or maybe the youngest ever, I don't know.
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't remember whether he would have been the youngest ever.  Yeah, so that was a big deal for the class.  And then the Vietnam War [1959-1975] was the other, other big deal for us.
Speaker 1: Okay, were you involved in any of the Vietnam era--
Speaker 2: Yes, I took part in a bunch of demonstrations, nothing, nothing, you know, particularly serious, the marches and, and, well, I don't think they called them sit-in's.  But they were just demonstrations outside the various places.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: But I wasn't a, I wasn't a ringleader of those sorts of things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Actually, I tried to, in Winston-Salem, during the marches, I tried to be a, I was the, well, they made me the parliamentarian to basically shove me aside.  And I wasn't allowed to walk in the front of the line.  So one of the college kids, and it took me about twenty years to realize what he was saying.  So one of the college kids was organizing this, this SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] group, said, look, no, we don't want you in the front.  We're gonna you when this is over.  And what they were thinking is they needed people who had the grades, who were qualified who could take the positions that they were opening up.  But as I say, I, I completely misunderstood what he was saying at the time.  I was really irritated.  But I think they did that to a bunch of us.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was there a--so were you involved in SNCC on campus at Harvard [University]?
Speaker 2: No, no.  Only in Winston [North Carolina], only when I went back to Winston.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so this is during the summers?
Speaker 2: Summers, vacations, and I remember one Christmas I came home with, with Jim Zetzel, and we wanted to participate in the marches.  This is when I was in high school.  And we had a big family discussion, say, you know, what are we gonna do about this, 'cause the white kid who wants to march with the black kids.  What do we tell his parents if something happens?  Eventually, we persuaded my, my parents to let us, to let us march, and then nothing bad happened that night.  But that was a pretty (laughter), I think for my parents, a more traumatic thing than it was for me.
Speaker 1: Right, ironically because in '64' [1964] SNCC had the idea of let's let the white kids participate because if something happens to 'em, it'll be on the news.
Speaker 2: That's right.  Now, my parents [Joseph and Juanita Gordon] were more worried about their responsibility as, you know, in loco parentis for this, for this high school student.  But, but everything, everything turned out okay.  So, yeah, so I really only participated in the, if something happened in the summer or, or during vacations.
Story_ID: 24928
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was your major at Harvard?  Did you decide to major in--
Speaker 2: I majored in physics and chemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I, I knew I was going to be a scientist at that stage.  I knew I was going into science.  I didn't know exactly what I was going to do in science, but I knew I was interested in science.
Speaker 1: And, now, on the campus of, let's see, oh, wow, I'm trying to think of, Archie Epps.
Speaker 2: Oh, Archie Epps.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, he was their dean.
Speaker 1: Okay, were you on campus when Malcolm X came to campus with, and debated Archie Epps?
Speaker 2: I don't remember that, so probably, no.  I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Mr. Epps brought him to campus, and they had a debate--
Speaker 2: Had a debate, okay.  I, I--
Speaker 1: He really liked Malcolm X a lot.  That's what he told us.  He tried to expose the students to--
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: --him, yeah.  But--
Speaker 2: There were quite a few, you know, black speakers who came, who came to campus, presumably through, through [Archie] Epps.  And there was a pretty, there weren't very many blacks on campus.  So it was a small, black group that would get together.  There were very few black scientists and so I didn't participate in any of those study groups.  I just didn't have common classes with, with people.  So I was sort of, I didn't really interact that much with the other black students on campus.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have an advisor in physics or chemistry there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, towards the, well, did I have an advisor?  Yeah, I think Ebright (ph.) Wilson was, was my senior advisor.  And I think each year there was an advisor.  I don't remember who they were the previous years.
Speaker 1: Okay, and were there any particular teachers that really made a big impact on you at Harvard [University]?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I mean I remember a bunch of people, but I think, no one stands out as having a particularly big impact on my direction.  The only thing I remember is that I did go, when I was getting ready to think about what to do after graduation, I was going to go to graduate school, and I was thinking about what subfield to go in, and I thought I wanted to be a theoretical chemist.  So I went to Wilson, and we talked about it.  And he says, well, do you dream mathematics?  I said, no.  He says, well, you might wanna think about it.  And the other thing is, look at the faculty here.  I'm the only theoretical chemist on the faculty.  We only need one.  No school needs more than one (laughter).  So there weren't a lot of positions, if you went into theoretical chemistry.  So that, that did have an impact, and I ended up not pursuing that and, and pursuing inorganic chemistry instead.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, that's an interesting story (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 24929
Speaker 1: Now, did you have any heroes in those days in science, science heroes--
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: --or people that you--
Speaker 2: You know, my family is, you know, I come from a family that had very strong academic traditions and a very strong interest in, in education.  You know, my father was a physician.  My mother's uncle was a physician.  My, my father's sisters were married to physicians or engineers.  It was just, it wasn't an odd thing to be in a technical field in the family.  And so I just, I, I didn't really need a mentor of that kind.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So no one sticks out as changing the direction of my life or anything like that.  I think basically, it was that my family supported the direction I wanted to go in, and encouraged it, and things just sort of flowed along.
Speaker 1: You said at one point though that your mother worried about being a chemist and--
Speaker 2: Oh, she never told me that though.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: So I never knew.  I didn't know that until I'd been working for twenty years and had just gone back on a visit.  And we were having some, I don't know what the conversation was about when she, when she made, told me that.  I think it was, she was recognizing that, you know, I had a reasonably successful career and things had worked out okay.  And she was saying she was very surprised, that she didn't know.  This was not a path she would have predicted.
Speaker 1: Now, did, were you inclined in the least to become a physician?
Speaker 2: No, my father actually tried to entice me in that direction.  I did a summer internship, I think right after high school, you know, in the radiology department.  And, but it just, it just didn't, didn't stick.  I really liked dealing with the inanimate world better than dealing with the people world.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was exactly the opposite.  And he just enjoyed dealing with people.
Story_ID: 24930
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, anything else about Harvard [University] before we get you, move you on?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  Not really, I mean I, I basically, you know, studied and graduated, and I, I was a coxin for the, for the freshmen crew and then for the house crew.  I played squash regularly with people, but not, not in a formal athletic way.  I was able to finish in three years because I ended up with, with sufficient advance placement courses from credit, from Exeter [Phillips Exeter Academy].  And I took an extra course every year, so I had plenty of credit to, to graduate.  Other than that, it was, I mean, it was, I enjoyed it.  It was a good existence.  I had a good set of roommates.  I had a good set of friends, you know, went to football games together, and we went to movies together.  We did, did stuff, and when I graduated early, I actually stayed in, in the class so that, you know, when we have reunions, I'm with the people I entered with and not the people I graduated with.  So I graduated in '66' [1966], but I'm actually in Class of '67' [1967].
Story_ID: 24931
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, now, all right.  So, so you came out in 1966.  Now, did you go directly to--
Speaker 2: To MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology]?
Speaker 1: --to graduate school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to MIT?
Speaker 2: I went to MIT.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Actually, I spent the summer in France first.  I, I got a student internship at [La] Gaude, France in Nautz (ph.) so I spent the summer in France and living with a French family, and traveled around Europe for about three weeks after that and then came home.  And then went almost immediately to MIT.
Speaker 1: Now, that sounds like an exciting--
Speaker 2: Oh, I, it was, it was, yeah, it was fun.  It was a good experience.  You know, I got quite good at, at speaking French.  I don't do very well any more 'cause it's been too long, and it was, the biggest thing was, I had the experience of living in a different culture, which I think is actually valuable for everyone.  It, it's different, different in ways you wouldn't think of initially.  And I think the, the lesson I learned from it is that, other cultures are different, but not better or worse.  And, and if you want to, if you--you can find something in other cultures that's attractive and that's, that's nice.  So we, and to this day, I like going back to France.  Yeah, I think it's a nice environment to live in and to visit.
Story_ID: 24932
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology].  Now, so you decided to go into inorganic chemistry?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I actually applied in physical chemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay, physical chemistry.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, who were some of your teachers at MIT?
Speaker 2: Well, my--
Speaker 1: You probably were familiar with the place, right, coming out of Harvard [University]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had, I think I had taken a, no, I don't think I had taken a class there, but I, I knew about it.  I knew people who, who were there.  And I looked at, I looked at several places, University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign], MIT and Berkley [University of California].  I didn't apply to Berkley, 'cause their application form had too many pages in it.  And it was a long way off.  And the area I wanted to be in, MIT was a, looked like a good place to, a good place to go.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, at MIT, were there any special professors or--
Speaker 2: Yes, there is, I'm drawing a complete blank right now as to his name.  There was one really good teacher, who actually taught quantum mechanics, Silvey, Professor Silvey, which is actually the best class I think I've ever taken anywhere.
Speaker 1: Silvey, S-I-L--
Speaker 2: S-I-L-V-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember one exam he gave.  At the end of the exam, we worked out a problem on exam, and it actually illustrated something he hadn't yet actively taught in class.  But we worked it out on the exam, and then at the end of the exam, you felt, ghee, I really understand this now.  Okay, he was really very, very good at good at doing it.  He was the only college teacher that I had that really had that, had that knack.  My advisor was, was Richard Holm.  I never took any course from Professor Holm.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you take any time to celebrate a Masters degree or did you just--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --go right--
Speaker 2: Went right through to the PhD.
Story_ID: 24933
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was your dissertation about?
Speaker 2: The title of my dissertation was "The Stereo Chemical Rearrangements of Triskelaid (ph.) Complexes".  So it's actually about how, to take one of a cobalt complex that had bidente ligands, six leggings around it, three bidentate ligands (ph.), how it changed, changed shape, how it could isomerize and whether you had to take a ligand off to cause it to isomerize or whether you could just sort of twist it in your hand and get it, get it isomerize.  And it turns out, both can happen.  And I was able to work out, using NMR [nuclear magnetic resonance], a method of determining what was the dominant pathway.  And so I looked at that for a number of different, different materials, cobalt, scandium, meridium, rhodium, I can't remember now.  I'd have to go look and see.  And actually, that actually ended up in textbooks for a while.  I don't know if it's still there.  I remember giving a talk when my son at Grinnell [College], and the chemistry professor came up and say, yeah, you know, he opens the textbook and he says, some of your work is in here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, that's, that's gotta be encouraging.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was, that was nice to know.  Yeah, I enjoyed graduate school.  It was, you know, it was a lot of work, as it usually is, but then everybody else is working hard.  It wasn't, you know, you weren't weird in any way.  And I finished in a reasonable length of time then went on to get a job.
Story_ID: 24934
Speaker 1: Okay, so you also had like a pre-doctoral fellowship from National Science Foundation, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, right.  And this is one that you apply for.  It's a competitive fellowship.  And it gave me a little extra money.  I had a teaching assistantship, and then that gave me a little extra money to live on.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so how good do you have to be to get that?
Speaker 2: It's pretty competitive.  I don't know the statistics.  I could probably go look them up.  Not very many are given out.  And it's given to the student.  It's not a, it's not a school fellowship.  You can take it anywhere.  So you take the GRE, you make an application and there's a, I've actually served on the committees that, you know, after I graduated, I've served on a couple of the committees to, to select students for this.  So it's a pretty competitive position.  It was considered quite an honor at the time.
Story_ID: 24935
Speaker 1: All right, okay, so, 1967, well, 1970 you get your PhD?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so were you recruited heavily by--
Speaker 2: No, I, I applied several places, basically with help from my advisor, interviewed at two, I think, at [University of] Illinois and Caltech [California Institute of Technology] and was offered the position at Caltech and accepted it.  I don't really remember now whether I applied, I probably applied other places.  I don't remember interviewing any other places.  Typically, there aren't a lot of positions in, professorship positions in research institutions.  And I wanted to be in a research institution.
Story_ID: 24936
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were hired by Caltech [California Institute of Technology] as a--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --as a professor of, assistant professor--
Speaker 2: Assistant professor of chemistry.
Speaker 1: Chemistry, now, how did that come about?
Speaker 2: I don't actually know the whole contact sequence.  I think my, you know, Professor Holm said there was an opening there, and did I wanna apply for it?  I said, yes, I wanted to apply for it.  She probably called someone and I made application.  I went out and interviewed.  I don't remember exactly when I interviewed now.
Speaker 1: Now, was there anything special about your graduation from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology]?  I mean did you graduate with some special honors or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I graduated with honors from Harvard [University], but not, but I don't know if MIT even gave special honors for the PhD program.  I submitted my thesis after normal graduation.  So I came back '71' [1971] to actually graduate, even though I had actually finished, I finished in September of '70' [1970].
Speaker 1: Okay, I guess I should ask you now, who were some of the--I know there, MIT was full of luminaries and stuff.  But I just wonder who was there when you were there that you remember that--
Speaker 2: Well, okay, well, in chemistry there were people like John Wau and, and, let's see, Syforth (ph.) who was very well known in main group chemistry.  There was, well, Decomb (ph.) is very well known in inorganic chemistry.  I don't, let's see who was there?  Were there any Nobel Prize winners in chemistry at the time?  I'm not sure there were any Nobel Prize winners there in chemistry at the time.  Who else was particularly well known?  The people I interacted with were a group of fairly young professor who came in just a few years before I did.  In fact, Dick Holm came a year after I arrived.  And, oh, Al Cotton was a senior inorganic chemist at the time, who eventually went to Texas.  He was very well known.  There were a few people who really weren't, you know, national stature in their fields, but I don't remember now, particular people who would stand out as being head and shoulders above the rest.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, Har Gobind Khorana was the big guy in organic chemistry, has a whole lab built for him.
Speaker 1: Right, we have his name here, yeah, Gobind Khorana.
Speaker 2: Khorana, yeah.  I didn't have any interactions with him.  He was biochemical or maybe a biologist, I'm not sure.  Whitesides was the other person whose now very well known and is, was a young assistant professor and had very odd hours.
Speaker 1: In what sense?  What--
Speaker 2: Oh, he would come in like early afternoon and stay all night, kind of thing, and he expected his graduate students to do the same thing.  Dick Holm came in early in the morning and stayed until around 10:00 at night.  Then basically, expected his graduate students to do the same thing.  So you had to sort of fit your schedule to your professor's schedule.
Speaker 1: Now, this level of science from everybody I've, we've interviewed, seems to be consuming, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, it--
Speaker 1: --once you're working on a project.
Speaker 2: It's pretty much all consuming.  I mean you, you basically, well, if you were single, it was really all consuming.  If you were married, there were other responsibilities.  Typically, your wife or husband expected you home at a reasonable hour and so these guys, you know, had to get home at a reasonable hour.  And they just had to be a lot more efficient, I guess, during the day (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but we, we still had time on the weekends to, to do stuff.  But, yeah, during the week, it was a pretty, pretty intense operation.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that gives us some sense of it.
Story_ID: 24937
Speaker 1: So, hired at Caltech [California Institute of Technology], 1970.  So--
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy [1970], yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so you go out there, and what was--now, Caltech, now I have to think about it, had a famous physicist out there, Richard--
Speaker 2: Oh, Richard Fineman.
Speaker 1: Fineman, yeah, right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I remember Richard Fineman and Maury Gelman, and it turns out my wife was in a singing group with their wives.  So we, you know, we got to know them through the informal, informal channels.  And it was a quite different place from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology].  MIT was rather formal.  People wore ties and jackets all the time.  You addressed your professor as professor until you graduated, and then you could call him, Dick, you know, but at Caltech it was entirely the opposite.  No one wore a tie.  Most of the professors were addressed by even the new graduate students by their first names, except for a few, at least in chemistry.  And it was a much more open environment.  I wouldn't say it was any less pressure though for the students.  And it was quite a bit of pressure on the faculty to, you know, to publish and become well known basically.
Speaker 1: Okay, which environment did you prefer?
Speaker 2: I think it would have been more fun being a graduate student at Caltech.  And I suspect it was probably better being a faculty at Caltech, but I'm not sur.  I was never on the faculty at MIT, so I don't really know what the interactions were among the faculty members.  Yeah, so I don't really know.
Story_ID: 24938
Speaker 1: Okay, so I take it that you were doing research too at Caltech [California Institute of Technology]?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was teaching and research.
Speaker 1: So how, well, how was your load balanced?
Speaker 2: Well, I had an exceptionally heavy teaching load.  I think I really didn't understand at the time that I could have refused it, okay, and I probably should have.  I was hired to, initially to, to handle freshman chemistry, laboratory and to teach an advanced course.  And it turned out one of the senior faculty went on sabbatical so I ended up taking his course also that year.  And then something else happened the next year, and I ended up taking, teaching an extra course that year.  And that, that probably was not a, not a good idea.  In hindsight, I probably wouldn't, wouldn't do it again.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were there from 1970 to 1975?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did anything significant happen there that you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, two things significant happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One was that I was drafted, okay.  And actually, I ended up enlisting in the Navy.  But I didn't stay in the Navy for very long.  I went to Naval OCS.  But that meant I had to shut down my research program.  This was in 1971.  I'd been there a year.  And I think in the fall of seventy--January '72' [1972], I went to, to Rhode Island for the Naval OCS [officer training command].  I turned twenty-six by then, and decided this really wasn't the career I wanted and talked to a lawyer and realized that I could, I could resign.  So I resigned.  And the draft people said, you know, you're over twenty-six.  We don't have any more to deal with you.  And so I went back to Caltech and tried to restart things.  Oh, got married in the meantime, okay, after I finished--
Speaker 1: Now, where did you meet your wife?
Speaker 2: I actually, first--we knew each other as children in Winston-Salem [North Carolina].  She was there when we moved in.  She left in 1956 or '57' [1957], just after we moved there.  But we really didn't interact.  I, I interacted with her brothers.  We met again when I was in college, and she needed a date for one of her girlfriends who was visiting.  And things just sort of took off from there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  So you got married around 19--
Speaker 2: We were married in March of '72' [1972].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So when I got back to Caltech, I never really got my research program running again, and I hadn't been gone long enough to get the clock stopped basically for--so I didn't get tenure at Caltech.  And, but it turned out that I'd done a sabbatical at, summer sabbatical at IBM and had an interest from there and Bell Labs sort of independent of the tenure situation.  And, you know, I interviewed both places and accepted the job at IBM.
Story_ID: 24939
Speaker 1: Okay, now, a lot of the people we've talked to, you know, say that Bell Labs [Bell Laboratories] was by far the best place to work, and you had so much more freedom there to create and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: It was the same at IBM Research when I went there.  I'd say, at the time, the Bell Labs and IBM and, and possibly GE [General Electric] Labs were the, were the big places.  I think Bell had the bigger reputation.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But I fit better into the group at IBM, I thought, than I would have at the group at Bell.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you come out, you go to San Jose [California], here, to the Almaden Research Center?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what did you work on?
Speaker 2: Well, initially, I, I, I worked on surface Plasmon's as a method of characterizing very thin films on surfaces.  And actually I did that because my lab wasn't ready to do what I wanted to do which was to work on liquid junction solar cells.  And it turned out that that, this surface Plasmon mushroomed into a mainstream project.  And I spent several years working, working on that.  And also in introducing electrochemistry to the lab.
Speaker 1: So you introduced electrochemistry to the lab?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So after graduate school, when I went to Caltech [California Institute of Technology], I started working on oxygen catalysis and with the thought of developing a, a catalyst for an oxygen electrode and field cells.  That was a long, long-range view.
Speaker 1: Now, it's, let me go back a second just to ask you what, what is electrochemistry and how does it differ from other chemistry?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, electrochemistry is a subset of physical chemistry that actually deals with what happens when you pass a current through a solution.  So if I do electroplating, I pass a current, and I reduce say a copper iron and make a copper metal.  And I get a copper plate.  Or I can do things like take oxygen out of the air and reduce it and that the other electrode, I can oxidize something like methane or hydrogen and make a fuel cell, generate power that way.  So electrochemistry is a science of understanding what happens when you couple electron transport with chemical reactions in a, in a system.
Speaker 1: Okay, it says here that you worked as a research staff member and then as an interfacial electrochemistry manager?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I started off as a research staff member, and that's the standard, you know, staff scientist position, and then eventually, after a few years, I was asked to manage the group and ended up having a number of management jobs after that in different, different groups. So the first time I managed a group, 'cause it was called interfacial electrochemistry, and we were looking at how to character--how to understand what went on, on the surfaces of electrodes, try to understand the electroless copper-plating reactions and that group developed a number of techniques for finding out what was on the surface, that is, you have a metal surface in contact with a liquid.  And it's quite difficult to figure out what's there.  And so we developed a technique called a quartz crystal microbalance.  It allowed us to actually weigh single atomic layers so we could tell how much was put down.  We developed a technique, well, we worked on a technique called surface-enhanced rom, and other people had developed it, had invented it, but we, we developed it further and produced some understanding of that, that allows you to take vibration spectra of the material on the surfaces.  And then I think the, the biggest thing we did was to develop x-ray techniques for looking at the surfaces.  So we could do x-ray diffraction, like you do for crystals, but you can also do it for two-dimensional films.  And we also developed surface XAFS, X-ray Absorption Fine Structure, which looked at the absorption spectrum in the x-ray region, and there're little wiggles on it that you can actually interpret.  They gave you structural information.  And those are the first experiments that actually gave real structural information about what I call a varied interface.  And so that was actually a pretty exciting period.  It was about ten years that we worked on that, the group worked on that.
Story_ID: 24940
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, in '84' [1984], you received the IBM Research Division Award for Contributions to the Printed Writing Process.
Speaker 2: Printed writing?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I don't--that's what it says here.  I don't know what--printed wiring.
Speaker 2: Oh, printed wiring--
Speaker 1: Wiring process, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: --process, yes.  Oh, yeah.  That, we worked on a problem that IBM had, but the printed, actually, it's a printed circuit boards for the mainframe computer weren't coming out well.  And so we had a team of researchers who were called in to help understand what the, what the problem was, and I think we did a number of, of interesting things.  As is frequently the case in these situations, it's not a fundamental chemistry problem.  It was, it was an issue of, of process control and several different steps are needed to be, to be adjusted, and the team did a good job of figuring that out.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  In, now, let me know if I'm skipping past something significant here, but just going from the outline, in '88' [1988], you received the IBM Outstanding Technical Achievement Award for an NC-2 Structural Studies of Electrochemical Interfacial--
Speaker 2: Right, that's the x-ray diffraction and surface XAFS I was telling you about.  There were two components to that.  One was doing structure of what we call at-layers, other atoms that are on the surface, and there was another award, a little bit later, for, I think it's the structure of water--I don't remember how it's stated, where we actually are able to determine which around a water molecule is oriented on the surface, whether it's oxygen down or hydrogen down.  And actually, we could actually see it flip.  So those are, actually, I think, were pretty significant additions to the scientific literature in this area.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I was gonna ask you, how many outstanding technical achievement awards does IBM award in a given year?
Speaker 2: Probably, in our laboratory, there would have been two or three, maybe.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I'm thinking.  This is kind of a rare--
Speaker 2: It's not, it's not very often, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's a countable number each year.
Speaker 1: So this is sort of a singular honor?
Speaker 2: That, that's the major honor for, for, for scientific work, and it required not just internal recognition, but also required that it be recognized externally as a significant work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, the, the committee that, you know, that did the final, final approval, actually would call up people and, and solicit external evaluations.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is a significant accomplishment--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's not Employee of the Month or (laughter)--
Speaker 2: No, this is not employee of the month.
Speaker 1: This is a really--
Speaker 2: This, yeah, yeah.  Most people would get one or two of these in their careers, as sort of a, would be very good.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were honored in 1990 as Black Engineer of the Year for outstanding technical achievement.  Is that by--
Speaker 2: That's by the deans of the Historically Black Colleges and Universities [HBCUs], I think, or is it "Black Engineer Magazine"?
Speaker 1: I'm not sure.  They don't have the source here.  I wonder if it was the National Black, the engineering group or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it's the black engineering group.  And there's another award from the deans.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know what it is.  It's from "National Black Engineers".
Speaker 1: The National Society of Black Engineers, that's what it is?  Yeah, that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah,
Speaker 1: NSB[E], yeah, okay.  All right, so that's--
Speaker 2: Actually, I should, I should look that up and tell you.  I don't (unclear) to get that right.
Story_ID: 24941
Speaker 1: Okay, and so in 1990, you were promoted to manager of the material science department at IBM?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's a second-line department, so I had managers reporting to me at that stage, and I did less science from then on.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's more administrative?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you, did you welcome that kind of a change or did you wanna do more research that--
Speaker 2: I actually welcomed that, that change.  It was a challenge, and I was able to keep a hand in, in the scientific area, just not as intensively as before.  So I didn't get my name on as many papers, but I still had people who reported to me, who were doing good work, and I got a, had a chance to help direct that and guide it.
Speaker 1: Okay, it says here that you conducted research on the atomic structure of chemical compounds, and your team was the first to determine how the atomic structure of a solid compound and a liquid compound change when they come in contact with one another.
Speaker 2: That's right, so that's the x-ray diffraction XFAS and this quartz crystal microbalance work contributed to that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a sort of general summary of what we were doing.
Speaker 1: And you managed thirty people and four projects with responsibility for large analytical instrumentation?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, what is--I have all these letters here, TEM, SIM, RBS, XPS.
Speaker 2: Oh, these are all characterization techniques, transmission electron microscopy, secondary ion microscopy, Rutherford back scattering would be RBS.  I'm not sure what else I have listed there.  We had a department that did, that did characterization for people that required machines that were bigger, that you'd have in your own laboratory, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that, that--I was the manager of that for a while.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so you were involved surface x-ray scattering and that's all, another measurement--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, there was a, and you're publishing during this period of time?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah, I kept publishing until about 19--mid-'90's [1990s], some time, I think, when I took over as another position as technical staff manager which is a, the chief of staff for the laboratory director. And that job took so much time I really couldn't do any other, other science at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's, and you took that job, in what year was it?
Speaker 2: Now, I'm not quite sure what job that was.  I think it was around 2000 or something like that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --or maybe a little after.
Story_ID: 24942
Speaker 1: All right, now, 1993, you received the Percy Julian Award from NOBCChE--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --National Organization [for the professional advancement] of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers.  And that's, you know, that's their highest award.
Speaker 2: That's their highest award, yeah.  I had been pretty active in NOBCChE [National Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers] for a while.  I was actually on the board of directors, I don't know, for how many years.
Speaker 1: Were you with them from the beginning in--
Speaker 2: No, I think, I think I became involved the second year.  I wasn't at--I think their first meeting was in New Orleans [Louisiana].  I did not make the New Orleans meeting, and I think I first got involved the year after that or the second year after that.  I'm not quite sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, how--just kind of explain to us the importance of black chemists and chemical engineers uniting in an organization?
Speaker 2: Well, for me the key thing that NOBCChE did was to provide a forum for the younger black scientists and for the black graduate students to present work before a supportive audience and to get help when it could, and also to have role models of other black scientists.  I actually don't think that, that it's a strong professional advance because the community is too small.  Your reputation is really made by doing things with the American Chemical Society or Materials Research Society or something like that.  So NOBCChE has a different, a different role.  And I don't think all, everybody agrees with me on this, but where I think it's value is, is in providing an environment and a forum for education, guidance and mentoring of the younger scientists coming up.
Speaker 1: Now, when you, before you got involved with NOBCChE, were you aware of people like Dr. Henry McBay and--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't know about Henry, Dr. Henry McBay.  I didn't go to a predominantly black school.  So I didn't, I didn't have that, that history.  I knew of, of people like Sam Massey because he was a compatriot of my father and a friend.  He visited the house.  I mean, and I'd--there were people of that kind.  That was the way I knew, knew black scientists and engineers.  So, so, no, I didn't, I had a different sort of tentacle upbringing than someone who had gone to a historically black college.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were you kind of surprised or glad to find out about these other--
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't surprised.  I, I mean I was glad to find out about them, and I was, I was interested to learn the history and the role that they had played.  And I realized it was a major role in many people's lives in making things, making things possible.  And I, you know, I knew of many of the schools, well, because we talked about 'em at home.  I mean we knew most of the black colleges around.  It's just that I hadn't had that much experience with them.  My brother who went to Fisk [University], will have a completely different, different view on things.
Story_ID: 24943
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, in 1997, you're awarded the IBM Technical Group Award for something that had to do with water molecule arrangements.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's the (unclear), that's the water flipping, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So this is, now, did, okay.  How was IBM to work for in terms of, now, you're, I imagine they didn't have very many black chemists before you came aboard?
Speaker 2: There were, when I came aboard, there were, there was one other, and that was Bill Lester.  We hired one more, Ken Carter.  I'm not quite sure exactly when he came on board.  And about ten years ago, we hired another, Al Nelson.  Yeah, so there weren't very many blacks at the time in, in, at IBM, although we had--oh, Delores Miller was, was there, and she's still there actually.  Let me see, who else?  And there were a couple in computer science.  I don't know, didn't have a lot of dealings with, I can't remember their names right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that year, I was, I was--Bill and I were the only two out of--oh, I'm sorry, Bill and I and Delores, out of a group of about 250, maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And, you know, how, I mean did you go through--I mean I don't know if you, if you know about what other black professionals were going through, but (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know, I, I haven't had the same experience as other black scientists because I don't look black to everybody.  And so in many cases I, I would, would be in a group and, and, you know, unless I said something or something came up, I'd worked for years with someone, and they wouldn't know I was black.  And, in fact, I went to some, one training session that had to do with, with diversity, and, you know, we got up and talked about ourselves.  And when I said I was black, someone in back says, ghee, I thought you were Hispanic (laughter), okay, so, so I, I really haven't had the really negative experiences that, that a lot of our, our scientists have.  I've had some funny ones, like I've had, you know, one colleague I was working with said when we were sitting at lunch one day, and he's making very disparaging statements about black workers at an IBM plant in North Carolina, and my colleague sitting across from me was sort of screwing up his face and trying to give signs (laughter).  And I said, you know, well, you know, I'm black.  I, I don't, and I don't think that's, that's quite fair to characterize everybody that way.  And, you know, he shut up and thought about it.  We'd published papers together, you know, we have patents together.  And, and it just blew over.  So I don't really what went on in his mind.  We're still close, we're still good friends.  It never had any really negative repercussions besides the statement there.  I hope it changed his mind a little bit, and there've been other people, you know, the usual comments that, you know, that I was able to advance faster than other people because I was black, and things like that.  There were a few people who said that, and not, not--at IBM, you wouldn't say to anybody's face.  You wouldn't say it to his manager.  You wouldn't say to anybody you didn't trust because the culture was very strong of, of being ethnically and religiously blind, okay.  And, and any kind of misstatement was really taken quite seriously.  So I didn't hear it very often.  And it was usually in, really informal settings where, where or secondhand or something like that.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: But, yeah, I'm sure that things were said, okay, but, but not to my face, and I had very few cases of, of where I felt mistreated.  Now, there was one manager I have some questions about, but nothing, nothing overt.  And I had very good support from, from my first manager, George Castro, who, you know, helped me with some of the, learning the ropes of how you deal with a culture, a business culture and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I've been, I've been really, really lucky in that regard and that I haven't had the, had most of these--you know, once-- after leaving North Carolina and except for a little bit of stuff at Harvard [University], and a little bit at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], it wasn't, nothing was very severe.
Story_ID: 24944
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in 2000, you were elected as a fellow of the American Physical Society.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, that is a big deal.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a pretty big honor.
Speaker 1: Yeah, big honor too.
Speaker 2: I'm really quite proud of that.  And that's based upon a lifetime career achievement and not a, not a single, single event.  And it takes a lot of work by somebody, I think Jamie Kaufman put me up for that, and I know he had to do a lot of work to, to get it through.
Speaker 1: Okay, 2004, you were awarded the IBM Research Division Technical Group Award for quote "Component Reliability Analysis and Predictions for PSG"?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was something to do with hard disk drives, and I had served on a, and led part of a panel to help with a problem with a, with a failure in some hard disk drives.  I've forgotten what PSG [photopolymerized sol-gel] means right now (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's not in Chinese food, is it?
Speaker 2: No, no, it's not Chinese (laughter).  It stands for something, but I've forgotten exactly what it is.
Story_ID: 24945
Speaker 1: Yeah, tell us now, now, we were trying to figure out what the PSG [photopolymerized sol-gel] problem was, but you do know what the problem was?
Speaker 2: I know what the problem was.  I just didn't know what the initials stand for.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it had to do with, with failure of bearing in the disk drive, and it turned out that one of the suppliers had, had put an oil on a part.  They oiled the part to keep it from rusting as when they ship it from Japan to Taiwan or something.  I can't, I don't remember exactly what the path was.  And they had changed the composition of the oil.  And the new oil reacted with some of the other components and would get sticky.  And so the drive would, would stop.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it took us a long time actually to figure out exactly what, what it was 'cause it had nothing to do with the things that actually went in the drive.  It was something that was just put on as a temporary, protective measure, and it turned out that it was incompatible.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So and also in 2004, you're appointed to several different management positions at IBM, beginning in 2004, I'm sorry--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You're a batteries and displays manager--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --technical staff manager.
Speaker 2: Let's see, I must have come off technical staff manager in 2004.  So I must have become technical staff manager in 2000, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, you were manager of the New Directions in Science and Technology and Research and relationship manager for healthcare--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and then senior manager for manager for Materials for Advanced Technology--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the last position I held.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so these are all like management jobs, and when I was reading over this, we were discussing it, and I thought maybe, you know, it seems like your management, you know, duties were like amped up, you know--
Speaker 2: They were.
Speaker 1: -- you were, more and more management.
Speaker 2: They were.  So, starting around, when I came off the staff (unclear), I didn't have any, any more direct reports who were actually doing scientific or technical projects that I was personally involved in, except for the batteries and displays group.  I think at some stage, some of us had an idea we wanted to make an electro-fretic (ph.) display.  And I decided to step out of higher management and go down and manage a first-line group to do that.  And we actually had some, some success in, in creating electro-fretic approach and also in working organic light-emitting diodes, displays for, using organic light-emitting materials.  That work stopped because the, IBM sold the display group.  And so there was no good reason to do research on displays anymore.  Okay, and when that happened, I basically moved into the other management position which, which--it happened to be one of--there was a retirement from the manager of that group.  And so I took over basically the, what was the low-key dielectrics (ph.), the photo-resist development and computational chemistry groups.  And at the same time, we had a, the research division at IBM is a corporate division.  And in order for us to, to make sure we're closely coupled with the, you know, with the business groups, we would have relationship managers.  So my task was to be the, the person who would couple the research division with the healthcare business group.  And that meant, you know, when they had a question, I would find the right person in research to address it, help with setting strategies, doing, getting people together to do the right kind of reviews and just make sure that we had the, a close connection between the research division and the business people.
Story_ID: 24946
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, some place within your career at IBM, didn't you do something, didn't you develop a new battery or something for--
Speaker 2: Okay, yes, during this, about the same time, in early 2000, well, since 1990 I had been working on, with the "Think Pad" division on lithium ion batteries.  And in the early, mid-'90's [1990s]--I'd have to go back and figure out the dates now, I had a small group that I actually was trying to develop a new lithium ion battery for, for portable electronics.  After a while though, it became obvious, when I put together several business plans, that IBM wasn't interested in making batteries.  So we, we stopped that effort also.  But it turned out that the "Think Pad" people still needed technical assistance in setting standards for, for safety, the qualification standards, and there're a whole stream of new technologies coming on, and they needed somebody to help them evaluate the new technologies.  So I stayed involved in that for a while.  And then in the, around 2002, '03' [2003], there were a series of laptop fires that were quite publicized.  And so all of the laptop companies then put together groups to investigate the cause.  So every single incident was investigated.  And I was the technical person for the IBM incident team who worked with the engineers in development and with outside consultants to do a failure analysis on each incident so we actually knew what was going on and could feed back to the battery manufacturer that they needed to correct some part of the manufacturing process.  So that was a pretty intense operation for about, for two or two and a half years.  Yeah, one year I remember I spent more than a 180 days in hotels, traveling to various places to perform the analyses.
Speaker 1: Now, that's between 2003 and 2005?
Speaker 2: I think, I think that was the time.  I'd have to go back and look and--
Speaker 1: I remember the incidents, yeah, an Apple computer battery caught fire--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it caught fire at some conference--
Speaker 1: Yeah, and blew, yeah.
Speaker 2: --yeah, right, okay.  And every time there was even a report of something at an IBM thing, we'd go and investigate it, whether it got into the news or not.  And I also, at that stage helped with the, what series is it?  I think it's the T-40 series.  We put in a number of improvements in that battery pack to help reduce the severity of a failure of an individual cell, okay.  And several people at research were involved in, in helping with that and to getting these things and doing simulations, doing calculations, doing experiments.
Speaker 1: So if it did get hot enough, it wouldn't actually flame up or something?
Speaker 2: Right, yes, so it wouldn't catch fire, and it wouldn't set off an adjacent cell.  If you have a single-cell failure, that's usually not real serious.  The big incidents happen when you have one cell set off another cell, sets off another cell.  And you get all six or all nine go off.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, but, okay, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that actually took a lot of time.  I was actually, at that time I was also the second-line manager.  So that was a pretty, that was a pretty, how do I say it--fully occupied my time for a while.
Speaker 1: Hectic time, I guess.
Speaker 2: Very hectic, that's the word I'm looking for (laughter).
Story_ID: 24947
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So, now, in 2009, you joined Advanced Tech--the Advanced Technology group in the Office of the CTO at Applied Materials Incorporated.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Now, what happened, you know, where you switched companies?
Speaker 2: Well, basically, I'd worked for IBM for a while.  And I got a call from CTO [chief technology officer] saying, you know, they actually wanted someone who knew about batteries.  And he talked to a bunch of people, and I came, my name kept coming up.  So he wanted to talk to me, and we talked, and it looked like it was an interesting opportunity.  It would be a completely different thing from what I had been doing at IBM.  And I thought, you know, I'm at a stage in my career where I can do some different things, and if it doesn't work out, you know, I could retire or, or find something else.  You know, I didn't, I didn't--I didn't have aspirations of, you know, being company president or anything like that.  And so I decided to take it, and, and to look at new energy storage technologies for applied materials and also to investigate a whole bunch of other things that would come up that are not traditional semiconductor type of things.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, Applied Materials have been around since 1967, it says here.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's right.  Okay, and, okay.  So, and they're in Santa Clara, California?
Speaker 2: They're in Santa Clara [California].  That's about sixteen miles form here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I have a somewhat longer commute now than I had before.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, just tell us about some of the things you've done, you know, at Applied Materials?
Speaker 2: Okay, well, since I came to Applied Materials, basically, what I've been doing is looking at, at a range of different potential business opportunities for the company, including various types of energy storage, from thin-film batteries to grid storage, looked at water purification and a bunch of other things that I'm really not at liberty to say anything about right now.  But it's basically other things outside of the traditional areas.  So the CTO's office is, the Advance Technology group and the CTO's office is looking at areas that are not simply advancing the current technology that the company does.  It's looking for different technology.  And so I get to work pretty closely with, with the people who look for new companies, but we, applied ventures which invests in start-ups, and with other potential partners that we might eventually wanna work with.  It's a combination of technical development and business development.  And so I also work pretty closely with the business development team in figuring out whether the thing we're looking at is a really, a new business opportunity or not.  I mean can you make money at it, how big is it going to be, in addition to determining whether or not it's technically feasible and what does it take to actually get it to a product.  So it's a different, I mean at IBM I was really looking more at understanding fundamental issues and then creating a roadmap for what might be done to advance the technology in areas that IBM was in as well as doing some basic science.  So this is a quite, quite different thing.  It didn't have quite a strong a business focus to it as the current position does.  And that's, that was one of the reasons I took it.  It was going to be an interesting challenge, I thought, to really understand how you turned a technology into a business and a product.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you're still at Applied Materials?
Speaker 2: I'm still at Applied Materials.  I've been there about, what four years now, right, almost four years.
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything on the horizon that you would like to do that, I mean besides, you know, finishing your work at Applied Materials?
Speaker 2: I don't have a, a particular goal of getting to position or doing anything.  I'd like to make a contribution to the, to the energy efficiency, energy use technologies, that would actually help the country and the world make better use of energy, more efficient use of energy and, you know, possibly address issues that have to do with ICO-2 and high population density and things like that, but from a technical point of view.  But I don't, I don't have a single thing in mind that's a single focus.  I probably would like to be into, do this in the energy storage area though.  And that's what I'm looking at most heavily.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you see that there's an opportunity with the background that you have and the skills, I mean the knowledge that you developed to make a significant contribution to that--
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: --if the opportunity comes up.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 24948
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing you wish you'd done differently or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the one thing--there are two things that I would have done differently.  One is, I would have stayed an extra year at Harvard [University] and taken some more courses in classical physics and probably some other chemistry courses and probably some advanced economics courses.  And I think it probably would have been beneficial to have done a post-doc instead of going directly to a, to an assistant professor job right out of graduate school.  I think those are the only two things I would have done, done differently.
Story_ID: 24949
Speaker 1: Okay, we always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm hoping that we can instill a deeper appreciation for, for the importance of education and get more blacks to really work harder earlier.  The problem that I see quite frequently is that we just haven't worked hard enough in the elementary and high schools to create the background that allows us to, to get the really strong positions in advanced education, take advantage of the advanced education.  And that's, that's really about the biggest thing that I see.  And I, when I look back at my life, I mean my family and all the people we associated with, it was just a given that you were going to go to school and that you'd do as well as you could.  I mean not everybody could do, you know, be at the top of their class, but you do as well as you could and that you'd get an education.  And so that's my actually, biggest hope for the black community today.  And I think that was what's driven my involvement in things like NOBCChE [National Organization for the professional advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers].
Story_ID: 24950
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, when you look back again at everything you've done to this point, what do you consider today to be your legacy in terms of the things you've been able to do?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm hoping that I'll be recognized for the work we did in the, understanding the interfacial structure, the techniques we developed and the knowledge we gained in that.  And I say "we" because, you know, I didn't, I didn't do it all myself.  It was a team of us who actually, who did it.  I, I helped, I initiated it and helped guide it along, but depended on a lot of other people.  And I think for scientists that's really pretty much all you can hope for.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, I think there's not, I mean I don't, I don't have a--it's very hard to predict how things are going to come out, and it's very hard to predict ahead of time what's really going to be important until you've done it and you see whether it works and whether you can find out the information you think you're gonna find out.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 24951
Speaker 1: Well, tell us something about your family?  Now, you've got a, you told us about getting married.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you've got a son.
Speaker 2: So I have one son.  He's adopted.  He's a family adoption.  And he's, he grew up here in San Jose, went to Leland High School and Simon's Elementary School down the road, and Bret Hart Middle School.  And then he went to Grinnell [College], finished Grinnell in Iowa.  And he's now a physical therapist and lives with his wife in Los Gatos [California], and he was a, a very good athlete growing up, and so I got involved, you know, I coached his soccer team and we did the usual things, you know, he was in baseball, he was in soccer.  So we did the little league baseball.  We did the local soccer leagues.  He's a violinist, quite good violinist.  So he's in the San Jose Symphony, Youth Orchestra, and so that was another thing we took time to, to go through and do.  And I think, you know, since 1985 or so, when he came to live with us, we've been pretty much, you know, being parents (laughter).  And I'm not sure how else you would describe it.  And we're quite pleased with the way things have turned out.  So he's married now, and he's living in Los Gatos and his wife has a child on the way.  So, we're, I'll be a grandparent pretty soon.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, congratulations.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what did your parents think about your career?  Did they--
Speaker 2: Oh, I think they were quite proud of it in the end.  I would, at least when I was in graduate school and for a few years after it, I would, I would write out a little explanation of what I had done the past year in non-technical language so that my mother [Juanita Gordon] could have something that she said she could understand.  And, you know, we would talk about my experiences and things.  And, you know, I, I think they were quite pleased with the way things turned out, even though to my mother, it was, it was a surprise, but both of them felt, felt quite proud of what I've done.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to explore before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think here if there's anything else that I wanted to, wanted to bring out.  No, I don't think so.  I think that gives a pretty, pretty good picture.  I guess one thing I should add is that I didn't have very much family out here in California, and neither did my wife.  So when we moved out, we basically hitched up with a bunch of other newbie's from other parts of the country and sort of created our own, our own little family.  So we have a small group of friends that we meet with regularly, and whose kids have grown up together and stuff like that.  So we made it feel like home, and one of the things that's different today than when my mother was growing up is that when she grew up, in Sumter, there was this huge family.  Everybody was related to everybody else.  There were people who were related, but we didn't know how they were related, but they all showed up at the family events and stuff.  And so, you know, it was a quite cohesive operation.  Today, we're spread all over the place, so I have one brother who's still in Winston-Salem [North Carolina].  I have a brother who's in Houston [Texas].  My sister's in Atlanta [Georgia], and we don't get together very often, and so we had to create a sort of, a support group around us.  And I think we've been very lucky to be able to do that.
Story_ID: 24952
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as he was a good guy, he led a good life.  And I think not much beyond that.  I think it's more important to have affected people than to have a, you know, a famous something plaque, okay.  So that's really what I'd like to be remembered for.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: You're welcome.
Story_ID: 24953
Speaker 1: (PHOTOS) (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Tell us about this picture.  Just tell us what we're looking at here.
Speaker 2: Okay, so that's the extended, my father's [Joseph Gordon] extended family from a 1987 reunion.  And it has my aunts and uncles and a whole bunch of cousins. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, which are your parents?
Speaker 1: So this is my father here in this hat.  And this is his, this is, that's his sister's husband.
Speaker 2: And your father's name is?
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, no, no.  This is my father here and my mother [Juanita Gordon].  That's my father and mother-- (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Can you tell us his name?
Speaker 2: This is Joe Gordon and this is Juanita.  This is Uncle Ted, that's dad's brother.  This is my brother, Eric.  This is Auntie, Ted's wife.  Let's see.  Luther's in here somewhere. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Is your Uncle Ted in Nashville [Tennessee]?
Speaker 1: No, these are all from New York, yeah, so this is just my father's side of the family, not my mother's side.  So this is one of his brothers, this is one of his sisters.  It's either Helen or Ruth.  They're twins.  I can't tell 'em apart.  Where's the other one?  I can't tell where the other one is.  And these are all, all nephews of various kinds. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, so one of the things my wife and I like to do is to take trips.  We used to go to Europe every couple of years, and after the first few, we realized, we cut back with all these pictures and we put--we had a hard time figuring out exactly where we were.  So we decided we, at the beginning of the day or the end of the day, we'd take a picture with a label.  So I used to carry one of these chalkboards with us, whiteboards with me (laughter) to do that. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  That's a great idea. (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE):  It was always in my suitcase.
Speaker 1: Yeah, actually, it served double purposes because it was used for my son's soccer practices too.
Speaker 2: And this is Ruth and me on vacation in the Netherlands somewhere.  This is in Hague in 1991, no-- (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE):  Oh, earlier than that.
Speaker 1: Earlier than that, '83', 1983.
Speaker 2: Okay, these are my maternal grandparents.  So that's grandmother on the left and granddaddy--grandmother on the right and granddaddy on the left.  These are my mother's parents.  Okay, I don't know when that picture was taken.
Speaker 1: Did you give their names?
Speaker 2: Oh, this is Gatson Jack Tarleton and Ruby Tarleton, Ruby Delaine Tarleton, I should say.
Speaker 1: This is my family, when was this taken?  This was about--Perry must have been in high school at the time.  So this would have been about 19--mid-'90's [1990s], '93' [1993] to '96' [1996], something like that, yeah.
Speaker 2: And this is my father, let me just wipe some of the dust off of there, probably in his late '50's I would guess.
Speaker 1: And he's--
Speaker 2: Oh, Dr. Joseph G. Gordon. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, you have to remember the audience is actually not us (laughter).
Speaker 1: Not us, right, okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: We already know.
Speaker 1: You already know, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, let me dust this off.  Oh, it just fell out of the frame.  Is that okay?  Do you wanna--so this is a picture of me at high school graduation in 1963. (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE):  That's Harvard [University].
Speaker 1: I don't think so, that's high school.  No, no, the haircut, honey, it's a butch, haircut.
Speaker 2: So that's Phillips Exeter [Academy]?
Speaker 1: At, from Phillips Exeter, yes.
Speaker 2: Here's one more.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's a picture of my wife and me, probably in the early '80's [1980s] here in San Jose [California]. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Every time I hear that name, that song goes (laughter) [song: "Do you know the way to San Jose?"]
Speaker 2: (Laughter), Yeah, "Do you know the way to San Jose?"
Speaker 1: You're showing you're old. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter)
Speaker 2: And this is a portrait of my mother, actually a photograph of my mother, Juanita Gordon.  I'm not exactly sure when this was.  I would say probably around 1960 some time.  So she would have been in her late '40's, early '50's.
