Story_ID: 668206
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Roger Lee Gregory [HistoryMaker Roger L. Gregory], R-O-G-E-R, L-E-E, G-R-E-G-O-R-Y.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: July 17, 1953, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a United States circuit judge, federal judge (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.  And you can give us specifics.
Speaker 2: Of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit in Richmond, Virginia.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is December 9, nine- 2016.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Richmond, Virginia, at the Lewis Powell Courthouse [Lewis F. Powell, Jr. U.S. Courthouse] for the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, in my chamber.
Story_ID: 668207
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight type of questions they ask us to ask that only require a short answer.  And first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Not really, no, not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The beach.
Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think one of--my favorite is that--when Justice Marshall [Thurgood Marshall] said--talked about when someone is making a point, that the question is--he said, is the currency reason or is it power [Payne v. Tennessee, 1991].
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In other words, is the basis for making a decision--is it based on reason or is it just power.
Speaker 1: That's an appropriate saying for this day and age.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 668208
Speaker 1: So I'm going to ask about your family history, your mother's side of the family and your father's [George L. Gregory] side.  And we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name--Fannie, F-A-N-N-I-E, Mae, M-A-E, Washington, W-A-S-H-I-N-G-T-O-N, Gregory, G-R-E-G-O-R-Y [Fannie Washington Gregory].
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December 7, 1924, Prince George, Virginia [Prince George County, Virginia].
Speaker 1: All right.  And, so what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Not far because I was adopted.  My mother, my mother's mother [Lucinda Washington] died when she was five years old.  And she was reared mostly by her aunt Suzie [Susan Washington].  And, so that's as far as--I never met any grandparents on my mother's side at all.  So, but then she has brothers and a sister.  So I knew my uncle, I had two uncles and a, and an aunt.  She had a brother and a sister who died rather young.  So that's my mother's side, so not a whole lot there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now your mother, she grew up in Prince George?
Speaker 2: Well, grew up mostly in Petersburg [Virginia] as a--young age, after her mother passed she moved to Petersburg with her aunt.  And she lived there, so Petersburg, since she was five years old.
Story_ID: 668209
Speaker 1: Now where did she [Gregory's mother, Fannie Washington Gregory] go to school in Petersburg [Virginia] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She went to elementary school at Virginia Avenue [Virginia Avenue Elementary School, Petersburg, Virginia], the same one I went to as elementary school and then I think early would be now middle school Giles B. Cooke School [Giles B. Cooke Elementary School, Petersburg, Virginia].  But her formal education ended at about the eighth or ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this is not unusual for those days, right?
Speaker 2: No, no, not at all, you know, those days were very difficult.  And very little scholarships and being a poor young black girl growing up in the South, it was not unusual--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --to start early.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, so, now what kind of talents did she have and what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother, she was a, she worked as a young kid, at sixteen years old at the Virginia State College [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] as a dormitory maid for briefly--brief while.  And then she worked at odd jobs, domestic jobs.  Then she worked in a tobacco factory [Brown and Williamson Tobacco Company] and then she worked in--domestic after that.  After the war was over, the women were laid off and the men returning in World War II [WWII], so she went to domestic work.  And then later she went back to the factory in the early '60s [1960s] and then she retired from there in the mid-'80s [1980s].
Story_ID: 668210
Speaker 1: Now can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: George, G-E-O-R-G-E, Lee, L-E-E, Gregory, G-R-E-G-O-R-Y [George L. Gregory].
Speaker 1: Now is there significance to the Lee 'cause I know you've got the Lee in--as your middle name too (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, oh, no, no, just my dad's middle name was Lee and they, so they named me Lee, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 1, 1920, Prince--Dinwiddie County, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now same as your mother [Fannie Washington Gregory], what's--how far back can you trace the ancestors on his side and--
Speaker 2: Okay, not--well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and do you know what they were doing?
Speaker 2: I did know one maternal--well, I did know both his parents.  They call him Jesse, but it's George Gregory, and his mother, Emma Dabney Gregory, and he grew up--his mother early on, his mother and father separated.  So his mother went to work in--as a domestic in New York [New York].  So he lived with his grandmother [Elizabeth Bailey Dabney] and his mother's father [Albert Dabney] in their family.  So he was with his uncle [John Dabney] and their family.  And, so he grew up there in Dinwiddie with them, so with his grandmother and his uncle's family.
Story_ID: 668211
Speaker 1: Now did he [Gregory's father, George L. Gregory] get a chance to finish school either (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, his education ended earlier than my mother's [Fannie Washington Gregory], probably, probably fifth grade education.  And he found out quickly he did not want to be in-- working farm--'cause he worked in tobacco with his uncle [Gregory's paternal great-uncle, John Dabney].  So when he got a chance in during the Depression [Great Depression], he worked with the CC camp, Civilian Con- Conservation Corps [Civilian Conservation Corps], building state parks and did that.  And then until the war started in--1940s, he went to--in the [U.S.] Army, served during the--World War II [WWII].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then worked at the tobacco factory for forty-one years, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did he have any stories about World War II he shared with you?
Speaker 2: No, not really, it--mostly his war--it was state side, you know, he didn't, he didn't deploy overseas, it was state side.  So not, not a whole lot of st- stories there.  Came back and worked in the tobacco factory.
Speaker 1: Now which tobacco factory did they work for?
Speaker 2: Brown and Williamson [Brown and Williamson Tobacco Company].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which was a British owned tobacco factory.  It was, it was probably the leading employer in Petersburg [Virginia].  And then when it closed--and he retired just before it closed, as my mother did as well.  But it was--I always tell the story, he worked there forty-one years, and you could count the number, you can't count the number of days he missed in forty-one years on one hand.  And still have fingers left and the thumb is not a finger (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  He didn't miss much time.
Speaker 2: He didn't miss time and he was there (unclear) the Greatest Generation they call them.  I mean, hard work, you know, and moral standing, and your word was your bond, that's the kind of man he was, the kind of values and traditions that he passed on to me and--as well as my mom.  And faith and--grew up in the church, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  What domination was he?
Speaker 2: Baptist, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Good Shepherd Baptist Church and, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: In Pe- Petersburg?
Speaker 2: Petersburg and I still attend that church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--let's see, so he comes, did he leave in, live in Petersburg before he--
Speaker 2: Well, no, he lived in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) went to the war.
Speaker 2: Well, no, he--well, he lived in Dinwiddie [Dinwiddie County, Virginia], in the country and then when he came back, he moved to Petersburg.  Or before he went to the war, (unclear) Petersburg.  And then a lifelong resident after that--Petersburg, both parents.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Forty-one years--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for Brown and Williamson, yeah.
Story_ID: 668212
Speaker 1: Now he [Gregory's father, George L. Gregory] was also a gospel singer?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he sang gospel music for forty years.  He was a basser.  And my mom [Fannie Washington Gregory] and I, we would travel with him all around, so I got a chance to meet all the greats.  The Dixie Hummingbirds, the harmonizing (unclear), Sam Cooke with The Soul Stirrers, Nightingales [Sensational Nightingales], it was just--Shirley Caesar, Clara Ward, Caravans [The Caravans], you name it, yeah, yeah, he was a, he loved that a great deal.
Speaker 1: And his group was called?
Speaker 2: The Sons of Zion [ph.] and then later the Lambs of Joy.  He was the managing, the group manager and he loved it.  My mom said, "Well, why are you going around and doing all this work and you get--," you know, in those times you get the--like a little love offering or something, he just loved it.  He really, he really loved it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you got a chance to see the neighboring towns and--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --how far would you, would he range?
Speaker 2: Normally, it would be in, I would say, in a radius of maybe fifty to seventy-five miles around, in and around Petersburg [Virginia].  So basically it was, definitely a--Virginia venues that he--occasionally they did some travel.  But for the most part, that's what it was.
Story_ID: 668213
Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' talents and their, and their attitudes, their sense of humor, you know, their work habits, their--how they walk and talk and that sort of thing.  Who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, it's both, it's odd that, you know, my tender side I take from my dad [George L. Gregory], you know.  My dad, you know, he was a, he was a, he was a man, you know, but he, when he said something, he said what he meant and he meant what he said.  And like I say, his word was his bond.  But he also had a very tender side, and part of it was--and I didn't really understand this really until I started having children.  Like I would, the kids would go--they just finished dinner, then they go into the refrigerator.  I said, "They don't need anything else to eat."  He said, "Boy, leave them alone, let them eat."  And I realized that he did that because when he grew up, it--there wasn't a lot of food.  And being--he had to wait 'til he was--'cause, you know, he was like the--it was, his mother [Emma Dabney Gregory] was in New York [New York].  So he was the son who ate the second round, he and his other two cousins, who's another sister's [Virginia Dabney Robinson] children.  And his grandmother [Elizabeth Bailey Dabney] would squirrel away food for him.  But, and he was just determined in no way, whether they needed it or not, he'd never see a kid with less than or hungry.  'Cause my kids weren't hungry, but it's just--he could never bring himself to even just refuse 'em because that's what a kind of--and he was a tender heart in that sense.  He had an incredible sense of anybody being mistreated, I don't care what your color was.  He was going to be on your side.  I get that most from my father.  My toughness I get from my mom [Fannie Washington Gregory].  My mom was like nails.  I remember once I came home, I used to have a marble collection, I was playing marbles and I lost some of them, playing the game.  And I came home crying, she said, "What's wrong with you?"  I said, "I lost some marbles."  She said, "Look, stop crying," she said, "did they make you play?"  "No."  "Did somebody take them from you?"  "No."  She said, "Look, you have one or two things, one, you can stop playing marbles or you can get the skills and maybe you'll win.  But don't ever come back to me crying about marbles."  I never forgot that so I chose the latter, get the skills so I could win them.  That's how she was.  I think I've only saw my mother cry maybe twice that I can recall, one, when she had a serious surgery.  A very difficult thoracic surgery she had and the other when my father passed.  But other than that she, I mean she was tough.  I mean give you the blouse off her back, but I mean she really, you know, she--pull yourself up, you work hard, you know.  You take your lumps and your consequences but you don't make excuses, you know.  And I learned it from--so a combination of both.  And their strong values of faith and that everybody should be treated alike.  And I tell people, people always talk about patriotism, I always laugh at them.  People have big flags, but they never, they always taught us to be, to love the country.  Understand that everything is not right and equal, but your job is to get your education and help right it.
Story_ID: 668214
Speaker 1: Do you have siblings at all?
Speaker 2: Well, with growing, you know, growing up being adopted, no, I grew up as an only child.  I didn't even really know until I was about thirteen that I was adopted.  'Cause that old school African American, you know, (unclear) it was like close to the vest.  You didn't talk about those things, you know.  But I do have siblings--biological, I just didn't, didn't know about them really until I was an adult, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, so what do you know about your biological parents, you know, now that you're--
Speaker 2: Oh, well, a little bit, you know I got a brother (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: I was born in Philadelphia and that was very briefly and I still to this day don't until how it was that I was born in Philadelphia 'cause I really must have stayed literally two weeks 'cause there's no history at all other than that.  But I found out I was born in Mercy-Douglass Hospital.  It's an old black hospital in Philadelphia.  And, so that and then later I found out that I have several siblings.  My biological mother had several children, and I met probably about five or, five or six of them and wonderful people, yeah.  And then I met some other relatives down in Dinwiddie [Dinwiddie County, Virginia] later who were my biological mother's siblings and their children.  So, you know, occasionally gotten together and had some family events together.
Speaker 1: So your biological mother was from Dinwiddie?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was from Dinwiddie.
Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was born in Washington, D.C.  But she was, her family was from Dinwiddie.  But a lot of stuff I can't get because--for example, I can't even get my birth certificate.  State of Philadelphia [sic.], they--once I was adopted, they redid my birth certificate, so I can't get the original one.  So I never was able to find out how my biological father is.  At all, it would probably help if I had my original birth certificate, but I don't.  But, you know, my parents are my parents, George [George L. Gregory] and Fannie Gregory [Fannie Washington Gregory].  The ones I love who nurtured me and that, and, so, you know.  I'm sure if my biological parents--mother. She had her own circumstances, it was tough for her, so I don't hold any grudges in that regard.  And, so--
Speaker 1: So you never met her?
Speaker 2: I met her only once, it was interesting.
Speaker 1: You did, okay.
Speaker 2: One time--
Speaker 1: Now how did, how did--was it set up and--
Speaker 2: I did research and found out where she lived and talked.  And then, and then I cold called, I just walked--found the address in Washington, D.C.  'Cause she had married and had other children, and we talked for about two hours, and I never saw her again.  And then years later I found out that she's now deceased.  And that's how I connected with my siblings after that.  And--
Speaker 1: What was she doing do?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know of any work that she was doing.  But, you know, she was living there, she had children, I mean so rearing her children.  And, so that's all that I know of.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So she didn't explain what happened?
Speaker 2: No, no, no explanation, no, there was no hug, nothing like that.  It was just pretty, pretty formulaic if you will, just my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was she shocked to see you, you think?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was, you know, and then sort of somebody saying, you know, a full grown man saying, "I'm your son."  But, you know, but she knew about me, and I didn't know about them.  They knew where I was and everything.  But, I didn't, like you say, my biological parents [sic.] didn't talk about that.  And, so it was sort of just--I'm sorry I never got a chance to really talk to my parents, just really.  Because the thing about it, it's very difficult to explain, but I didn't want them to think at all my curiosity about my biological parents took away in any way my love and respect for them.  And, so, you know, at the cost of that loyalty to them meant that I wouldn't know the full story (unclear) that I was willing to pay that price.
Speaker 1: I suppose that's a fear that adoptive parents have--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, exactly (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that the child will love their, will naturally love their--
Speaker 2: Naturally, right, will cling because of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And that--so, and I can understand that and I didn't want to do anything that would anyway bring any harm or some displeasure to my parents.  'Cause they really were the greatest blessing I've ever had--God gave me was my parents.  Especially me, I was a kid who--I found out later when I was born, I born with asthma.  And I had little rickety legs and I got a scar now on my shoulder.  I was in some kind of a fire or something.  And I always think who would have, who would have taken me.  The kid with asthma, you don't know his genetic pool.  And my parents must have sort of poetically said, "I'll take him."  I remember when I was little, my mom would have to take me out in the night air.  I couldn't breathe from asthma attacks.  So I could get my breath and with all the detriments and all of that, you know, they took me.  So that's why I always think, you know, very important to me when I see kids without.  Or the world has sort of judged them by less than they really are and never understanding that.  I see myself there and, but for the grace of God that I certainly, I certainly--so I realized that I need to give back as much as I can to make sure kids have an opportunity, and not be defined by their problems but be encouraged by their potential. And that's--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's what I was able to do.
Story_ID: 668215
Speaker 1: Any of your siblings, are they involved in any professional activities at all or--
Speaker 2: Oh, not that I, not that I know of no.  One brother retired from--he was--worked for a big hotel in Washington [D.C.], you know.  Hard worker, could do any- anything with his hands.  I mean he's just really innately bright.  And a really, really good person, he and his family and his sons, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you were raised basically as an only child?
Speaker 2: Only child, yeah, I was an only child.
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think my earliest childhood memory is walking around, I had some new shoes and I must've been about two years old.  And I remember people laughing like, he's like--I was so excited about these shoes I was just, you know, the first kind of hard shoes you get as a kid, I was walking around.  And I remember living with--in a place--the old stove, it used to be a round thing, and you take the lever and you open it.  It was open fire, and you could stick wood in there, in the wood box (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the wood stove--
Speaker 2: --in the wood stove and next to it.  And taking baths in the number ten tub in the middle of the floor.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, those were--that was some, some interesting days, yeah.  I remember those childhood days, it's a wonderful time.  My parents [Fannie Washington Gregory and George L. Gregory] were so wonderful and like Christmas I was Zorro.  I got the cape and the mask and the sword and I making my Zs all over the place.  And it was a lot of fun, a lot of great, great memories (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were about five then?
Speaker 2: About five years old--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and had that.  And that was like my favorite, you know, and sometimes you get the old pop guns and the Western, and the hat.  But I had some great friends and neighbors and we played every--amazing, kids, you can't get them outdoors now.  Because they're so bound to computers.  We cried when it was time to go back in.  And when it was dark, the rule was--sometime you didn't have to go in, but the rule was one call, you should.  You didn't have to worry about how far can I go.  The rule was call you one time, if you're so far that you didn't hear that first call, that's too far.  'Cause that was the rule, so you better make sure you in, clear ear shot.  But in those days the village raised you, I mean you walked in, you say, "Yes, ma'am" to whomever--an adult.  And they say, "Where you going?  Your mama know where you going?"  "I don't know."  "Well, you go back and make sure she knows."  You know, and that's the kind of way that we lived.  And Boy Scouts [Boys Scouts of America] and church [Good Shepherd Baptist Church, Petersburg, Virginia] and that's why I first did public speaking.  You know, during--reciting bible verses and being in plays and those kinds of things, Sunday school and really, just a really wonderful time.
Story_ID: 668216
Speaker 1: Was there a name for the neighborhood you grew up in, in Petersburg [Virginia] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, called the Heights.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Delectable Heights.
Speaker 1: Delectable (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That would be for--the Heights for Petersburg was almost like Harlem for--I can't imagine--not the kind of culture Harlem [New York, New York] had but the kind of (unclear)--Hough in Cleveland [Ohio], you know, in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] or South Central [South Los Angeles], Watts in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], you know.  It was known for being sort of a tough place and kind of like in scripture talk about is anything good come out of Nazareth [Israel].  So, and you're from the Heights, it was a special thing I guess when there was achievement.  Yet we had many achievers Moses Malone, NBA [National Baseball Association] hall of fame basketball player was--grew up about four streets over from where I was.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --a lot of great achievements.
Story_ID: 668217
Speaker 1: So Petersburg [Virginia] is located on the Appomattox River, right?
Speaker 2: That's right, Appomattox.
Speaker 1: It's a historic place.  Did you have a sense of the history of Pet- Petersburg growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, I did, I've always loved history.  From my backyard porch, I could see way across, you could see the, the beginning of the woods that was the Confederate defense line in the, in the Civil War.  And old Petersburg and, yeah I loved that.  I used to go down to the library and, so, yeah I had a sense of the historic aspect of it.  And when Petersburg fell that was the end, Richmond [Virginia] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 2: --fell the next day.
Speaker 1: That's right.  It'd seem like everybody would know that.  But in other parts of the country, people don't seem to know.
Speaker 2: Oh, exactly (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I didn't find out until I was in my thirties.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: The longest siege in the history of American warfare, right in Petersburg, over three hundred days.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and you can still see the depression where the crater was in '64 [1864] when they had come up with the plan to blow a hole in the Confederate line, which was a complete disaster, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the black soldiers were at the key of it.  I mean they created the--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --tunnel underneath the lines that--and delivered the explosives--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and were the first to rush into the cra- crater.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so--
Speaker 1: Well, it was a, it was a mess.  But I think had a couple things happened differently, it would have been a big success.  But it--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --did not--
Speaker 2: It probably was they pulled some of the black troops because of fear of politically if it was a disaster, there may be repercussion, and some of the troops that did charge were, really were ill trained--prepared for it.  And the Confederate troops regrouped themselves and literally shot Union soldiers in their own hole.  First of all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's like shooting crabs in a barrel or something.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly you had the Pennsylvania, I think, engineers who came up with it used too much TNT.  And it was a bigger hole, and they just, just the, just the shear massive carnage and I mean, men and horses and everything, and they stymied them right in their hole.  And again it took a long time to--for Petersburg to fall, yeah and would be (unclear)--
Speaker 1: There would be a black heroic--in a place called New Market Heights [Virginia]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --close by.
Speaker 2: Exactly, we got, you know, across from Richmond you got Cold Harbor and a wilderness not that far away.  And I mean, you're in the, in Richmond, you're in the center.  Matter of fact, the building you're sitting in right now [Lewis F. Powell, Jr. U.S. Courthouse, Richmond, Virginia] was the treasury of the Confederacy and Jefferson Davis had an office in this building, yeah.  And he was arraigned in the courthouse upstairs for treason.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is it true that he tried to escape dressed as a woman?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, there are rumors that that has happened, I can't verify that's true.  But it certainly--it's a lot of rumors in that regard.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  So, yeah it's a lot, there's a lot of history that people don't seem to--I know it's not--it never was clear to me what the significance of Petersburg was.  And then I, then I started really reading about it.  Oh, this is, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It is--
Speaker 1: And every black per- person should know about this.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 668218
Speaker 1: And it's the home of Virginia State University [Petersburg, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my alma mater, yes.
Speaker 1: So, and it has a long history during the--as you, when you were growing up, the Civil Rights Movement here (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, Petersburg [Virginia] factored--loomed largely in that.  That was, there was the Montgomery Improvement Association that grew out of the boycott.  And Petersburg was one of the first towns outside of that, the Petersburg Improvement Association and Wyatt Tee Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker], who's the executive director of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] came from Gillfield Baptist Church in Petersburg, Milton Reid.  So, yeah and Dorothy Cotton, who is an unsung heroine, she was in Petersburg.  And she left to work for SCLC with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  So Petersburg contributed mightily to the Civil Rights Movement, Dr. King and his organization.
Story_ID: 668219
Speaker 1: So your neighborhood in the Heights [Petersburg, Virginia], what was it like?  What was the housing like and what was your street like?
Speaker 2: Oh, my street, you know, it was, it was, it was, it was nice.  Every, every, every house was different, there were tenements for people who were renting.  Probably more people rented than owned, you know.  And my parents--we were, you know, (unclear) you're buying the house but you don't own it.  But everybody--it was, there was class whether your parents worked a factory or whatever they did, we all grew up together.  Yeah, we really did.  And at the end of the street, not my block, there were a couple of teachers on there.  So you could see teachers in your neighborhood.  So there were--the mailman down the other end.  So it was an eclectic experience that you saw people--African Americans although in a parallel universe 'cause it was segregated no question, it was segregated.  I went to segregated schools up until the twelfth grade.  But it was a lot of fun, my father [George L. Gregory] was a Mason.  So his Mason brothers--you had a lot of respect and you had great role models and a deacon in the church, my mother [Fannie Washington Gregory] was a deaconess.  So even though we realized that things aren't the same, and there was segregation and there was no reason not to have the greatest pride in yourself and your community and what it stood for.  So it was a lot of, a nurturing place.
Speaker 1: Was the black side of town paved in the--
Speaker 2: Well, it--we didn't have sidewalks, yeah we didn't have sidewalks.  And our curb, when I first--but it took a long time just to get a curb, never got sidewalks.  You know, it was--
Speaker 1: Streetlights and different things (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Streetlights and then I remember we had a--since a lot of people didn't have phones, we had a fire plug on a pole, so in other words, you could run out, if you had a fire, you could pull the fire--
Speaker 1: Fire alarm (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) from the tele- telegraph pole.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So, yeah and matter of fact, my first--went until I was six years old that the home I lived in had an inside bathroom toilet.  It was on the porch, yeah, so it, yeah.  But, you know, it--you never skipped a beat.  You didn't think about it, you know, it wasn't an existence of being deprived, it was, that was normal, and you moved on and you, and you--people worked hard like I said, it was no--and we invented no child left behind because whenever we took trips with the church or youth group, whether your parents could afford to pay the bus fare or not, everybody had to work to raise the money so you (unclear).  And I loved that ethic 'cause it wasn't about what you individually had, it's what your service was, and everybody could work.  And that's where the pride was.  And I think that's--the struggle is what was the binding part, it was not the victory but the struggle.  And I remember that so well.  And it was so wonderful that people dressed up and having so much pride.  And my mom and I could walk down the street at night by ourselves and doors could be unlocked and screen door unlocked.  And it was a, it was a time of strong faith and, and struggles and difficulties.  Nobody wants to return to those days, the nation is much better now, but there was something redemptive also about independence and pride.
Story_ID: 668220
Speaker 1: Tell me about school.  Now you started at Virginia Avenue Elementary School [Petersburg, Virginia], right?
Speaker 2: Virginia Avenue went from first to the seventh grade.  Great days, I remember the principal was Mr. Powell [Calvin J. Powell, Sr.], and he would always say every Friday, he would say, "All right, boys I want y'all to rake the yards, and girls help your mom," (laughter).  "And then go to church on Sundays."  You could, you could say that at a public school in those days.  But, yeah he was just--great teachers, great teachers, they, you know, I remember it was--we had--I'll just give you a quick idea how much I just, we just honored teachers and had this elevated notion.  We had the debate once, and it was division almost 50/50, whether or not our teachers went to the bathroom.  "No, I can't believe, no, not your teacher."  It was--I guess didn't too, say too much about our biological--bio- biology skills and knowledge (laughter).  But that's where we, we just thought they were above, they were, they were, they were more than humans, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they were, not them, you know, they're--but, yeah I tell it, it was so funny but that's how esteemed we held them at--and those days you know you got beaten in your hand too and you got in trouble.  And you just hope that your parents didn't find out about it.  You know, it--and--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: 'Cause they really were the in parente locus [sic.], in place of parent.  And your parents respected and expected it, so you--it was some good days.  And then from there I went to Peabody High School [Petersburg, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Um-hm, now, in grade school--did you have a--what were you keenly interested in, in grade school?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I must say it wasn't until probably until the fourth grade that I really got involved in academics.  My fourth grade teacher, she said, you know, "Gregory [HistoryMaker Roger L. Gregory], you know--," I was, I was sort of a prankster, like to play around.  She said (unclear), you know, because Gregory sounds like a first name, a lot of teachers would call me Gregory.  "Gregory, you know what?  I'm going to sit on you the whole year.  You have potential but you play around a lot."  And she did, she had eyes in the back of head, I couldn't get away with anything.  But she really, Ms. Mitchell [ph.] really--she's the one who sort of got me (unclear).  And then I, and after that I focused on--I love history and science.  And I enjoyed it and did that.  And it was, it really homed in the beginning of the--and I laugh when people talk about Black History Month but then it was Black History Week [sic. Negro History Week].  But at my school it was all year round, 365.  Because--well, we didn't go the summers, but there were photos, there was pictures of famous African American men and women that were up all the time.  Yeah, and we studied (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now that, now that's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they never came down.  They were all (unclear), Phillis Wheatley and Doug- Frederick Douglass and all--Benjamin Banneker, you just--it was a part of your everyday routine.  You had these constant reminders of greatness.  That people who looked like you, in spite of the difficulties, they achieved, as James Baldwin said, monumental success.  And, so it really was a nurturing--then we'd have--they'd bring in--I remember there was a professor from Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], Dr. Todman, a wonderful historian.  He had a television program on those, then those the, I call them the fuzzy stations.  They were like PBS stations [Public Broadcasting Service], when you had one--only three channels, whatever came in.  And he would teach, have lessons every--once a week on black history, and we're watching in the classroom.  Yeah, so, yeah, yeah it really was quite a, quite a--and we had to take those tests, but they were--I guess the state re- required them.  But we would take them and then we'd never hear anything from them on what the score was.  Then they said, "Let me teach you want you need to know.  As opposed to define you by what you did and when you bubble in answers."  Yeah, as--so, yeah we had some, because we had teacher who otherwise would have been physicians, right.  But because the lack of opportunity, we were blessed to have them as teachers.  And they were otherwise, in a world where equal opportunity--they would have been in someone's board room, operating room or courtroom or lab and science.  But they were teaching us and they poured all of that into us.  And, so we got an incredible education.
Story_ID: 668221
Speaker 1: Now as you were in elementary school [Virginia Avenue Elementary School, Petersburg, Virginia], you were--this is what we were alluding to, the Civil Rights Movement is, cranking up.  Were--were your parents involved at all or anybody that you knew (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, my parents--I recall my parents, you know, my father [George L. Gregory] is a Mason and my mother [Fannie Washington Gregory] was in Eastern Star [Order of the Eastern Star].  I remember going to see Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] when I was eight years old.  One of those rallies and march at First Baptist Church in Petersburg [Virginia].  And I can remember that and, so my parents were committed and grew up saying--understanding that was an important part of life and progressive movement.
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to meet him yourself?
Speaker 2: I didn't get a chance to meet him, I wish I had.  And I saw him again at Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] and I was--he spoke there.  So I saw him twice but I never got a chance to meet him.
Story_ID: 668222
Speaker 1: High school, you were at, what was the name, was--
Speaker 2: Peabody.
Speaker 1: Peabody High School [Petersburg, Virginia] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Peabody, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now who was, was Peabody, was it named after Peabody the millionaire, Peabody or--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, that's right, George Foster Peabody--
Speaker 1: Okay, George Foster Peabody.
Speaker 2: --the great philanthropist who gave--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --a lot of money, particularly in the South to education.  Yeah, it was named for George Foster Peabody.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So almost everybody has a Carnegie library--
Speaker 2: Right, exactly (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at their school donated by Andrew Carnegie.
Speaker 2: Same (unclear).
Speaker 1: But George Foster Peabody is part of a similar--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, philanthropic, you know--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, now Peabody, now how many students were at, you know, at your, at Pea- Peabody (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Peabod- I would say, then it went from eight to twelve [eighth to twelfth grade], so five grades, I would imagine it was probably about maybe, eleven, maybe eleven hundred students, somewhere about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause it was like the high--triple, triple A high school, which was the highest rating in terms of size, so it was a pretty good size.  Yeah, the Lions.
Story_ID: 668223
Speaker 1: What activities were you involved, were you a leader in high school or did you--
Speaker 2: Well, I wouldn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) kind of just sink back, or what did, how did you do it?
Speaker 2: No, I wouldn't say, I wouldn't, I wasn't a leader but I didn't, I wouldn't call myself a leader.  But I engaged in activities, I played football one year.  And then I was in the Spanish club, I did, I was in the Drama club.  And what I really loved, I participated in the science competitions, science math competition, where in the black school, we had a competition, we would go to college campus in the spring and compete in the--chemistry and math.  And I remember one year, I won first place in chemistry and then overall second in all the sciences.  But you work on your project for a long time and then you present it and compete against people from around the state.  And then when they integrated the schools they ended that.  I never could understand that, it was an incredible program.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of--
Speaker 2: I had never, I still don't understand the logic of that.  But it was a wonderful program, so I did those kinds of things.  And I enjoyed that, yeah.
Speaker 1: And were you involved in sports?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but played football one year.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Played junior varsity football.  But then I quickly, then I went out the next year and went through the whole spring--fall training or early training.  And then I said, "You know what?  I'm not going to be a football player.  I think I'm going to take--put my energy someplace else."  And I did, but it was a--I loved the experience playing one year.  The camaraderie, the team work, the discipline.  But I played enough football, sand- sandlot football and baseball in the neighborhood that I love, I love sports--participating, yeah.
Story_ID: 668224
Speaker 1: You were naming some of these people that were from Pe- Petersburg [Virginia].  Mo- Moses Malone--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Moses Malone, Ron Bolton, who played for the Cleveland Browns, retired, yeah.  And Ricky Hunley, who came in drafted by the Denver Broncos.  No, no, he was drafted by the Cincinnati Bengals but he wound up, he played for the Denver Broncos.  Now he's a football coach.  So, and then there are people who are in music.  Joe Jefferson [Joseph Jefferson], who wrote a lot for The Spinners, out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And another fellow who crossed the street sang for Harold Melvin and the Blue Notes.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So Petersburg has always had its fair share.  And another friend of mine I went to school with played bass guitar for Ray, Goodman and Brown.  Used be called the, I guess they were The Moments or something they were, maybe they were called.
Speaker 1: The Whispers [sic.].  Yeah, was that The Whispers (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not The Whispers, I think it was the Mo--
Speaker 1: Ray, Goodman and Brown--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  Yeah, I know what you're--
Speaker 2: I think they were called The Moments, I think they were--
Speaker 1: I think they were The Moments, okay.
Speaker 2: The Moments, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: So, yes, so it's always--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --incredible amount of success and people who you really could role model and did some, did some wonderful things.
Speaker 1: So it was quite a community there at (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, one of my classmates from high school [Peabody High School, Petersburg, Virginia] became a two star general, he was head of the, all the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] programs in the nation, in the [U.S.] Army, yeah.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Montague Winfield [W. Montague Winfield], wonderful--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --wonderful guy, yeah.
Story_ID: 668225
Speaker 1: So did, did you have favorite teachers in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, my favorite teachers by far is a man named Leon T. Hairston, H-A-I-R-S-T-O-N.  Wow, he was great, he taught me in the tenth grade, history and in the twelfth grade, government.  And he literally, he'd say--well, you know, he'd say, "Greg [HistoryMaker Roger L. Gregory], you know, you're a good student.  Are you going to college?"  We talked about it, and he took me in his car over to Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], met with the chairman of the political science department, Calvin Miller, Dr. Calvin Miller.  And I got a scholarship to Virginia State in political science major.  So this was a high school teacher, he was just phenomenal, he's just so inspiring, just demanding and getting the most out of you.  He was--and Ms. Mitchell [ph.], of course, in fourth grade [at Virginia Avenue Elementary School, Petersburg, Virginia].  I didn't realize at the time how important she was.  That was an acquired taste later on to say, "Wow, she's one really--," but M- Mr. Hairston was just, just awesome and English teachers, I always had an affinity for my English teachers.  Miss, just Miss Birdie Powell [ph.], who taught me in high schools, yeah, good people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you graduate with any kind of honors or anything?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I graduated high school in the top 10 percent of my class, yeah.  In my, in my last year I went to integrated school.  Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] came to Petersburg [Virginia] in full force my senior year, I finished up in Petersburg High [Petersburg High School].  And it was easier once it came if you went to high school in Petersburg, you went to one high school and, so yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 668226
Speaker 1: Yeah, you just talked about how you got, you chose Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --scholarship.  And, so, all right.  So at Virginia State, who were some of the per- personalities who were there and what were you interested in (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, well, you know, it's--again my chairman of politic science, Dr. Calvin Miller, he was just awesome.  And teachers like Emily Madden in English, but at the time, I really just--absorbed in studies, I did really, I did very well there.  And was involved in the foreign language honor society that the Alpha Kappa Mu National Honor Society, which is the Phi Beta Kappa [Phi Beta Kappa Society] for black schools [HBCUs], traditionally.  And matter of fact I did some things that I wouldn't even, wouldn't, wouldn't have had the opportunity to do any place else.  In 1972 as a sophomore, I went to President Johnson's [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] Civil Rights Symposium in, down there in Austin, Texas.  And everybody was there, I mean, I flew on the plane with Chief Justice Earl Warren, vice president, former Vice President Hubert Humphrey was there and Clarence Mitchell [Clarence M. Mitchell, Jr.].  I mean, you name it, Roy Innis from CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond, all these--it was a whole symposium, and Johnson was really talking about his presidency and civil right, and all his people where there.  And it turned out, I didn't know it but that was the last public address--appearance that President Johnson made because that was in December of '72 [1972], and he died the next month, January of 1973.  But I met the president and the first lady [Lady Bird Johnson] and just for--I mean, I was like a kid in a candy shop with Ramsey Clark on the--was my first flight, I'd never been on an airplane.  And that was quite a moment, quite a moment (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was 1968?
Speaker 2: Nine- no, 1972.
Speaker 1: Se- '72 [1972], '72 [1972].
Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972], um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, (mumbles).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a sophomore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: First semester sophomore, yeah.  And I remember, I remember it was, it was amazing and then I got a chance to go my junior and senior year to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and the model United Nations.  Virginia State, we represented West African countries, and you model like you're in the United Nations.  We came back, our team won honorable mention.  And they gave me a sense that, you know, what I was learning at Virginia State, it was competitive to any kid and student anywhere around the country.  And then my senior year, I gave my senior theses at the--thesis at the--in Charlotte, North Carolina, at Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University] for the association of black social and behavioral scientists [Association of Social and Behavioral Scientists] and defended the paper there.  I mean, just opportunities just wouldn't--and the key thing was I got a chance to meet [HistoryMaker] L. Douglas Wilder, then senator.  He taught me constitutional law and civil liberties for two classes.  He inspired me to go to law school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, all of that was incredible.  And then I met my wife there--
Speaker 1: Oh, is this--
Speaker 2: --who became the love of my life.  And we met my senior year, her sophomore year, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what was her name, and how did you meet?
Speaker 2: Oh, we--her name was Carla, C- C-A-R-L-A, Lewis, L-E-W-I-S [Carla Lewis Gregory].  We met in an Afro American literature class, a night class.  And we almost missed each other 'cause that was my last semester.  And she was a sophomore.  And we were in the class together and started talking from there.  And, yeah that was--we were married almost twenty-nine years before she passed, yeah.  So Virginia State really was my alma mater, the fostering mother.  So a lot of opportunities.
Story_ID: 668227
Speaker 1: Your grades were really good.  You graduated like, what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I graduated summus--
Speaker 1: Su--
Speaker 2: --summa cum laude, yeah.  I was blessed to do very well and that helped me to, I guess to get into University of Michigan Law School [Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Speaker 1: So did--was the already lined--how did you line that up?  I mean, how did you--
Speaker 2: Well, this--my mom [Fannie Washington Gregory] wanted me to go to University of Virginia [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia], not so much--it was a great school, but she wanted me to stay close by home.  But what was good, again Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] was just awesome, in political science, we had a consortium with the University of Michigan political science department.  At that time Michigan had some great--(unclear), there's leading professors in political science, so we had a consortium, they would come down to Virginia State.  So that was my first inst- introduction to the University of Michigan.  So then I did my research, I said, "Wow, they have a great law school too."  'Cause at the time it was like number three in the country.  It's been top ten for years and it still is.  So that's when I applied and I got accepted and off to Ann Arbor [Michigan].  And the first day (laughter) I stepped foot in the State of Michigan was the day before law school started.  (Laughter) I never visited the campus.
Speaker 1: So, all right.  So you had to get on board fast?
Speaker 2: I had to get on board fast, it was, it was culture shock coming from a historically black small college [HBCU] to a very large research university, big law school.  And I was a minority within a minority 'cause not many African Americans.  But most of the Africans Americans that I knew, which was a wonderful experience, they went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] or Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] undergrad, so to be coming from a historically black school, state school, that was, it was rare.  But I've--wonderful friends, lifetime friends and just a great experience.
Story_ID: 668228
Speaker 1: Who are some of the teachers you remember from law school that were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my favorite, L. Hart Wright, he wrote most of the 1950 tax code and E.L. (Unclear), expert in criminal law.  J.J. White [James J. White], commercial transaction and then Lee Bollinger, my contracts professor who later became the president--dean of the law school, president of the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and, now he's the president of Columbia University [New York, New York].  Taught me contracts and, so, and I did, I did legal aid when I was there and I had my first jury trial in my third year of law school in Michigan.  And through legal aid, so I, so I engaged myself in those other type things, too.  And I did moot court to extend--'cause I knew I wanted to be a lawyer and I wanted to absorb all I could.  So I had a great education at University of Michigan Law School [Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Trying to think of what was going on up there--now you were there from 19--
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-five [1975]--
Speaker 1: Five [1975]--
Speaker 2: --through '78 [1978].  Oh, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) through '78 [1978].
Speaker 2: It was, that was before--the BAM strike was in 1970, Black Ac- Action Movement.  And then, you know, Michigan at that time when I was there, it was always something political.  So you had people in the Diag, they call it, the Diagonal Walk.  And it was just a wonderful time to be in Michigan.
Speaker 1: Now what was BAM?  The--
Speaker 2: BAM was the Black Action Movement that had--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --occurred before I got there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, okay.  Was the first year hard?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it's difficult because it's a foreign thing, you know, undergrad and law school are quite different.  The whole way of thinking and the writing structure is active voice, you know.  So I loved creative writing.  But, you know, the law is different.  It's much more structured, like exactness and, so, yeah, it's--you have to cut your teeth on it.  And there's some days--plus the other thing is that was the shock, was climate shock, you know, coming from the South and coming to a place in Michigan.  It started snowing in November and ended somewhere around April, so the ground was white most of the winter.
Speaker 1: Now the law--I mean, Michigan--the University of Michigan is a huge, has a huge population?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it's like about thirty--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a--
Speaker 2: --when I was there, it was about thirty-five thousand in the--Ann Arbor [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's like Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] or UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --huge student body population (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Big, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did--were the classes large classes?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the law school, you're, you know, so you're sort of inside a school within a big school.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, but the classes were about--in law school about 350 per class, so a little over a thousand students.  So, you knew everybody, and they had sections, I was in section C.  So I knew everybody pretty much in my section.  But some of the classes were large and that, and that's what makes law school even more--more anxiety, you only have one test at the end.  Unlike medical school where they test you periodically and, so you get markers as where you are.  There you kind of go along and you hope you're getting it.  Because if--it's sort of that one shot deal.  So it makes it even more terrifying.  But it was great and, you know, you know, I absorbed everything.  And professors, the way they--their thinking, for example, I had no idea that I wanted to be a tax lawyer, matter of fact, I didn't.  But that's--I was so inspired by L. Hart, Professor L. Hart Wright, my first job I had I--was a big firm in Detroit [Michigan], and I was with the, in the tax section.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, all right.  So did you clerk for anybody when you were in law school?
Speaker 2: No, didn't clerk, you know, I wish there, not that--that wasn't even on the radar for me.  It wasn't in my thought. My thought was I wanted to be a lawyer.  I wish, I always tell law students now, don't do, don't follow my path, you know, explore all of those things.  But it just, it wasn't on the radar, not necessarily that I would have been able to get one if I did, but it just wasn't, it wasn't, it wasn't just the trajectory I even thought about, you know, mine was just I want to get everything 'cause I want to be a lawyer and that's what I did.  I was very fortunate I worked at some really great firms.  Butzel, Long, Gust, Klein and Van Zile [Butzel Long] one of the oldest firms in Detroit.  I was the first African American that--to work for them as an associate.
Story_ID: 668229
Speaker 1: What did you do during the breaks from law school or did you, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, do--
Speaker 1: --you couldn't go straight through all the time, right?  You had some other kind of job--
Speaker 2: Oh, oh--
Speaker 1: --right or something?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, what I did was during the break, oh, sure, yeah.  During, at the end of the first year, I worked for the commonwealth attorney, which basically people call prosecutors, here in Richmond [Virginia].  I worked for the whole summer.  That was a great job.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I saw some wonderful lawyers try cases.  And then Governor Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglas Wilder], watched him 'cause he was practicing there.  And then at the end of my second summer, I clerked for Butzel Long [Butzel, Long, Gust, Klein and Van Zile; Butzel Long], the firm I went to after I graduated [from the University of Michigan Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan].  They hired me for a summer clerkship.  And then they off (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's in Detroit [Michigan], right?
Speaker 2: In Detroit and then--
Speaker 1: Butzel Long.
Speaker 2: They gave me an offer for a permanent job when I finished that summer.  So, going into my third year, I knew I had a job offer for the firm in Detroit.
Story_ID: 668230
Speaker 1: Now Butzel, there's a Butzel Elementary School [Fred M. Butzel Elementary Middle School] in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: Is it named for the Butzel that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, probably the same family, Leo Butzel probably.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm thinking because, I mean how many Butzels could there be?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah probably he was--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Leo Butzel was known for--he did a lot of Ford work, Ford Motor Company, and the firm [Butzel, Long, Gust, Klein and Van Zile; Butzel Long] was still doing Ford work.  And then I, you know, I worked in tax and then another partner who's in litigation, we had a client, had some big problems with suits against them and products liability, and I said, he said, "Would you like to work on this?"  And I did and I never went back to tax.  I became a litigator, a trial lawyer in Detroit--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --after that.
Speaker 1: Is that what you wanted to do--
Speaker 2: That's what I wanted to do, yeah, I think, yeah.
Speaker 1: --wanted to do?
Speaker 2: But I loved tax though because, you know, it was, it was fun.  I loved the technical aspect of it, you know.  But--
Speaker 1: Now had you imagined yourself as a, as a civil rights lawyer at all during this period of time?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I didn't, not necessary civil rights but I knew I wanted to be a part of--in terms of justice and the whole idea of defending someone.  I remember when the whole world is against us, it always excited me that you always talk about, you know, when people accept you and love you, you don't need constitutional rights, everybody else will protect you.  It's those--that's the people on the fringes and they're marginalized that the law has to work equally for them.  Because, you know, they just don't have the hue and cry of support.  But they do have the back stop fortunately of civil rights and, so I enjoyed that.  I did and then I worked in Detroit and came back to my home town, home state because I always thought I would be a Virginia lawyer.
Story_ID: 668231
Speaker 1: Now did Doug Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglas Wilder] teach you at--
Speaker 2: At Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Virginia State, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So he was at the undergrad school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: We talked--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  And he taught--what did he teach?
Speaker 2: He was a adjunct, yeah, he taught--
Speaker 1: Adjunct.
Speaker 2: --constitutional law and the other class was civil liberties.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So two classes I had with him.  He was a senator then.
Speaker 1: Now what was your impression of him then?
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, I was awestruck, I mean, he--just the way his mind worked and the Socratic Method, every question leads to another question.  And I would joke to him now, I said, "Look, you gave us exams that were harder than law school exams."  I mean, he pushed you, I mean he always--the point is that you got to be a lawyer to a lawyer.  And that was--he would always say that, you know, in terms of the way you think and the way you approach and your writing and the analytical aspect of it.  And he really was just--matter of fact when--sometimes we had scheduled an exam or test or whatever, he would open up his appointment book, and you could see court dates in it.  And I would just sort of--wishfully thinking that be cool to be a lawyer, and I never had no idea really ten years later, we'd become law partners.  So, yeah, so, yeah he was--and in fact, he's still a great friend and partner.
Story_ID: 668232
Speaker 1: So when you came back to Virginia--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you went right to Richmond [Virginia] to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to--
Speaker 1: --Wilder [Wilder and Gregory; Harrell and Chambliss LLP]?
Speaker 2: What I did was, no, I went to--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --a firm, big firm called Hunton and Williams [Hunton and Williams LLP, Richmond, Virginia]. I interviewed while I was in Detroit [Michigan].  And they flew me down here to Richmond, and I interviewed, and they gave me a job.  Hunton and Williams was one of the largest in the South.  And at that time Justice Powell [Lewis F. Powell, Jr.], who's on the Supreme Court of the United States, he was a partner in that firm.  Again I was blessed again to work for a man named Lewis Booker [Lewis T. Booker].  He was probably one of the greatest trial lawyers nationally.  I mean, he's--so I worked on his team.  Again, so awesome (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is a, is this a white law firm?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: I was the second black they ever hired at that firm, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At that time, I think that firm had about two hundred and, somewhere around 240 or fifty lawyers in Richmond.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And Butzel [Butzel, Long, Gust, Klein and Van Zile; Butzel Long] probably had about seventy-five, eighty lawyers in Detroit.  So they were both big law, corporate law firms.
Speaker 1: All right.  So--so you're at Hunton Williams--
Speaker 2: Yeah, from 1980 to 1982.
Story_ID: 668233
Speaker 1: You got married in 1980, right?
Speaker 2: That's right, yes, I was going to--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I alluded to Carla [Carla Lewis Gregory], love of my life at the time.  She--we got married, she moved to, she went to Michigan [University of Michigan School of Information and Library Studies; University of Michigan School of Information, Ann Arbor, Michigan] after she graduated from Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], and got her library science degree, master's in library science there.  So we were there at the same time, I graduated a little bit before she did.  And then she came to Detroit to work for Rockwell International library [Rockwell International Corporation].  And she lived in Birmingham, Michigan.  And I was in Detroit, Michigan, yeah so that two years.  And then we got engaged before I left in '79 [1979] and I moved back and then she moved back.  Her home state of Virginia, she was from Middleburg, Northern Virginia.  And then we got married in September.  That's my first year at Hunton and Williams.  I had just passed the Virginia bar.  'Cause I had to take the bar in Virginia, I was a Michigan lawyer--bar and had to take the Virginia bar, we got married in September and, yeah so, yeah.  Started our home together in Richmond in 1980.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now--now all this while you were working for Hunton and Williams LLP [Richmond, Virginia] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 668234
Speaker 1: Did you have any interesting cases and discuss what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I did, you know, but, you know, a lot of time with a big firm like that [Hunton and Williams LLP, Richmond, Virginia], you weren't first chair.  But I worked on some airline crash cases.  'Cause Lewis Booker [Lewis T. Booker], he was an awesome lawyer.  So I mean, he did some incredible cases.  So I worked in a lot of research and writing memos and watching him try cases and depositions.  And then I had smaller matters that I did.
Speaker 1: Now on the airline cases, what side were you on in the--
Speaker 2: Oh, defending, defending the--
Speaker 1: Defending the airlines?
Speaker 2: Defending the, yeah.
Speaker 1: So what were--
Speaker 2: I was the defending one where air--a manufacturer of a part on the airline--was an incredible case where it was a question of causation of the crash.  And I was defending the company that manufactured the part.  But I did, you know, all types of case and defending and that and, but again a lot of it was the research and, you know, some of that's how--you carried a lot of bags too but you learn a lot at the feet of some great lawyers, and Lewis Booker was an incredible mentor and lawyer.
Story_ID: 668235
Speaker 1: When you joined Douglas Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglas Wilder], he, was he just by myself?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was by himself, yeah he was by, he had been sharing office in the same building with somebody.  He was by himself, he had--1982, when he came and formed together, formed the firm of Wilder and Gregory in 1982, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so he was operating in the old style--black lawyer--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the old style, yeah he had his--
Speaker 1: Always had to have his shingle up.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: People would come see him, talking about my boy's in trouble, see if you can help him and--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Or, you know, insurance company's trying to cheat me, see if you can help me, you know, all that kind of stuff.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's right, that's the kind of price we had and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I love it, you know, people--you had to really produce.  It wasn't about the--you couldn't just read your resume (unclear), "Well, I went to the University of Michigan Law School [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and I worked for Hunton and Williams [Hunton and Williams LLP, Richmond, Virginia] and Butzel Long [Butzel, Long, Gust, Klein and Van Zile; Butzel Long]."  Yeah, okay but can you handle this matter.  I love that, and you had to produce and you had to really show what you could do.  So it was, it was, it was good.  And Governor Wilder, he was--then senator, he was awesome trial lawyer.  I--his timing and just quick mind, I learned--we used to tried cases together, he was just awesome.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So he brings you in as a partner.  And what was your plan?  What was, what was Doug Wilder's plan--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --for you to be part of his--what were you going to work on?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you know, he was in the Senate [Senate of Virginia] then, and the whole idea was, you know, he had some idea of what value I could bring to the table.  And then fortunately he trusted that I could help build upon and (unclear)--institutionalize it for the first time.  I think it helped him to see what he might have be able to do beyond just as an individual lawyer but a firm, an institution.  And we did, the two of us practiced and then we had hired an associate.  And we built up and when we finished, we had eleven lawyers and we did bond work and all kinds of work.  So we grew and took that opportunity but we still did the core things, like you talk about when, you know, the mom and dad and junior's in trouble or we need this.  We were the firm that could answer those needs and do it at the highest level.  And then we--only difference was in our view, was we're just smaller.  But we didn't take a back seat to anybody in terms of confidence and ability and that's what I learned from him and that confidence and competence, yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay.  So he was in the state senate even then (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was in the state senate and he would--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --at the end of the day, I loved that we would come back and he would talk about the day.  And the senate floor and the politics and his, and just his comprehensive knowledge, he's the quintessential statesman.  Not only a politician but a statesman, in terms of understanding the needs of people and addressing what really makes the difference and how to make the political process work for the better good.  The common weal, as they say it, and the commonwealth.  And that's what he, he dedicated his public service to it.  And a, had a high sense of duty and public service, modeled by him.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So now did you help in his campaigns when--
Speaker 2: No, I helped by this, that I always say that I want to make sure that my priority was that I do nothing to dishonor and hurt his opportunity.  So my job was to keep the home front going, matter of fact, when he ran for lieutenant governor, his headquarters was in our law firm.  So I lived and breathed it every day.  So, but, no, you know, and my job was to keep the firm going.  And he was--as lieutenant governor, you know, he would, he could still practice law, so his mind was, he was right on target, he knew what was going on, he tried cases, so it was a wonderful partnership.  And, you know, and we never signed a document, it was by handshake and understanding, yeah.  Now it's been unheard of to be able to do something like that.  But that's the kind of ilk of a, of person that he was and still is.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So for--before your first appointment as judge, you like, you were working with Douglas Wilder for--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it was from--
Speaker 1: --basically (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) from 1982 all the way up to 19--well, 2000--
Speaker 1: --to 2001, that's like twe- twenty years.
Speaker 2: To 2000, yeah.  Long, yeah, it's a long--
Speaker 1: You had a twenty years so--
Speaker 2: Long time.
Speaker 1: --so what are the cases, some of the cases that you all dealt with that you dealt with--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, well, we--
Speaker 1: --during that period of time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We dealt with a lot of (makes sound)--I tried murder cases, double homicide cases.  We--I did--and what we did was, we can, we be--we're fortunate to be an American Bar Association demonstration project.  People like [HistoryMaker] Dennis Archer, who's the first black president of the American Bar and then Robert Grey [Robert J. Grey, Jr.], who's the second black, they helped us get into that.  And we could show it so we started getting corporate clients nationally.  So we did work for Ford Motor Company and did some work for General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] and other, and, so we did defense work for insurance companies so we broadened our footprint.  But we still did the old school criminal defense work too.  And we did bond work, so I loved it, it was a great pra- we had eleven lawyers.  (Mumbles) one of the largest African American owned, at the time, firms in Virginia.  And it was wonderful, some bright lawyers we got people who worked at the firm who are now judges.  And I'm so proud that it wasn't--and that's where the point about institutionalizing.  The firm is still in existence, it's called Harrell and Chambliss [Harrell and Chambliss LLP].  But that's the firm and so proud that that's still going on.  It wasn't just--'cause, you know, success is seized having a plan of succession and them taking the ball running and gone further on, and I'm very proud of them so, yeah we were able to, thank God, to do something that was significant and still goes on as a legacy.
Story_ID: 668236
Speaker 1: Douglas Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglas Wilder] was elected governor in, what year was it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, in--in 1989, he was elected and he took office--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in January of 1990 and then he had to leave the firm [Wilder and Gregory; Harrell and Chambliss LLP].  'Cause in--at that point--and I became the managing partner in the firm.  And the firm grew, I was saying, it's a different work.  And we were general counsel to Richmond Public Schools, one of my favorite clients, for about fourteen years.  I did, our firm did the work for them.  That was an incredible opportunity and, so it really was a great practice.  And had some wonderful people in Richmond [Virginia] bar's--very helpful, good lawyers and judges that nurtured us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now he became mayor, was it in 2000s?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that was, yeah I swore him in.
Speaker 1: That was later, right?
Speaker 2: I was on the court [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit] then.   I swore him in, that would be--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was much later, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, like 2002 [sic. 2005]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I think it was, yeah.
Speaker 1: Hardly anybody--I don't know how many people have been mayor and then, I mean have been governor and then mayor of one of the largest cities in the state.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And in fact, Rich- is Richmond the largest city in the State of Virginia?
Speaker 2: No, it's Virginia Beach [Virginia].
Speaker 1: Virginia--
Speaker 2: Virginia Beach, yeah they have over three hundred thousand people, yeah.
Speaker 1: I did not know that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think of it, I just think of a beach.
Speaker 2: You think of Richmond, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I think, I don't think, yeah I think Richmond, being the capital, is the biggest.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I really think of D.C. [Washington, D.C.] as being like the--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, and Northern Virginia all around there, that's--I call it--that's the wealthy part of our state (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --it's a great state.
Speaker 1: So you never took up a spot in his cabinet or anything?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, never, never had any political appointments, never got, you know, into--I was on the board of VCU, Virginia Commonwealth University [Richmond, Virginia].  And I was, I was appointed by Governor Robb [Chuck Robb] and then (mumbles).  But then it turned out that Governor Wilder had to reappoint me to make that happen because it was, it was a blip in the law, in the law and procedure.  But, no, I never took any political position and I was just so happy to be practicing law and being a part of that, you know.  It's--that was enough for me.
Story_ID: 668237
Speaker 1: Now in 2001 when you were appointed judge in the--now wasn't there like a wait, a significant wait?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, when I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause you were nominated by--
Speaker 2: I was nominated by President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] in--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --in June of 2000.  And I went six months without a [U.S.] Senate hearing.  And then the president did something that surprised everybody Christmas 2000, which was sixteen years ago this month.  He recess appointed me to the court of appeals.  Which means you go on the court when they're in recess but you're only there for about a year, 'til the end of the next congress unless you are nominated and confirmed.  So I went on the court from, literally from being a lawyer and partner at Wilder and Gregory [Harrell and Chambliss LLP] to on the Fourth Circuit court of appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit], which happens to be right down the street, it's only about three blocks away.  At--three blocks away but a long journey, a long journey.  And I came on in--as a recess appointee, there was no guarantee that I would be here more than a year.  I gave up my law practice and partner and all those things.  But my wife [Carla Lewis Gregory] was, she was so loyal and wonderful, we said, "Listen, we're going on in faith and, you know, and what happens--we going to keep going."  And did that and I was fortunate that President Bush [President George Walker Bush], when he came in--'cause everybody was saying, "Oh, a new president."  I, but I knew that though when I took the--wasn't like I was waiting to see what the election was going be.  I knew what it was.  But then he made me his ap- nominee and then I was confirmed in July 2001 for a lifetime position on the court.
Speaker 1: Now that's a--so it wasn't a shock because you had to wait for quite a while for it to happen (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But it was a shock in the sense that people could, people thought I didn't have a chance once there was a Republican, not once, but a Republican president.  But it turns out, I'd be the only person in the history of the United States to be nominated, to be appointed by two presidents to the court of appeals by--in different political parties.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, exactly.  So do you, do you consider yourself a bipartisan type of person (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah, you know, but, you know, it's sort of, you know, you know, it's a--before I was a, you know, on the court clearly I--Democrat, you know, in terms of my partner [HistoryMaker L. Doulas Wilder] was a Democratic governor so, and then (unclear) Democrat, but once on the court, you know, you--the partisan is dropped and you're there to do it without political strife.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: But certainly, yeah.  Democratic Party (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right, all right.  So, okay.  Now, so how were you received you're the only black judge.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, my colleagues were really good.  I was not a judge with an asterisk, I say because at--it went very well, I was treated very well.  And it was a interesting time coming on, I had no law clerk so I had to get law clerks and do that.  And there's no orientation, you just come right on and you get your--matter of fact, my first briefs where delivered while I was still at the firm.  So you got to hit the ground running.  I was hearing cases that winter with the court.
Speaker 1: Was there anyone that like played the part of a, of a, of the (unclear)--or a mentor to you, when you came on?
Speaker 2: Well, no, not a mentor but I--
Speaker 1: Or someone who was a guide or took an interest (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I, but I, but I, but I--at least that J. Wilkinson [J. Harvie Wilkinson III], who was the chief, he was very kind, he was very kind, very welcoming.  And I remember Karen Williams [Karen J. Williams], who is the first woman on the court, she called me when I was first nominated and she said, "Roger [HistoryMaker Roger L. Gregory], I'll help anyway I can."  She said, "I know what's like to be the first."  And I always thought that was such a kind gesture.  But all of my colleagues were wonderful, in terms of helping in that regard, they really were.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you didn't find any resentment or anybody--
Speaker 2: No, no, people were--
Speaker 1: --who was trying to represent Strom Thurmond or somebody or (laughter)--
Speaker 2: No (laughter).
Speaker 1: --that kind of, that kind of attitude?  No.
Speaker 2: No, not at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, it's--it--very rigorous, there were some very able judges, when you put your stuff out there, it's subject to be cut down but some able judges.  But never any kind of political strife or that you'll, you know, that kind of rancor, so I really credit them for making it a very pleasant and a, and an inviting collegial setting.
Story_ID: 668238
Speaker 1: So what--what were some of the cases that came up that were notable during the time that you--
Speaker 2: Oh, well, I worked on the Moussaoui case [United States v. Zacarias Moussaoui], that was a--that's the case where the man's accused of the 9/11 bombing [September 11, 2001], yeah.  And I'm the only judge, the original judge that--on, sit on the court, that was incredible.  My law clerks couldn't work on that because it required such a high secret clearance.  And, but that was fascinating, my--I wrote dissent in some of those issues.  But, you can't even understand some of it, because it's--CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] redacted it, they redacted it.  So because some of that stuff was classified, but it was an incredible case.  And I've had some cases where--twice I have dissented on the Fourth Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit] and the case went up to the [U.S.] Supreme Court.  And the Supreme Court reversed the Fourth Circuit and mentioned me by name in their opinion, twice that happened so, and I've been on some important cases.  I was on the--
Speaker 1: Let me, let me before we get, you get past that I just wanted to, you know, kind of explain 'cause people are going to be watching this in the future (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, and what is--
Speaker 1: --and may not even know what Mouss- Moussaoui's case is.  So what happened?
Speaker 2: Oh good, oh, yeah, exactly.  Well, the Moussaoui case--this person who--
Speaker 1: How do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, my goodness, I think its M-O-U-A-S- [sic.]--. I'll have to get that for you, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But it's Moussaoui.
Speaker 1: He was a--
Speaker 2: He was accused--
Speaker 1: He's from, was he from Egypt or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, no, I think he was--
Speaker 1: --or Sau--
Speaker 2: --from--Moroccan.
Speaker 1: Moroccan, okay.
Speaker 2: He was Moroccan.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: And he was not on the planes, of course, everybody got killed on the planes.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But he was accused of--
Speaker 2: Right, of being a part of it, yes, exactly (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) helping plot the--
Speaker 2: And he was tried in Northern Virginia.
Speaker 1: Now where was he supposed to be when the event took place--
Speaker 2: Well, see, I--
Speaker 1: --when 9/11 too place?
Speaker 2: Well, he--well, he clearly was, I believe in custody at the time.  So it was no question that he was not there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he would--already had been--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --arrested--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --prior to this or during or what--well, what--
Speaker 2: Yeah, prior to.
Speaker 1: Prior to.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah and, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --he was in custody, but the whole question is what complicity did--he had.  And that was--see, I was not (unclear) the trial part of it.  When it came up to me on issues of for example, secret documents of--whether or not the fact that it impacted--could you fully prosecute when there was some witnesses that were unavailable and documents that were--so that was the aspect that I had of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was a fascinating case, the documents were just unbelievable, yeah, yeah incredible, yeah.
Speaker 1: So what was the rul- ruling that he was, he was up for, he was up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, he was up--it came to us that he was, that he could be tried on the death ineligible counts.  And that was the question because the district court [U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia] had ruled that he couldn't.  So it came up to us called interlocutor, which means that the case hadn't been tried yet.  But that issue was so important, you could bring that issue for appeal first.  And then eventually he was tried and then he came back up after he was convicted.  And the jury found him guilty of capital elib- eligible offense but gave him life in prison.  So he's been serving a sentence of life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But a fascinating case though.  I mean incredible, can't even talk about it because a lot of stuff were--it was--
Speaker 1: Classified.
Speaker 2: Classified (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but fascinating case.
Story_ID: 668239
Speaker 1: Now you were getting ready to tell us about another case before I had--made you back up (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, this--another case, this was one where--dealing with campaign financing where--and I dissented which mean--normally we sit in panels of three.  And if one judge disagrees with the majority, it's--he or she writes a dissent and then the case went up to the [U.S.] Supreme Court.  And they agreed with my reasoning in the dissent and mentioned me by name, in the dissent.  And my favorite one is Justice Souter [David Souter] said, "As Judge Gregory [HistoryMaker Roger L. Gregory] rightly stated," (laughter) I love that.  And then another one, Justice Ginsburg [Ruth Bader Ginsburg] mentioned me in a, in a case, we had a statutory issue.  So we had some--and I was on the case where the, where we struck down Virginia's ban on same sex marriage.  I was on that panel, on the Bostic case [Bostic v. Schaefer, 2014] and then also it was my opinion that they took questions whether or not if the exchange portion of the Obama healthcare [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010], whether or not that was constitutional, and I ruled that it was.  And then the Supreme Court affirmed me in that case.  So that, so I have had some interested cases in--on the Fourth Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit].
Story_ID: 668240
Speaker 1: I should have asked you about this before, but you got a part in a play To Kill the, To Kill, 'To Kill a Mockingbird' [Christopher Sergel].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah it was 2003 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Harper Lee--um-hm.
Speaker 2: --the first one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My wife [Carla Lewis Gregory], she was saying, you know, I said, she said, "You always talking about acting, go down to the Barksdale Theatre [Virginia Repertory Theatre, Richmond, Virginia] on Sunday."  I said, "What do you mean?  There's no theatre on Sunday."  She said, "No, I signed you up to do an audition for 'To Kill a Mockingbird'."
Speaker 1: Now were you always talking about plays?  Did you like plays (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I did 'cause I love, I used to write plays--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --a long time ago for my church and Sunday school.  And I've always had an interest in drama.  But I didn't get any big parts in high school.  But I was--drama and she said, "Well, let's see what you can do."  And I did it and (unclear) and I didn't tell them I was judge.  And I got a call back and I got--landed a part, Reverend Sykes.  And that was just--and since then I've been off and on doing it, now I write and direct plays more.  And normally I write a play every year for my church, I'm the artistic director of the drama ministry of my church--at Good Shepherd [Good Shepherd Baptist Church, Petersburg, Virginia].  But I love it, and I've done--back in 2013, I did 'To Kill a Mockingbird' again.  I've done August Wilson's 'Fences.'  And done some--I did play Thurgood Marshall in the documentary done by [HistoryMaker] Tim Reid the actor.  He directed it and, so I've had some fun (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) right there in Petersburg [Virginia].
Speaker 2: Right there in Petersburg.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That's right.  It was--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's got Celen- Centennial Studio [sic.]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mi- New Millennium (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Millennium.  Oh, New Millennium Studios [Petersburg, Virginia], I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: New Millennium, Millennium, yeah.
Speaker 1: I didn't know they had, yeah.
Speaker 2: He and Daphne [HistoryMaker Daphne Maxwell Reid].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, they are wonderful people.  They are absolutely, I mean great people.  So I love that, I love acting.  I'm working on a skit now, that I'm writing and will direct soon, yeah.
Story_ID: 668241
Speaker 1: The other thing about 'To Kill a Mockingbird' was that you've been quoted as saying part of the reason you wanted to be lawyer was because you saw the movie.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Atticus Finch.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, he just inspired my--and what's really nice, I say the lines, my favorite lines is when the case is over, and Atticus is lost and Tom is--Robbins [sic. Tom Robinson] has been wrongfully convicted, and the reverend [Reverend Sykes] stands up in the balcony and says--tells little Scout [Jean Louise "Scout" Finch], "Stand up, your father's passing."  I was always thought that was the greatest--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --greatest compliment to a lawyer.  You know, all about the struggle, they didn't recognize that today you saw a lawyer, and he's passing, give him your respect.  Yeah, and that was searing to me.  I may, I may (unclear), many a lawyer I think were galvanized by that, by Atticus Finch and--in that, taking on the fight that couldn't be won but still taking on the fight, yeah.
Speaker 1: It inspired you to be the person who gets that kind of respect for your professional work.
Speaker 2: Exactly, because I think, you know, unfortunately people talk about lawyers and that.  But I always thought and I still believe that law is a noble professional.  And one that, when somebody needs you in some of the most dire circumstances literally, you know, matter of life and death.  You stand in the well and represent them at the highest level, yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, I listen--one Saturday afternoon in Chicago [Illinois] working for The HistoryMakers, I was riding in the car and 'Prairie Home Companion' ['A Prairie Home Companion'] was on public radio.
Speaker 2: Oh, I love that, yeah, I love that (unclear), yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And they were telling lawyer jokes (laughter).  They--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --they used to have one, what does ten thousand lawyers at the bottom of the sea re- represent?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, a good start (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A good start, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right (laughter).
Speaker 1: And what do the sharks, you know, why don't the sharks bite them when they're down there?  And it's professional courtesy, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: All that kind of thing.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: So it's a, you know, there's a lot of, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and what's black and brown and looks good on a lawyer?  A Doberman, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right (laughter).
Speaker 2: That kind of stuff (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.  So lawyers get clowned in the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --media, public (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But in the end, at the end one of the most misunderstood lines from Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] is that I would kill--the first thing I would do is kill the lawyers ['Henry VI, Part II'].  But that was a great compliment because what it was, the question was well, if I took over the world and, and ended democracy, what's the first thing you'd do?  Kill the lawyers.  That was a compliment that we are the barriers and those--the--those who, you know, protect rights.  So if you wanted to scheme to end that, you kill the lawyers.  But most people take it as like a negative like, yeah kill the lawyers first, that would be a good start.
Speaker 1: Well, when you talk about that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But really it was a compliment.
Speaker 1: --scene, that feeling, I thought about those schoolteachers that--in your home town [Petersburg, Virginia] and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, absolutely, kind of respect.  And that's why we had so much respect for them.  And we knew they were so bright and they were, you know, they wouldn't let you go.  I said, "Oh, love, they will not let you go" ['Oh, Love That Will Not Let Me Go'].
Speaker 1: Yeah, that kind of public respect and authority, the authority that's derived from public respect is what I think most people try to strive for in a public leader and by that I mean that they want leaders that inspire that kind of--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --respect.
Story_ID: 668242
Speaker 1: And in that regard you were, you served on the, on the Brown versus the Board of Education anniversary commission [Brown v. Board of Education 50th Anniversary Commission].
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was a nominee (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And--
Speaker 2: Justice Rehnquist [William Rehnquist] nominated me for that.  That was incredible, we went to all the five sites of the original cases.  And we had public panels and symposia, and it culminated on 2004 in Topeka, Kansas.  President Bush [President George Walker Bush] was the speaker.  And it was fascinating, I met some wonderful people, it was a commemoration, the national commemoration.  I'll never forget that one of the, those cases was in Washington, D.C., Sharpe versus Bolling [Bolling v. Sharpe, 1954].  And another--people don't realize that the Delaware case [Gebhart v. Belton, 1952], it actually--they were not petitioners, they won, they won that case in Delaware, but it took it all up.  But the others, of course, South Carolina, Topeka, Kansas and Virginia, they were petitioners, and D.C., yeah.  But, yeah it was a fascinating time.  It was, of course, in, being here in Richmond [Virginia], with Mr. Hill [HistoryMaker Oliver W. Hill].  Oliver Hill, who worked on the briefs and, of course, Spottswood Robinson [Spottswood William Robinson III], who was on the D.C. circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit].  I mean, just, just giants, giants, giants and and S.W. Tucker [Samuel Wilbert Tucker], who's a civil rights lawyer and the Marsh firm [Hill, Tucker and Marsh, Richmond, Virginia], Henry Marsh [HistoryMaker Henry L. Marsh III].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was just awesome, awesome lawyers so, you know.  And being in Richmond, I was really blessed, it was--practice of law with some very courageous men and women and fine lawyers of all colors, a diverse array of just, of wonderful lawyers.
Story_ID: 668243
Speaker 1: Did you have much interaction with Wyatt Tee Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker] or Oliver Hill [HistoryMaker Oliver W. Hill]?
Speaker 2: Oh, Mr. Hill, oh, absolutely, yeah.  It--Mr. Hill, I remember, I put together a--when I was the pre- I was the president of the Old Dominion Bar Association, which is the oldest statewide black bar in the country.  And I wrote a grant to the Virginia Foundation [Virginia Foundation for the Humanities, Charlottesville, Virginia], and it got a twenty thousand dollars to put on a video documentary about Mr. Hill.  And one of my proud moments in interviewing him and researching him and just--what an incredible man.  Just unbelievable, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and I asked you about Wyatt Tee Walker, too.
Speaker 2: And Wyatt Tee Walker, you know, I met him (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know he doesn't live in Richmond [Virginia] anymore but--
Speaker 2: But, now he lives in Chesterfield [Virginia], just outside of Richmond.  Yeah, about--I've met him before because he's a close connection with Virginia Union University [Richmond, Virginia].  He went to school and, so, yeah he again, he was the pastor of Gillfield Baptist Church in, right in Petersburg [Virginia].  So all these illuminary--as a matter of fact, the week I think that--bef- afterwards when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] died, he was scheduled to be in Petersburg to work on the poor people's march [Poor People's Campaign] that was set for the spring in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]  Yeah, so Petersburg has always been prominently factored in that and the undergrad people, like I saw Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], [HistoryMaker] Edward Brooke, Ed Brooke, a Republican black senator from Massachusetts.  Ron Dellums [HistoryMaker Ronald Dellums], who's from Oakland [California], [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond, just an incredible experience.  And plays from New York [New York], and 'River Niger' ['The River Niger,' Joseph A. Walker] and 'Ceremonies of Old'--
Speaker 1: 'Dark Old Men.'
Speaker 2: --'Black, of Black Men' [sic. 'Ceremonies in Dark Old Men,' Lonne Elder III], yeah.  And just incredible cultural experience in the, in the time wonderful time to be in college and just--I think about those days, it really was an incredible experience, grounding experience.
Story_ID: 668244
Speaker 1: So we talked about Bostic versus Schaefer [Bostic v. Schaefer, 2014], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: The same sex marriage--
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: But was there a lot of, you know, it's been said that the black church is one of the most unprogressive on this subject of any of the institutions in the black community.  And it's probably a place where you're going to, you're going to visibly see a lot of gay people doing things in the church.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, yeah, you know, yeah it's--as a judge, you know, I (laughter), I don't really get to com- comment on that but, you know, I think, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --preachers that have their, have your faith in what there is.  But, you know, as the, as the law in construing it, I mean I found the case to be not very compliment, not very complicated on the law after Lawrence [Lawrence v. Texas, 2003], when the [U.S.] Supreme Court said that matters of sexual encounters and intimacies among consenting adults can't be banned, so once that, 'cause that--I thought it was the moral traditions was the longest and strongest issue that states said, "We can ban it."  But once that's no longer the case it came to be dis- discrimination in terms of how could that be legally deprived by based on who they loved.  So from a legal standpoint, but I think people have very strong religious and moral views about it which, you know, because--and I remember sitting in my office before the argument, I could hear people chanting on one side versus the other.  But I thought how wonderful it is to live in a country where people can voice their views one way or the other but, yet in an ordered fashion.  I'd be going in a few minutes in a court of law and deciding the case and in an ordered fashion, and not being disturbed by the slogans of the time or whatever but by being drawn to what the law--and interpret it as best you could--the [U.S.] Constitution.  So, you know, it's--it does speak to freedom of ideas and thought, but the law had prevailed, so it was quite a moment (unclear) cases.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is it, is there ever a time when you feel that the sacred and the secular are clashing too much or there's a--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --there's a--
Speaker 2: I don't think and I think we all comes with our backgrounds and construct, you know, you know the--I'm a Christian and I, yeah and I have very strong faith and also, not but, and also I'm a, I'm a judge.  And if it comes to the point there's anything that my view in that regard is so overwhelming that it surmounts my interpretation (unclear) of the law, then I shouldn't sit and cannot sit on that.  'Cause you take an oath to be impartial and that's what the job is.  Like I have death cases, but my personal views of the death penalty is of no moment, the question is was there constitutional error.  And if it was, then the writ should be granted, you know.  And, but if isn't then, the writ is not, you know.  So, you know, it's looking at the law but certainly, you know, you wear the hat as a human being, and I got three daughters, I'm a father and a husband.  It's like everybody else but it's that the obligation to look at the law and judge it fairly.  That's why justice is blindfolded because she's saying that I'm not looking at who's before me, where they're from, their ethnicity or gender or whatever.  But I'm only interested in what is the weight of the evidence.  And the side that wins the one under the law and the facts have the weight of the evidence and the preponderance of the standard and that's who prevails.  But not who I visually see and connect with or would want it to be in my personal view.
Story_ID: 668245
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about the police brutality issues that have been coming up in the--
Speaker 2: No, no, I don't have any broad comments about that, I've had cases, you know, before.  And the question of--I've had cases where a person died as a result of encounters with the police.  And I've ruled on those cases and try to look at what the Fourth Amendment--and the terms of protection.  And the Fourteenth Amendment, the equal protection under the law, so in those analysis, yeah.  So, and then there--obviously these are very serious matter.  I think we're all, as citizens, want to have protection of our police.  But protection of citizens as well and people feel sanguine about that, to be treated equally.  So that's why the law is there to try to--and without passion or fear or favor, to understand what the law is and speak directly to what the resolve is.  'Cause everybody has to comport, nobody is above the law, no matter what uniform you wear or what robe you wear or civilian.  And once we get to the point that anybody's above the law, then we'll have lost our sense of what our system of justice and equal justice under the law is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So those cases had to be weighed.
Story_ID: 668246
Speaker 1: You were saying that if the law, you know, ever, you know, I mean I'm--after the last thing you said (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, in terms of (unclear) if we get to the point where if ever anybody's above the law, the law is not done fairly, then we've lost our system of justice.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And that's key, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now this is the issue that's the rub on many of the people that are in the streets.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Because--so case after case we see an unarmed black man, you know, killed and assaulted by police in a minor--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --incident.  There's no--there doesn't seem to be any justice of the--it's awfully difficultly to convict an officer of the law.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, I think it's always been traditionally and probably still so is--that's always difficult because we put so much trust in police officers.  Matter of fact they're the persons who (unclear), they're armed, they can come in and they risk their lives and they also enforce the law, so you have to have some sense of trust there.  And we're dealing with--we don't, we like to think these are people who are, as the French would say, the creme de la creme.  But it--reality is that they're all human too.  And then they make mistakes and sometimes some of them, have some intents that are not modeled and consistent with what we want to see in police officers.  So we have to look at those cases and what we look through in the field design in excessive force cases--and I think is, that is, what would an action be for a reasonable officer, and not a subjective but one of a reasonable officer under those circumstances.  And sometimes it makes it--those ones where someone wheels around that they have a stick of gum and a shiny foil from a gum wrapper or was it a barrel of weapon, those kind of things.  But then I think what--but people find more and more there are instances where it seems like that--clearly situations where they can't see in their minds the immediate threat and that kind of thing.  So they wonder and that--finding that ebb and flow and that balance and doing that, it's some difficult--and I think police training, community, those kind of things and working together and resolving it.  Because it's something we got to get right because we do have--rely so much on our police officers and for them to do a great job and to be safe.  And our citizens to be safe and feel that they are going to be treated equally, too.  And I find where--so we have to--it's something that it's--you can't work any corner isolated, you have to come together and first admit there are some problems and become, and that in fact there is the minority of a problem and then make so and then you create a culture that none of that's accepted, as well as the community creates a culture that police officers are there to protect and serve and to help that so working together.  It--but it's, I think it's something that's very difficult in our country, in our society, we have to work on because it could be a situation that could really hurt us for years to come.  And it already is a situation where, you know, I think they've showed perception is that even with courts or higher--70 percent of the people believe people are treated better that are rich, as opposed to the poor.  And that's a--when perception becomes that stark, out of balance, then you can't just put your head in the sand and say it doesn't exist.  In other words, there's uncertainty and doubts and anxieties, rather than repressing that, give voice to it.  And let people sound it out.  And try to resolve it.  But you can't suppress doubts and uncertainties and fears and--just by ignoring them.  You got to give it voice and say, "Okay let's talk about, let's reason it."  And then I think if you do that, you'll find that well, both sides have some things to do to change how they look at things.  Because we can't go around destroying each other and in my view, and in any setting, that's going to be productive, that's going to be fertile ground for the, for the--sprouting roots to the aspirations and dreams of our children, all of our children, no matter what their color is and where they come from.  And, so I think it's incumbent upon us as citizens to work on those things.  'Cause we can be better and matter of fact, I think we must be better in every sense.
Story_ID: 668247
Speaker 1: Do you think that--I know you're not a legislator, but do you think that the procedures, the legal procedures that attend the--either, I mean that examine whe- whether police officers should be indicted or not in a certain matter are skewed in the favor of the officers.  I mean, to the extent to where it's almost impossible to convict them?
Speaker 2: No, I can't, I can't, no, I wouldn't make any across the board characterization like that.  It's, you know, it's--I think that some things that are traditional, it's, you know, it's--police officers and vigilantes have always been hard to (laughter), you know, get indictments on.  Because people like, because we've put so much high esteem in them traditionally.  But the problem about it, that's eroding, it's becoming--eroding and that's going to have different thoughts because that's the whole thing, perception is--becomes real, and if it's not real, it becomes real and even more so and it is real.  And then there are instances more and more people are looking at, so we have to judge ourselves and always sus- ex- examine where we are, are we doing the right thing, are we approaching law the same way, are we, you know, how do we teach each other and how do we relate to each other?  Like bullying, I mean it starts there, you know, in the whole sense.  We wait until the very end, and somebody's in the, in the street dying or whatever, as opposed to when we have a chance to change how we look at each other.  We don't take the opportunity and to do that, I mean we--I'm talking about society in terms of what young people--and relating.  We're in these silos and how do you expect people to come out of these silos that we've built for years and years and through housing patterns and all those things.  And all of a sudden, it's going to be kumbaya?  No, success is by chance and, not by chance, it's by choice.  You got to choice to engage, to give opportunity and broad fields of endeavors and respect and that takes a long time.  It's work, but, you know, I say perfection is the enemy of good.  People say, "Oh, I can't do it because it will never work.  It will never work perfectly."  No, don't worry about perfection, worry about doing something good.  And I think we lose sight on that because it's not--it takes a long time.  But we start changing their ideas, and you see when people get together and you see these wonderful photographs of young people and police officers working together and proud.  Nobody wants to see rancor in their neighborhood, they don't want fear, they want to live.  Everybody wants that.  I credit everybody wants to--their children to grow up better than they did, in a wholesome environment.  We got to spread that, and I always say that what difference does it make if you live in a mansion, if the kid next door is playing with matches?  You know, it's so much fire around that we have to begin to say--look beyond our walls and say, "I got to be a part of that," because at one point, all of us going to wind up in their hands--if we live long enough, in somebody else's hands.  And do you want that person to be somebody who's bitter and never had an opportunity, and their children never saw the light that they have a hope and opportunity.  Because I don't care how much money you have, you going to wind up in somebody else's hand.  And the question is, is that going to be somebody who wipes your mouth and your backside, you want them to make sure they get it in the right order.  And only people who--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's an interesting way to put it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And only people who (laughter), only people who love and have a sense of human dignity and I, I don't care how money you can, if nobody's looking, they can set you at a window and mistreat you, money won't do that.  So we have to cultivate love and respect and that's so important in my view about society and all of us.
Story_ID: 668248
Speaker 1: Now you've probably given us some of it already but what is your judicial philosophy?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't have one other than I think the closest one is this one (cough) and I can't take credit for the quote, so I'll tell you who it is, it's Justice Frank- Felix Frankfurter, and he was talking about an opinion.  He said, an opinion ought not to be the expression of mere will, it should be the effort of reason to discover justice.  So if I have one, that's mine, that it's not just my mere will.  Anybody can sort of--this is where I want to end up, now give me the roadmap to get there.  You know, you can--it's like taking the bible quotes out of context, you can do everything, it was used to justify slavery, you know, you know, you know. Servants, obey your masters and that was taught.  But the whole point is--but the truth of it is in the wholeness of it.  Just like it is in the word and that is the effort, reason, you know.  So I can't tell my law clerks this is what I think, this is what I want.  No, we have to wrestle with it.   "But judge, how can you (makes sound) in light of this precedent, in light of these facts?"  That takes effort, and it takes, and that type of thing.  So if there is one that's--it's not one of a context of a subject matter, as it is the rigor of working at it and trying to get it right and not being stuck in concrete.  If my good colleagues write a dissent or say anything, I say, "You know, I thought one way, but this--doesn't--right.  It's--," you know, I remember talking about it with Justice Marshall [Thurgood Marshall], the currency must be reason not power [Payne v. Tennessee, 1991].  Not because I got two votes over one but, no, that one vote might be the right vote, if you sit back and listen to reason, you say, "You know, you're right."  And I'm glad for people like Justice Marshall and others, Brennan [William J. Brennan, Jr.] and many other you could add who were able to standby what they--on reason.  And in spite of the odds and in spite of the circumstances, were able to write and even though they were in the dissent, the minority sometimes, it became the majority.  Because they never gave up on the idea of justice and reasoning.  So, and that's all, otherwise every case stands on its bottom, it comes to me fresh, and I'm willing to be persuaded by my colleagues but I'm not afraid to be on the dissent by myself.  If I really believe that that's as I understand the law and the [U.S.] Constitution to be right.
Story_ID: 668249
Speaker 1: Now in 2014, you authored the unanimous opinion that upheld the Affordable Care Act--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --tax subsidies in King versus Burwell [King v. Burwell, 2014]?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, oh, interesting case, yeah they took my case 'cause I felt that, and I understand it did- it didn't say, it could have said easily four words and any other exchange.  Because it said goes by state, but I thought under the old idea of deference to legislators and understanding that that was the reason, it was intended to be a comprehensive health plan and these exchanges would be the mechanism by which they were (unclear).  I thought that was clear, although the statute was ambiguous, we can feel up, if it is ambiguous, at what the intent is, and I thought that was clear.  And [U.S.] Supreme Court agreed that, it was--the, it was constitutional.
Story_ID: 668250
Speaker 1: At some point in, I guess in the 2000s did your first wife pass?
Speaker 2: Yes, my--Carla [Carla Lewis Gregory] passed in 2009, she was diagnosed with a malignant brain tumor in 2007.  And she had a courageous and faithful battle for twenty-two months with--she had the most lethal (unclear), it was called a glioblastoma.  But I learned so much and--about the whole idea of faith and love and (unclear) that journey.  And she was, she never lost her spirit in that regard and did some incredible things but, yes.  So she passed, yeah about eight years ago.
Story_ID: 668251
Speaker 1: In 2016, you were appointed the first African American chief judge of the Fourth U.S. circuit court of appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: --right?
Speaker 2: It was, yeah the way it works, it works by seniorities, yeah.  So July 9th, I became the chief, it's a seven year term, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you have, you really have to check on the work of the others, right?  That's what you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my goodness, yes, five states of--Maryland, West Virginia, Virginia and North and South Carolina.  It's not just our court that has fifteen judges on it, but the whole circuit, which is about 160 federal judges.  So you deal with all this judicial complaints, the budget, facilities.  And then, you know, the other layers is that moment judicial U.S., the Judicial Conference of the United States, that's with Chief Justice Roberts [John Roberts].  All the circuit chiefs work, and we set the policy for all federal courts in the country.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that's presided over by the--Chief Justice Roberts?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, that's chaired by Chief Justice Roberts, so we meet in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] in the [U.S.] Supreme Court and do that and, so it's--you got the hierarchy, you got this court, and you got the whole Fourth Circuit.  And, so I had a judicial conference meeting this week and boy, people there from the judges--so it's a lot of administrative work.  Plus I got my day job, just like my other colleague, I got the same caseload they have.  And got to do that and, but I like it though it's a challenger.  But it--my work as a managing partner of the law firm of Wilder and Gregory [Harrell and Chambliss LLP, Richmond, Virginia] really helped prepare me for being chief because, you know, sort of lawyers herding cats.  But my colleagues they're, you know, they're really great.  I've had a lot of support and wonderful people work here at the Fourth Circuit.  And very proud of them and they've all helped in in many ways that--(background noise) they help, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: All right.  So you will serve as chief judge for how long?  (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, seven years.
Speaker 2: Seven years, okay.
Speaker 1: Seven years, yeah, term ends twenty- twenty thir- 2023, um-hm, yeah 2023.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So is that when you become a senior judge or some or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, it's my choice, if I'm blessed to be still around.  But, no, I don't have to take senior status, it's a lifetime appointment.  But I can because--matter of fact, I can take senior status even before my term ends because it's called the rule of eighties.  Your age plus your years of serve must be eighty year, eighty or more, and you have to be sixty-five five years old.  So when I reached the rule of eighty somewhere around sixty-four years old or something like that.  I've been rule eighty because I've been on the court now sixteen years.  So it's about--sixty-four'll eighty, yeah.
Story_ID: 668252
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything major you would do differently, if you could do it again?
Speaker 2: Well, no--well, you know, I think I'd be more focused about the broader aspects of law school [University of Michigan Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and that kind of thing and probably the clerkships and all of that.  But looking back on it, it worked exactly like it should because I think if you're, if you did that and you go off, and I never would have gotten where I really needed to be.  You know, sometime doors have to close and what you believe, believe to be disappointments have to occur because that's what (unclear) of where you ought to be.  So, you know, so, no, I don't, you know, certainly I'm not perfect.  I wish I had done some better things and maybe spent more time with your children when they were young and you try to make a life and your wife and all of those things.  Yeah, but it's--I was--just feel very blessed and--grace and God gave me the opportunity to do those--and, you know, and (unclear) talk about, you talk about wife, I was--just had my first anniversary, I remarried in 2015.
Speaker 1: Right, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah, so, you know--
Speaker 1: So tell us about her.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, Velda, V-E-L-D-A [Velda Edwards Gregory], yeah she's--she lives--this is the interesting--we started--Virginia Avenue [Virginia Avenue Elementary School, Petersburg, Virginia], we went to the same elementary school and did not know each other at all (laughter).  It's funny, so from Petersburg [Virginia], same hometown, didn't know each other.  And really then we met briefly at church [Good Shepherd Baptist Church, Petersburg, Virginia] a few years back.  But it really wasn't until sometime in like, late 2014, started dating, yeah, yeah.  Then we got married in 2015, wonderful woman, woman of faith and like, she worked--lived in Cleveland [Ohio] for twenty-eight years and Illinois before that, and she did, like the long road back to Petersburg or the area.  She has three sons, I have three daughters so we got sort of a Brady Bunch going (laughter) there.  But wonderful, I have two grandchildren, she has four grandchildren.  So really, really, really, she's a wonderful woman.  And like I said, I was blessed to find love again and, so it's been a very good life, a blessed life.
Story_ID: 668253
Speaker 1: Did you ever image that you'd become a judge when you--
Speaker 2: Nope, never did, you know, I didn't grow up with any lawyers and--lawyers and professionals.  And, you know, you know, I loved recitation, and one thing I did, the closest thing I did with law was, when I was growing up in the days when you went to the movies, if your friends couldn't go to the movies, the person who went--your job was to tell them what the movie was about.  And you couldn't just stand up there in some monotone and--, "It was about these two dudes, they rode in town--." No, you had to make sure they were in the seats.   So that's how I learned storytelling and, so that came in good use being a trial lawyer and summations and opening arguments.  But being a lawyer, no, it wasn't, I mean one time like a lot of the kids I wanted to be a baseball players, fireman, you know, and all those things.  And, but, no, it really didn't, it was--matter of fact, when the whole idea of job, of being a judge came up I said, no, I wasn't interested.  And I went and took a trip to India 'cause I was on the Christian Children's Fund [ChildFund International, Richmond, Virginia] board for many years and went to India and forgot about it then and then Governor Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglas Wilder] was a big part of that and then Senator Robb [Chuck Robb].  And I said, "Yeah, I'll consider it," and the rest is history.  And then President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] went through that and I was able to get on the court.  But I love the court, you know, it's very sedentary, I spend many hours here and lawyers don't call.  And, you know, sort of--appellate court is much different, lawyers can't come.  We only sit six weeks a year, and lawyers come--six weeks, that's all, for one week intervals (laughter).  So it can be, but I love it though, the research and the writing and my law clerks and I love it.
Speaker 1: Now what would consider today to be your major contribution?
Speaker 2: I would say today (cough) my major contribution, if, you know, (unclear) modesty is that I was able to I think come on to court.  And it was a very difficult time and it's been a long--lot of political back and forth about whether or not and about (unclear) be on the Fourth Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit].  (Unclear) was able to be, I think that to come here and do enough, do well enough that--to get the respect of my colleagues and work hard.  And I think even the respect of the [U.S.] Supreme Court looking at some of the cases.  And, that more importantly it's one thing to be first, but not to be the only.  And then the court now has, you know, four other judges of color.  I'm very proud of that, very proud that, to be a part of that beginning of that diversity of the court.  So if there is a contribution that being part of that rope of destiny and leaving back enough of--in terms of character and competence and hard work that other people might climb and succeed even more so.  And I'm very proud of that.
Story_ID: 668254
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well the hope is that--well, let's say what the concerns in a sense that--I look at a lady in my hometown of Petersburg [Virginia], we have some tough economic problems.  And a lady--I spoke in a church not too long ago, and she came up to me and she said, "Judge Gregory [HistoryMaker Roger L. Gregory]," (cough) excuse me, "what can I do?  I can't--I'm afraid in my home that people coming by and there are shots and things like that."  And this lady was one of the first people in her profession as an African American to work in a, in a form of medical type field, nursing, and early on, here she has all these golden years of her life, she's afraid to be in a community that she nurtured (cough).  She poured her work and her effort and her spirit in, that should be a place where people should be saying, should be falling all over her saying, "Can I take your groceries, can I help you?"  Should be people waiting in line to do that and instead she's afraid and she's huddled in her home and afraid.  That concerns me, that concerns me, it concerns me we still have not been able to level the playing fields of all places and give.  And we still got a ways to go, that's a concern.  So that's the macro and the micro and you, and one is--can't be dealt with mutual exclusively, you know.  It's all of those things so, and that, and that, and that spills over to many people.  But sometime is--it's more pronounced sometimes in some communities.  And, so opportunities--and I think the whole thing about a lot of our urban schools, no matter who is there or what the makeup is, it's got to be excellence every day.  And I think that's the key, there's a--and people say, "Well, look--," no, no, no, what's happening in this school?  And I'm really disappointed that the Internet is not embraced more in terms of equity.  'Cause the way I always that about is, was the good part about it is this, whether you're in South Central L.A. [South Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] or you're in the zip code of Beverly Hills [California], you're in that classroom, you can fire that computer up and you can get access to libraries all over the world.  I know everything is not the same.  You can look at the physical plan--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and we need to work on that.  But (unclear) what you do have and take it and say, "Look you can take this and light the world."  And I'm concerned, do we still--doing that on a full base--we can--that's a--wonderful programs and teachers and--doing a great job.  But we got to double that and redouble it and that's--but the hope is, it's wonderful bright young people, and all they need is the opportunity.  I see it every day and I never lose sight of that.  And I think that's what gives me hope.  And I think we should all feel a lot of pride, and people doing some incredible things.  And African American and other people of color and people of all colors.  And embracing that and I think that is the hope.  But it's going to take some time, it's going to take us working together.  And what I say is this, we're never going to make a real change until we see that if a child is not reaching her full potential, I'm bereft of something.  And you think about it, when you can say, "Well, I'm not worried about that kid getting a good education 'cause they're never going to do--perform my angioplasty when I'm seventy years old.  They're never going to be on my board of director, they're never going to do it."  Well, long as you can separate that then it's okay.  But we got to say, "Well, no, no, if he doesn't get it, then I won't be able to get what I need, when I'm old or when I need help."  So I think the key is stakeholder--broadening the footprint of what is a stakeholder.  What stake we have in that, that's the hope I have that we, that we'll do that and do it better and consistently.  And do it with a fulsome, a fulsome way.
Story_ID: 668255
Speaker 1: Tell us about your children?
Speaker 2: Well, my children?  I have three daughters, one [Adriene Gregory] works here in Virginia for the state in Richmond, in Richmond for the state; she has two children.  And, so I got a ten year, eleven year old granddaughter and then an almost eight month old granddaughter.  And then, and the mi- middle daughter [Rachel Gregory Ledbetter] lives in Northern Virginia, she's an editor.  And she's the--there and then my baby daughter [Christina Gregory] just graduated from college last spring.  She's an accountant, and she lives in Northern Virginia, but she's assigned to an agency doing work in D.C.  [Washington, D.C.]. So that's the--those are, those are the children, yeah.
Story_ID: 668256
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't raised that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Let's see, no, I think we--we covered, covered quite a bit in terms of growing up and scouting and those things.  And, no, I think you were thorough, were thorough.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, all right.  The last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to be remembered as someone who was a giver and a server.  I always hear people talk about public service, I put the, you know, elevated to service that's--that the capital part of it is service, elevations is the small A.  Because I really felt that way, you know, I learned so many things about growing up, I told about being a--blessed to being adopted and who would have thought that I would have been able to do any of those things.  And, so I'd like to be a person who thought of someone who never forgot when they got a chance at the table they remembered who wasn't at the table.  They re- they remembered that, you know, everybody has a, needs a hand, not up but a hand to move forward and a push and somebody who was willing to do that.  And I always try to do that, a person of faith and love and who cares very deeply about what they did.  And I love my clients.  I always thought there was no higher honor and I worked hard at doing that and as a judge [on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit], I worked hard as a justice and as a citizen to try to contribute to a community.  So a servant who contributed in faith and love and in hope.
Story_ID: 668257
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead and tell us about this one.
Speaker 2: Well, this was an honor I received recently named one of the Person of the Year 2016 in Richmond, Virginia by the Richmond Times-Dispatch.  I guess largely this year because I became the chief judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit.
Speaker 1: This is a school picture from Peabody High School [Petersburg, Virginia], an eighth grader, you know, eager to learn and explore high school and new adventures in education.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Top left, I'm guessing?
Speaker 2: Top right, yeah.  There I was a young student in Virginia Avenue [Virginia Avenue Elementary School] in Peter- elementary school in Petersburg, Virginia.  A third grader, my argyle sweater on.
Speaker 1: Now are you in this one?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You got the one with the sweater, right?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes.
Speaker 2: Was there anyone else?
Speaker 1: Was there--let me see.  Is there another one?  Oh, yeah, this one right here.  I love it.  Can you get that one?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah (clears throat).  This is one of the earliest pictures I can recall.  I was two years old, and my uncle Sterling [ph.] had given me a little winter suit, and I was just very proud of it.  And I loved it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: It's a picture of me and my father [George L. Gregory] at a football game at the Gold Bowl between Virginia State University [Petersburg, Virginia] and Virginia Union University [Richmond, Virginia] around 1988.
Speaker 2: This is a picture where I was--went back to my alma mater, University of Michigan Law School [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  And I presided over moot court competition.  And I was the presiding judge in the room where I was as a law school student.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my fifteenth reunion as a judge on the Fourth Circuit court of appeals and these are my law clerks.  And it's signed by all of my law clerks.
Speaker 2: The picture in the background of me with my hands raised, I was being sworn to testify before the [U.S.] Senate at my hearing for confirmation hearing at the judiciary [Thurgood Marshall Federal Judiciary Building, Washington, D.C.].  And in the middle is a circle of my mom [Fannie Washington Gregory] and my father at their fiftieth anniversary and then Governor Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglass Wilder] in the lower left and my wife, Carla [Carla Lewis Gregory], in the lower right.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me and my mother, and I was ten years old and in Petersburg, at our home in Petersburg.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: A picture of me and my mom.  I was about maybe fourteen years old with my mom.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear) okay.
Speaker 1: (Cough) A picture of me and my wife Carla, we were at a social event several years ago.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my father retiring from Brown and Williamson tobacco [Brown and Williamson Tobacco Company] after forty-one years working.
Speaker 1: And this is a picture of the night that I became president of the Old Dominion Bar Association in Richmond.  It was--
Speaker 2: This is Judge Gregory's [HistoryMaker Roger L. Gregory] brothers (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) This is a school picture when I was about twelve years old.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me at my, at the law firm Wilder and Gregory [Harrell and Chambliss LLP, Richmond, Virginia], where I was managing partner.
Speaker 1: This is a picture in December of 2000, where I was recess appointed by President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] and--with my wife and two of my daughters are shown there at the White House [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: This is a picture in September 6, 1980, I was about to get married.  And my mom and father, watching me in the background keeping a watch on the time.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear) (laughter).
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me sitting in my chamber here in Richmond in the courthouse [Lewis F. Powell, Jr. U.S. Courthouse].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my wife, we were married in 2015.  Velda [Velda Edwards Gregory] and I, at a reunion from Virginia State.
Speaker 1: It's a picture of our wedding date, with Velda and I going to our reception after being married.
Speaker 2: It's a picture of my mother when she was about sixteen years old, working as a dormitory maid at Virginia State University.
Speaker 1: It's a picture of my older granddaughter, Ky [ph.], she was in--a grade school picture.
Speaker 2: A picture of the five judges of color on the Fourth Circuit court of appeals.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of the court of appeals judges when I came on the court, the judges sitting in that time.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my first wife, Carla, on our wedding day, bride.
Speaker 1: A picture of my three daughters, Adriene [Adriene Gregory], Rachel [Rachel Gregory Ledbetter] and Christina [Christina Gregory].
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me and L. Douglas Wilder who--we were law partners, he taught me undergrad and became later the governor of Virginia, a great friend.
Speaker 1: This is a picture with me in the group of President Bush [President George Walker Bush]--first nominees to the circuit court in the East Room, in the White House, 2001.
Speaker 2: It's a picture of me in the West Wing, in the Oval Office with President Clinton in 2000 when he recess appointed me to the court of appeals.  White House.
