Story_ID: 47045
Speaker 1: My name is Calvin Lamont Giles.  The name is spelled C-A-L-V-I-N Lamont, L-A-M-O-N-T Giles, G-I-L-E-S.
Speaker 2: And I'd like you to say what district you're from and your birth date.
Speaker 1: The district that I represent is the 8th District [Chicago, Illinois].  My birth date is 7/10/62 [July 10, 1962].
Speaker 2: And when did you first get elected?
Speaker 1: I got appointed to the legislature in 1993 and I was elected in 1994.
Speaker 2: You were appointed because of what?
Speaker 1: I was appointed because the previous representative that served the area was deceased, passed away in the position and so I finished--I was appointed.  There's a process that you have to go through and I went through the process and was able to get appointed and to serve out that representative terms, Representative Robert LeFlore and, of course, once I finished serving out the term than I had to get elected if I wanted to continue to serve in the [Illinois General Assembly] House of Representatives.
Story_ID: 47046
Speaker 1: I want to come back and ask but I need to do your interview in reverse order.  There are a few questions that I ask at the beginning of everyone and they have no relationship with politics or anything.
Speaker 2: Sure. That's fine.
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's difficult for me because I'm a cooker but soul food, Italian and Mexican.  Those three right there. It could be a combination.  It could be oh, wow, fettuccini with white sauce, chicken--I mean it's a combination of all.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: Well, I really don't have a favorite vacation destination.  Anywhere I can go is a favorite of mine but I must say I've been to Cancun [Mexico] which is very lovely and also I like Vegas.  I like the California area.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I would have to say blue.
Speaker 1: The best time of the year.
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: And phrase or saying.
Speaker 2: I like the quote Proverbs three, five and six [Proverbs 3:5-6].  You know, "Lean not unto your own understanding but in all thy ways acknowledge God and He will direct your path."  So it sort of goes like that.  I find myself almost in every situation just trusting the Lord and He will direct your path.  Don't lean on your understanding but His understanding and he will give you the wisdom and knowledge.  I find myself using it quite a bit.
Story_ID: 47047
Speaker 1: Now, you're from Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Born and raised.
Speaker 1: And you're the oldest, the oldest child.
Speaker 2: Yes, I am.
Speaker 1: Now tell me a little bit about your parents.  I need to keep this real short but tell me about your parents and who they were and what they were like.
Speaker 2: Sure.  Let's start with my mother [Betty Giles].  My mother is an extremely hard worker.  She's always been a hard worker.  Her name is Betty Carter and she's from Arkansas.  That's basically where the family is from and she's one of ten siblings and she went on to get her college education and, of course, growing up in the household she really pushed education in our household and when I was small she worked at I believe Continental Airlines as a--today we call them stewardess.  Back then they were aides and helpers on the plane.  So when we were small she could not keep us because she was en route.  She was traveling.  So I stayed with my grandmother in Arkansas for the first, I would say, the first ten years of my life.  So I was sort of reared in Arkansas.  Mcgehee, Arkansas and when my mother completed, I guess, all of her years at the airlines she picked us up and brought us back to Chicago [Illinois].  But I was born and raised in Chicago from that point on and I would say that one of the most--I would say in my household one of the most memorable thing is to continue to express education and get us involved in also educational programs.  My mother, she raised practically raised five kids on her own.  She married my father [Louis Giles] later on.  I don't have the exact date and I'll get you that but she practically raised us.  She did a lot of sacrificing to send us to schools that she thought that would best serve us in our environment.  I know numerous times she did without sending us to the parochial school and religious schools.  She's a very religious lady and through eighth grade school, high school; paying those tuitions and I saw that early on that she was truly making a sacrifice and being the oldest a lot of pressure was always put on me.  I worked quite a bit.  And I'll tell you at my age I worked enough to almost retire now but I started to work at an early age just to help my mother out and I saw the sacrifices that she was making for me and so I think that truly encouraged me and gave me that will to work hard in life and to get my education and to try to be in a position to help somebody else.  But that's what my mother gave me.  On my father's side I knew him, I would say, maybe ten years prior to being deceased.  I got a chance to learn a lot about me in those ten years.  Why I didn't like certain things or why I acted in this situation but my father was very, he was a very integral part of the 1965 Movement, the Civil Rights Movement.  He was very active and now I understand why politics is in my blood and I didn't know those things until I actually sat down and talked with him and he was truly on the front line and fought for [Civil] Rights and things.
Story_ID: 47048
Speaker 1: Tell me a little more about that because it sounds like you saw yourself in your father [Louis Giles].
Speaker 2: I did.  He was a very caring person.  Had a lot of compassion toward people.  I used to wonder why I would always--my mother would always get on me when I was in school I would give my last quarter away to my friends or just give my last to someone and she would say now you don't have it for yourself and I used to wonder why would I do that, why did I feel that way or act that way under circumstances and then when I met my father and began to study him and look him over I saw that those were some of the same traits he had.  He would give his last to his buddies and just to try to help somebody, to help somebody else and I'm sure during his days of the struggle that's the type of person that he was.
Speaker 1: What, in a short for, but what did your father actually do?  How was he involved in Civil Rights?
Speaker 2: Well, I think he was more of a demonstrator with the groups.  Type of individual who would go door-to-door with the pamphlets and to educate and get people to come out and participate and get involved.  I think that was his primary duties.  He was one of the individuals--I think a lot of people looked up to him and they believed in him so if Lewis Carter was doing it than it must be okay.  He had a certain air about himself and I think that's where he was most affective.
Story_ID: 47049
Speaker 1: Can you share like two childhood memories with us?
Speaker 2: Oh wow, you're talking about somebody that for a person of my age I've got a very short memory.  I'm the type of individual--I put my all into something right away and then a day or two later I'll move on to the next thing and I forget about a lot of the details and you really need to talk to my sisters and brothers.  They have very good memories and I'm the one left with memories.  But I can, I can recall one strong memory when I was a child I had a desire, I had a strong urge to do something with my life and I don't know where this urge came from and I guess during that period in time, growing up in the South and I saw the way things were and I just wanted a better life.  I wanted a better situation and I recall working--doing very well in school at that age.  I mean ver- extremely well in school and, of course, my mother kept impressing upon me that education is the key for you to be able to be successful and do these things, whatever you want to do in life and I kept that in the back of my head along with hard work.  I remember as a child one time I'm sure if you recall the gym shoes, the All Star gym shoes was very important to kids.  The different colors of gym shoes; so I was asking my mother, "Well I want a pair red color and a pair of green color."  She said "Son," she pulled me to the side, "I can't afford to get you those things," she said, "But if you work hard in life, if you work for it, you can have whatever you want in life."  And that always stuck with me to be a hard worker and you can have your own and those are probably the two most memorable things as a child.  The desire to succeed.  I have a very strong desire to succeed and more so than my other siblings.  Pressure was always put on me because I was the oldest and, of course, my mother, who I highly regard, impressing upon me in order to get out of the situation, (background noise) to break the cycle of poverty or to do some of the things or experience things that you want in life you must get a good education so that you can go out and experience those things.
Story_ID: 47050
Speaker 1: Is there anything about this high school that you would like to talk about or you know, the decisions--as a young person though, what did you dream of being?
Speaker 2: To tell you the truth as a young person, of course, and during the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s] it was always impressed upon you to be a good business man or go to school to be a lawyer, that same cliche lawyer, doctor type of thing.  I never, unfortunately, I never was shaped to say I'm going to be a fireman, I'm going to be this type of individual.  I knew that I wanted to be in a position to help people, to educate people and teach people.  I'm more of the serious individual in the group.  You're going to have fun with Kenner, that's all I can say.  Just keep it fair.
Speaker 1: So you were saying that--
Speaker 2: You were going to ask about high school.
Speaker 1: What did you dream of being?
Speaker 2: Yes, and as I stated I never dreamed of being a particular profession but I knew I was going to be very successful in whatever I wanted to do.  The will and the drive and the motivation was there.  But I've always asked God to allow me to be in a position to help people, teach people and educate people and I've never knew exactly where that would take me.  I loved to teach.  I loved to share the little knowledge that I have from the youngest to the oldest and I also love to listen as well.  So with those desires that has led me here as a public servant.  Something that I didn't ask for and I really didn't ask for it because I truly knew what it entailed with a lot of dedication and a lot of time consumption, a lot of commitment and a lot of sacrifices but I love the ideal, I love the situation when you can help somebody and you can resolve someone's issue or you can resolve someone's problem, I like that feeling.
Story_ID: 47051
Speaker 1: Now you grew up really --  Politics was sort of around you all the time.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.  My uncle Percy Giles was the first elected official in my family as alderman of the 37th Ward but prior to that Percy Giles was the executive director of a community organization, based organization called West Side Business Improvement Organization, WBIA, and in that organization I used to, as a kid, run errands and just being in on some of the meetings and saw some of the business people come together and talk about their issues and try to resolve their issues and make the community better and be a participant in the community and that's the environment that I grew up in.  Moreover family owned grocery businesses, we had about two or three and working in that environment one of the best things that I think that helps me today is that I truly believe and I learned at a very young age that the customer is always right and I learned that you must treat people right.  You must treat people the way you want to be treated and so I think at a very early age I learned how to talk to people, listen to people and deal with people at a very early age and I think that has truly helped me immensely throughout my little career especially in public service.
Speaker 1: What were some of the things that you learned that you think you applied now but you learned around, you know, being around your uncle?  Where there things that you observed and learned about political-
Story_ID: 47052
Speaker 1: Yes, I would say the two most influential individuals in my life, is one, is my uncle, [Alderman] Percy Giles when it comes to politics and [Mayor] Harold Washington.  Percy Giles, the first individual that gave me the opportunity to be involved on a higher level, working in an aldermanic election, working in the re-election of [Mayor] Harold [Washington]--working in the election of [Mayor] Harold Washington at the time, in nine- I believe in 1983, just putting out pamphlets and flyers.  Just being involved and that was my first taste but [Alderman] Percy Giles brought me to the table and he taught me that in order to be a public servant you must be dedicated, you must take the leadership, you must treat people the way you want to be treated.  He, not only did he just say those things, he showed me those things.  I saw the dedication that he had and the times consumption that he put into it from the family, from his family.  The meetings, the continuous meetings.  The block club meetings, the community meetings, the dinners, the functions, the social functions, the drawn out hours at the office of trying to solve and resolve a constituent's problems.  Trying to build something in the community.  Trying to work on projects that would enhance the community.  Shopping center projects, these type of things I got a first-hand experience on and that's one of the reasons why I've always said I would be a politician if these are the things that you have to do because I saw what he went through and it was very much time consuming.  I knew he put his heart and soul into it and I knew what it really entailed and so I wasn't so eager because it takes away from your family and I know once I put myself into something I'm going to take myself away from my family and friends and truly get involved in it and it just so happened that's exactly what happened.  I'm the type of an individual where I really didn't have the full social life that everybody--someone of my age would have had because I was always working.  I tease [Alderman] Percy [Giles] a lot.  I tease him to this day when we go to functions where you have to dance, I don't know how to dance.  "You took that from me.  I was working.  You had me working." But he was very influential in my life and taught me the real ropes about being a public servant; not a politician. And to this day he's not a politician, I'm not a politician, I'm a public servant.  That's a big difference to me because there's a lot of people who play the political game.  There's a lot of people who think it's a big game but you're playing with people's lives, you're making decisions on people's lives, you're passing legislation and things that will direct and affect people's lives and I don't play with that and so I'm a public servant.  I'm here to serve.  I'm here to do whatever I can to help and that's how, that's where I was brought up in this field of politics; being a public servant on that end, which a lot of politicians don't like.  They like the cameras and the various functions and some of the perks that goes with it.  Personally I'd rather go home and spend time with my family and do some things.  Those are some of the things that I missed early on in life and now I see myself fighting to do that more and more instead of being in the glitz and glamour of a political function or something like that. And the--
Story_ID: 47053
Speaker 1: And the other part with [Mayor] Harold Washington, I think, what truly made me realize that this is my calling.  I did very well in his second election in 1987, where I got the highest amount--highest number of votes out in a particular precinct and in a particular Ward and [Mayor] Harold Washington was riding around in a car with my uncle and he was looking at the number, you know.  He was looking at the numbers, you know, he was looking at the numbers and see where the numbers came out in each Ward in the city and when he was looking in the 37th Ward he saw the 46th Precinct [Chicago, Illinois] and he saw that I had got out something like ninety-five percent [95%] of the vote and out of the ninety-five percent [95%] of the vote, 98% of the people voted for him and the numbers were so skewed and favorably that he told, he said, "Alderman, who worked the precinct in the 46th Precinct?"  And Percy said, "Oh, that's my nephew, Calvin."  He said, "Get him on the phone."  And so I was at his campaign office at that time and someone said, "[Mayor] Harold Washington is on the phone for you."  And I'm like, [Mayor] "Harold Washington, for me?  Harold Washington, for me?"  And I picked up the phone, "Yes, Mr. Mayor."  He said "Calvin Giles?"  I said, "Yes sir."  He said, you said, "You worked the 46th Precinct of the 37th Ward?"  I said, "Yes sir."  He said, "You did a very good job."  He said, "How did you do it?"  And I said, "Well, sir, they told me to go out and talk to everybody and, you know.  And they basically told me to go out and talk to everybody and convince the people that they need to come out and exercise their right and vote for [Mayor] Harold Washington and I did that very well."  I went door-to-door and made notes and I worked very hard.  I would put down my school books; I was in college at that time, put down the college book and pick up my voter's registrations kit and go door-to-door registering people to vote and getting people involved and I think that truly what drawed in going door-to-door.  I had a couple so senior citizens when I went to their door and they say a young man out trying to get people to get involved to participate and they say, "Young man, you bring me hope," and I truly didn't understand what they meant at the time.  Of courses I had a couple of doors slammed in my face and I almost gave it up.  I said "No, this is not for me," because I was a very shy person.  I was a very shy individual but that one lady who brought me in and gave me a cup of tea and said, "Young man have a seat and it's such a pleasure to see you;" that gave me great encouragement and so I continued to press on and, of course, when [Mayor] Harold Washington called me and said, "Young man I think you're going to have a future in this business," and I didn't know what he was talking about.  At that time I was in school finishing up and I was working at West Suburban Hospital.  I was an EKG technician.  I thought maybe I was going to go into the medical field but when he said, "I think you're going to have a future in this business," I didn't have not a clue as to what he was talking about.  And so, but here I am today.
Speaker 2: You know, I have question about this whole thing is about--
Story_ID: 47054
Speaker 1: Well, I'm sort of a newcomer in the business but I would say two of the major individuals that have an influence on me; once I began to get involved and began to look at the history of this political arena starting from the Presidential Election all the way down to a little local election or even a local school council election which a lot of people take for not but it's very important. But I would say two of the biggest people that I had a chance to really sit down and to study some of their materials and books and read some of their materials, of course, it's my uncle Max is one of them and what he really stood for, I think a lot of people really don't know what his teachings were about and I think it's sort of smeared with the Nation of Islam and the whole bit but I think he was truly--his struggles were about the empowerment of people that you must rise and educate yourself and do what is necessary to rise above the mire and that's something that reading some of his materials that's what I got out of it and, of course, the most eminent one is Martin Luther King, reading some of his materials and taking a page out of history; his materials are just, I mean, they're just beautiful and also when I read that material--if you take some excerpts and read today, you know, you begin to wonder what time century was he in and looking today where we have all this technology and the advancement and supposedly advancement of social issues and the advantages that we have to be together and come together but yet when you begin to read some of the materials that he wrote and the things he talked about, we have a long way to go especially as an African American People, we have a long way to go; not saying that we haven't made progress but we have some things that we need to do for yourself.
Speaker 2: That was a very good response but my question really was to those people who came...
Speaker 1: I would say as for me being a rather typically young member of the General Assembly, the two most influential individuals as for me currently one is still serving in the [Illinois] House [of Representatives] and Mr. Paul Williams, who I'm sure you will get a chance to talk to has been very instrumental as a lobbyist not, now he's a lobbyist but as for telling me about his experiences and the wealth of knowledge that he has of the Legislature, he's been very instrumental as was me learning the process.  The other individual is, of course, my dear friend and one of my political mentors as well and that's Representative Arthur Turner because he has over 20 years in the Legislature.  He's one of the most respected public servants in the General Assembly and, of course, the seniority in the [Illinois] House of Representatives, he's been very influential to me as far as learning legislation and being able to read the legislation and really know what it means and those things and the actual process.  He's been very instrumental.  So I don't have a lot of the history as some of the other members that would could remember about but I would say those two individuals.
Speaker 2: Okay.  You don't have the history but you're serving a third term in Congress?
Speaker 1: That's correct.
Story_ID: 47055
Speaker 1: What do you think that your generation--the current generation of African Americans Legislators, what do you want to be your homework or what do want to accomplish?
Speaker 2: Well, I would like to say what I would like to accomplish as an individual more so than a group.  I think a group because everybody has their own agendas because their district's are respectively different.  I serve the Austin Community and the Oak Park Community [Illinois]. I have a little bit of the Galewood Community, a little bit of Lawndale, a little bit of Cicero, Illinois but I am born and raised in the Austin Community and the Austin Community is the largest part of the community.  Also I would say the Austin Community is the most community that needs the most help.  It's the community that needs the help.  And what I try to do; what I spend a lot of my time is to connect the Austin Community that African American Community to the State [of Illinois], to the legislature and what I mean right now if you were to go down the street and ask any Jane Smith off the bus stop or someone if you go to their house and you ask them what does your State Representative do?  What does the Legislature do?  How does that affect your home?  How does that affect your household?  What does your State Representative, what are his duties?  What does Legislating Laws mean?  What does providing services from all of those state agencies and State Department, how does that sixty-five billion dollar budget can it get to my home or affect my community?  In my district one of the biggest tasks is educating is to be able to educate the people exactly what this particular office means to the community and that is a huge task within itself.  I spend a lot of my time talking to directors of various department of the State Agencies to try and find out about the state services, the programs that the state has; trying to trickle some of that sixty-five billion dollar budget back to my community as far as programs and educating.  I spend a lot of time doing that and if I am going to lead the General Assembly and when I leave I would for someone to say well, Representative Giles truly tried to educate us about the process, truly tried to educate us about state programs, state resources, how to access those state resources, how to access those programs, how to get involved with State Government because that's something that's truly amiss in our community.  We do not--everyone knows who the alderman is.  Everybody knows that the alderman can get them a garbage can or they'll call the alderman's office but their State Legislator which are becoming to be really the, I would say, the mainstream in the political arena.  I mean we deal with so many important issues; one of the major issues we deal with this funding public education and when our parents know that your State Legislators are the ones who are making these policies, who are recommending certain guidelines and once our parents realize that and we're the ones appropriating dollars to these various educational programs. Once they realize that they will begin to get more and more involved and demand more and more from me and other members of the legislature and begin to participate so we can have a good dialogue and a good line of communication to be able to work with so that they can tell me exactly what they are feeling and I can share that information with various directors and head of agencies when they come before me in a committee setting or in the actual--on the House of Representative floor to be able to question these individuals and express the views from my community.  When I can connect--when we can start that domino affect within the community where people begin to understand how the state can benefit them, then I think that I would have done my job and that's part of the legacy that I would like to see left.
Story_ID: 47056
Speaker 1: Okay, I think that's great.  For those people who--we plan to put this thing--the schools in Illinois are so-school children will be looking at it, why should they seek out or start to be someone like you?
Speaker 2: Well, I think firstly if not to be a public servant but to be an individual who is willing to work hard.  An individual that's willing to dedicate him or herself to something.  Individuals that's willing to participate, to get involved.  An individual that's willing to educate, to teach.  And individual that willing to give of his or her time and talent and to make huge sacrifices in whatever field.  I think an individual, if they want to be like me, to have those qualities.  Not necessarily to be a public official or local official or any official but to have those qualities and take that with whatever that they may choose to do but if they do want to get into the field of politics and be a public servant, than I truly believe that they've got to have some of those qualities.  They've got to be compassionate towards people.  They've got to have the desire to want to help people and not just to hold a title or just to have a title in front of their name and say I'm Representative, you know, Calvin Giles but truly to have that title, to make that office an opportunist place for individuals to come there and to seek relief or try to get something resolved.  I don't look at the office that I hold as my office.  The people elect me to serve and to represent them and I know today, tomorrow, next year I may not be in this seat but I think If anybody wanted to be a public servant that they truly have to have a heart and a desire to want to help people and have compassion toward people and that's something I do have.
Speaker 1: That's a skill set but what would I--people, you know, what they can get from it in any way so what about what you do is enjoyable or challenging or you talked about a skill set that you need to be compassionate--
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: What other aspects would you say?
Speaker 2: Well I mean definitely you have to be educated.  You have to be able to read and write and comprehend those things.  You have to if you're going to be affective you have to have those qualities.  You have to be able to do that.  I think part of the question you're asking is qualifications maybe or-
Story_ID: 47057
Speaker 1: The qualifications.  Well, I wasn't--some qualifications but also what do you find satisfying out there?
Speaker 2: Oh, what I find satisfying.
Speaker 1: You have to be able to read.  You're managing--aren't you managing an office?
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.  You have to be able to do those things but I think the most satisfying thing for me and maybe this takes me away from the actual office of a State Representative; the most satisfying thing to me is to be able to train young individuals to get into the process, to be part of the process and that's something that I've been doing for years prior to being in the legislature and that is training young people about the political process.  How does it affect you?  How does it affect your household?  It affects you in each and every way every day and trying to give them a sense of understanding why you need to get involved.  Why you need to participate because government is not there to solve all your problems.  Government is there as a crutch and if you take a hold of it and make it bend for your, it will work for you but government is not going to solve all your problems but to educate our young people about that.  So many of our people think that government is going to make them rich or going to solve all their problems.  Government is going to knock on their door and say you need to have your tree cut down, you need to improve your house and I got a nice loan for you.  People actually think government is there for that.  Government is a crutch and if you make it work for you; if you get out and get involved and participate and dedicate yourself to it, it will work for you.  It will do the things that you want to have done and I would say that trying to educate and teach about that process is probably my most gratifying and something I've been doing for quite a long time.  I've given up many a Saturday mornings holding meetings, educating and teaching our young people about that.  I would say probably out of the last 10 or 12 years I may have had three Saturdays completely off because that's something I do every Saturday morning and I still do it.  As a matter of fact I got a meeting this Saturday.  I still do it now which we get volunteers that come in and try to educate them about the political process and how does it truly work from a on hands point of view not a text book but just how it works when you get involved.  And that's the most gratifying for me to see someone get involved and they begin to participate and they can resolve some of the issues in their home.  They can help grandma with the circle breaker or help her get some property tax relief if she fills out that form.  Something that she didn't know about it and they learn about it by just being involved.  Those type of things, that's what gratifying for me.
Story_ID: 47058
Speaker 1: I just have one more question and its value, the values.  To be well known but for you, what do you think--what kind of values are important for someone who's a political leader?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean there's a wealth of different values that people have and, of courses, that's according to some of their up bring and backgrounds and what they believe in.  Some of the things that they were taught, learned issues but as for me I think some of the values that I have is that you must be sincere about what you do.  I think that I truly want to help people and help educate people and teach people.  This is not a game for me.  I don't play with people's lives.  I don't want no one playing with my life so, I mean, there's something that you have to truly be committed to.  I think one of the other values as far for me that I have is that I like to go to sleep at home at night.  I like to sleep comfortably and have a good conscious so I don't believe in trying to do anything that will hurt anybody.  I have a Christian background.  I am a Christian.  I don't take that for naught.  It's serious for me.  I'm a Sunday School teacher.  I try to take the words and apply it to my life everyday and I try to share that with someone whenever I can and those are some of the things that I truly believe as for me to be a public servant and I talked about being compassionate towards people.  People need help.  People screaming for help all the time and people want someone there that show that they care or that they're trying.  I'm not he Savior of the world.  A politician is not the Savior of the world but if someone sees that you are trying to help them, that you're using what God has allowed you to have to be a representative of people, have blessed you with that position and if people see that you are using that position to try to help, to try, just to give an opportunity for someone to get employment.  If they see that you're trying than I think those are some of the good values that you would have.
Story_ID: 47059
Speaker 1: I have one more question and I'd like a short answer.  It is, let's say thirty years from now, you'll be sixty-two?
Speaker 2: Wow, you just put a lot of things in perspective for me.  (Laughter).  My goodness.
Speaker 1: What would you like to see for the Black Community?
Speaker 2: Oh wow, oh wow, do we have enough time?  And you said make a short answer for this one.  Well, truly I've worked on the West Side of Chicago practically all my life.  I have a strong feeling for the West Side of Chicago.  I believe the West Side of Chicago during the fires and the years of the sixties [1960s] has been a forgotten community in a lot of sense as far as resources and services being rendered to that side of the city for African Americans and I know I can sit here and talk about all of the whole African American population but I am selfish to the community that I serve and that I work on and even though I know we are well represented in the other communities but on the West Side of Chicago is truly where my heart is and I would like to see our people arise to another level of consciousness in my time and that means that they begin to really participate and get involved because monies are allocated and appropriated by your level of involvement.  Services are allocated and appropriated by your level of involvement.  As a politician, you know, the old saying is that we all statics, you know, statisticians, you know, we look at numbers and numbers--that's our report card, that's how we're judged.  How many people can we get involved.  How many people we can get to participate in something and I want to see our people participate.  I want to see them go to the poles and exercise their right and it's very important when they so; it's very important to show support whomever is elected or is a public servant in that respect in position because when that individual takes that office; the people give that individual that power and people respect you and give you respect and listen to you when people get involved and participate and they support you.  So I would like to see our people come to a level of consciousness to truly participate and get involved on all areas.  It's like right now we have the census going on.  Chicago should be able to get a certain amount of resources but you have to be involved in order for those resources to come back to your community.  They're going to go there.  They're going to be taken from you from local taxes, state taxes and federal taxes.  Those dollars are going to be in a pool but if we don't participate in a lot of those dollars to come back to our communities than we miss out and so that's truly what my great desire is to get people especially on the West Side of Chicago, especially in the 8th District and moreover in the Austin Community to really participate and get involved.  Thirty years from now is whoever's in this seat and they're taking that charge and taking it to another level than I will truly be happy and satisfied.
Speaker 1: That's it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
