Story_ID: 106084
Speaker 1: [My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.]  So we're going to start out by slating of the interview and having you, just slating, I'll ask you a few questions.  So, I'd like you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us.
Speaker 2: Okay, my name is Charlynn Goins, C-H-A-R-L-Y-N-N, G-O-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, and can I have your date of birth?
Speaker 2: September 15, 1942.
Speaker 1: And our location?  Oh, today's date first, sorry.
Speaker 2: October 21st, 2013 and we are in Manhattan, New York City [New York].
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I serve on boards of directors.
Speaker 1: Okay, let's see, board member okay.
Story_ID: 106085
Speaker 1: Okay, so I have five People magazine-ish questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, I just love all food.  I--there's almost nothing I don't like so it's very hard.  I suppose cheeses, if I had to choose something, the most unhealthy thing.
Speaker 1: A favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: A favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: South of France.
Speaker 1: A favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't have one.
Speaker 1: Okay, don't worry.
Story_ID: 106086
Speaker 1: Okay, so back to--I'd like to talk about your mother [Charlotte Wilson].
Speaker 2: Okay, my mother was born on a farm in Arkansas in 1907 and one of eight children.  Her mother, or my maternal grandmother [Lilly Mae Wright (ph.)], was a teacher.  I think she had gone to what they call normal school.  Is that what it is, I think it is.  And my mother and her three sisters and four brothers must have not had a very happy childhood because all of them left the farm as soon as they could.  I don't believe my mother probably had more than an eighth grade education but she ended up in Europe, modeling for Sir Jacob Epstein who did a bust of her and I think she did some modeling in Paris [France], she came back to New York and in the late '30s [1930s], and by that time she had developed a relationship which turned out to be a long-term relationship with my father who is, or was until he died in 1982, a very highly-educated prominent white man.  She and he were together until I was fourteen, when he passed away, and he and my mother never married.  In fact, my mother, he was much older than my mother, and my mother ended up getting married to my stepfather [Clifford Wilson] when I was five or six but my father continued to play a significant role in my life and supported us and made us very comfortable until he died.  My mother was a woman ahead of her time.  She raised me, I mean, keep in mind, she was thirty-six when I was born and it was obviously a decision on her part to have a child and I was a very indulged little girl who went to private school, we lived in a brownstone in Manhattan [New York City, New York] and had a very comfortable life.  She and I were very close.  I'm an only child.  My mother and my stepfather did have a child when I was around eight but he had all sorts of intestinal complications and died at three months old but he had never left the hospital.  I never even saw him other than photographs.
Speaker 1: So let me ask you, Charlynn, when you--how would you describe your mother as a person?
Speaker 2: My mother was very bright, extremely well-read considering that she had no formal education.  Our house was just loaded with books and she encouraged me to read anything I was ready to read or that I felt I was ready to read.  I remember her not objecting when I picked up a book by Alberto Moravia which was quite scandalous for back in those days and I must have been thirteen or so.  She felt if I was ready to read it, it was okay for me to read it and we would talk about it.  My mother raised me to think that I could be the president of General Motors and this was very unusual for a mother of a little black girl in 1942, or born in 1942.  She, interestingly, when I started dating Warren [HM Dr. Warren Goins], my husband, and we talked about getting married, she was okay about it if that was what I wanted to do but she wasn't just bowled over and back in those days, the thought of your daughter marrying a doctor was supposed to be the be-all and end-all but she was more focused on what I could do myself for a career, and that was unusual for those days.  She was very active in local politics in Westchester [New York].  In fact, I was--my wedding reception was at the Westchester Women's Republican Club because she was an old-line [President Abraham] Lincoln-type Republican, or [Nelson] "Rockefeller Republican," I should say in more current times.
Story_ID: 106087
Speaker 1: So what things, what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: One of my earliest memories is my uncle, by marriage, picking me up in Manhattan [New York City, New York].  He lived in Queens and he would come over and pick me up and take me and my friends to Coney Island, and it was a big deal because I was allowed to sit in the front of the car and pay the toll and, bottom line, I was not just indulged by my mother [Charlotte Wilson] and father and stepfather [Clifford Wilson], but also by my mother's siblings and their spouses because out of the eight children that my grandmother gave birth to, there were only two grandchildren, which is just incredible.
Speaker 1: That's incredible for that time period.
Speaker 2: It really is and one of them, my cousin, Dorothy, was probably thirty years older than I was so I really didn't--
Speaker 1: You were like--
Speaker 2: --I was the only child in the family and my mother's three sisters all lived in the New York area so I was spoiled by everybody.
Speaker 1: So do you think your mother started the migration out of, you know, from--
Speaker 2: I would guess she did but I really don't know what transpired there.
Speaker 1: So, so, with, so how old were you at that time period, do you think, you know when you remember the Coney Island incident?
Speaker 2: Probably five or six, yes--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --very young.
Story_ID: 106088
Speaker 1: Okay, and can you describe, do you want to describe your father and your stepfather [Clifford Wilson]?
Speaker 2: My father, as I said, was a much older man.  I mean, he could have easily been a grandfather.  He was very erudite, warm but reserved in some ways but very loving toward me.  I didn't know he was my father, I thought he was just godfather, and close relationship to my mother [Charlotte Wilson] and stepfather, but I didn't learn he was my father until he died, when I was fourteen, but he, in his later years, lived next door to us and I would go over and he'd help me with my homework at night, encouraged me to do really well academically, which I did, but he was just sort of a presence in my life and, as I said, helped my family to live very comfortably.
Speaker 1: And your stepfather, what was his--
Speaker 2: My stepfather came to our house in the townhouse that we had in Manhattan [New York City, New York] to rent an apartment.  We had a four-story brownstone.  We lived on the first two floors and then there were two apartments on the floors above us and he rented one of the apartments.  He had just returned from World War II and he had been a prisoner of war who came home and discovered that his wife had married someone else because he was missing in action and he had a daughter who had no idea of his existence and it stayed that way and he was really a bruised person from this whole experience, but he and my mother ended up getting together, and they did get married.  He was in the Army and we never traveled with him and so if he were stationed in Pennsylvania, he would come home on weekends or whenever he could but we stayed put in New York City and he's an interesting man in that he graduated from Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee] in 1937 but other than being an officer in the Army, when he was not in the Army, he was a postal worker, which was not unusual back at that time.  And so most of my young life he was away.  He actually turned out to have to go back and serve in the Korean War and one of my memories of that just shows you how a child of eight or nine thinks very selfishly.  I wrote a letter to him while he was in Korea asking him if he couldn't do something about my mother being very difficult with me.  So, I can't believe I did it but I do remember that.  That's one of my earlier memories is how on earth could I have done that.  But anyway, when he did come home, and I think leave the military, we left Manhattan.  I left the private school I had attended and we moved up to White Plains and bought a house there.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you were about what age at that point?
Speaker 2: I was ten--
Speaker 1: Ten, ten, okay.
Speaker 2: --when we moved to White Plains [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 106089
Speaker 1: So your mother's name?  I forgot to ask that.
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Charlotte Wright.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, but you're Charlynn?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: My mother created this name which has been the bane of my existence because people say, "Carolyn" or "Charlene".  In fact, my husband [HM Dr. Warren Goins] calls me Charlene because when I was a girl, I got so tired, I just didn't want to tell people what my real name was and I would say, "It's Charlene."  And only when I started to work in a law firm, after finishing law school [Columbia Law School in New York City, New York], people would say, "but it's not Charlene" because they got to know me through memos I wrote or letters I wrote for the firm and they would see how my name is spelled and they would say, "well it's not Charlene".  So I started, at that point, saying "well actually, my name is Charlynn" and, but anyway.
Speaker 1: It's a nice name, though it's unusual.
Speaker 2: It's--well that's the problem, yes (laughter).
Story_ID: 106090
Speaker 1: So now tell me about your house that you lived in as a, as a little girl up until age ten.  Can you--and the block you lived in?
Speaker 2: Okay, we lived on 146th Street which, I think, is part of Washington Heights but we were between Broadway and Riverside on a lovely block.  I had a beautiful backyard that had been landscaped and so it was a very nice garden back there and it was a neighborhood that was quite diverse.  In fact, one of my closest friends, when I lived there, was a Japanese little girl and in fact I ended up going one summer to camp, a sleepaway camp, and I was the only non-Japanese person.  It was a camp run by the Japanese Christian Association up in the Catskills [Catskill Mountains] and we ate Japanese food and it was quite an experience but the neighborhood was lovely because we had Riverside Drive right there so you could go down to the park and I would take the bus downtown, to Midtown to my school, but I can't really think of anything else to describe it.
Story_ID: 106091
Speaker 1: So what was your, what was-- what school did you go to as elementary school?
Speaker 2: I went to Professional Children's School.
Speaker 1: So from the beginning, you went to Professional Children's School [New York City, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So when did you start acting?  Can we talk about that?
Speaker 2: Sure, I started, I started first grade just a week or so before I turned five years old and during the six years that I attended the school, I acted in two Off-Broadway plays by an organization called The Blackfriars Guild [of New York, also known as The Blackfriars Theatre], which was a New York City-based repertory theatre.  I was in a play called "[The] Climate of Eden," directed by Moss Hart and that play toured Wilmington, Delaware; Washington [D.C.]; and Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] before opening on Broadway and I think we only lasted a month or so on Broadway and it closed.  And then I did a television program called "General Hospital."  I was in an episode of that.  And I did a little modeling and I think that was about it.  My career ended when I was ten.
Speaker 1: So do you remember, so, did it start when you were five or did it start earlier than five?
Speaker 2: I don't think I did anything professionally before I was five.  My mother [Charlotte Wilson] had a close friend who was a theatrical agent and she was the one who encouraged my mother to send me to PCS and I guess that's how it got started.
Speaker 1: So what was your mother's friend's name?
Speaker 2: Gertrude Quentin.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what--so around you, are your mother's sisters and your uncle?
Speaker 2: My uncles were not in the New York area but my mother's three sisters were.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were they close around you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so you would see them often?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, were they younger than your mother?
Speaker 2: One was older and two were younger.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 106092
Speaker 1: So when you were attending PCS [Professional Children's School in New York City, New York], who were the other students that were there, you know, in the school also?  And how did it operate?  And you know, 'cause--
Speaker 2: It was quite different from your ordinary school.  First of all, to your first question, in my class were Josh White, Jr. and I can't remember if Leslie Uggams was in my class or she might have been a year behind me but she was in the school as well.  And the school ran from ten in the morning until two in the afternoon, enabling students to stay up late in the evening if they were acting in a play and still get to school for a ten o'clock opening and the school day ended at two in the afternoon so that some of the more active people, students, could get out to their agents.  We didn't do much of that but some did and so they'd go and visit their agents in the afternoon.  And the school was incredible as far as academics were concerned.  There was no Phys Ed [physical education] or any of the normal things you have in school.  They really winnowed the school day down but we had French, from first grade on.  So I had six years of French by the time I was going into seventh grade and I remember reading--we did The Odyssey of Homer when I was in fourth grade.  I mean, it was really a, an intense academic curriculum and prepared me very well.  I ended up going to junior high school when we moved up to Westchester [New York City, New York] and I didn't have to do the grammar part of English class because I had done so much grammar in, at PCS.  Another thing PCS did was teach you to speak without an accent because that made you more attractive to be in the theatre and so you--people going there didn't have a real New York accent by the time they came out.
Story_ID: 106093
Speaker 1: Did you remember any of the plays and being on stage and the relationship with the audience or, you know, do you remember, have any snatches of memory about that?
Speaker 2: What I remember is being on tour with the play that ended up opening on Broadway [Moss Hart's "The Climate of Eden"] because we went to three cities [Wilmington, Delaware; Washington, D.C.; and Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] before coming back to New York [New York City, New York] and there was a boy in the play, whose name I can't remember, but my mother [Charlotte Wilson] agreed to sort of shepherd him along and oversee him and she traveled with me to the three cities and I remember by being, there were just two children in the cast and all of the cast was traveling around and so we got a lot of attention from other members of the cast and I also remember from that tour having to do my homework by correspondence.  That was another aspect of PCS [Professional Children's School in New York City, New York] was that they would send you your homework assignments, you would mail them back, they would return them to you graded, and then you would take any tests that were necessary when you returned to school so that enabled students to travel if they were in a play and continue to do their schooling.
Speaker 1: So did you have tutors at all that traveled with you--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or you just--so just the tests?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was it, no tutors.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what--so how--you did three cities, you know, over what period of time you did that or what part of the year?
Speaker 2: I think it was fall and I believe we might have been in each city for a week or two.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what, the whole experience you were staying at hotels?  Do you remember that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --'cause that would have--
Speaker 2: We were staying at hotels and this was a play with a very diverse cast and so when we went to Wilmington, Delaware, we did not get a good reception because it was a Southern city.  Washington [D.C.] in those days was also a Southern city and we had to stay at a particular hotel because other hotels didn't want black people staying there.  Philadelphia was much warmer and more welcoming.
Speaker 1: Now, so, you don't, do you know what--so was the, there were a lot of mixed cast things.  I mean, sometimes we don't think of that, you know, around that time period but those things were happening.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 106094
Speaker 1: So what, how were you being--are you being raised in a white community?  A black community?  What, what, what--
Speaker 2: A white community.  I really have to say that I didn't know--my family, all black, but my friends were white.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And which is unusual for the time, too, sort of?
Speaker 2: I guess so.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum, so now when you--so you do that up until age ten, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then you are-- the other thing is that you're a grade ahead, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was a grade ahead.
Speaker 1: You, because, you know, when you said that you were going into first grade when you were five--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you're a grade ahead.
Speaker 2: I finished high school at sixteen.
Speaker 1: Oh I see, okay.  So when you're ten, what grade are you in?  Sixth?
Speaker 2: I had just finished sixth grade when we moved to White Plains.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see, okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Charlotte Wilson], did you test out?  Do you remember testing out of anything or you just went into Professional [Children's] School [New York city, New York] and that's--?  I'm just wondering, was she tutoring you as a, you know, before age five?
Speaker 2: No, no, but when you have a mother and it's just the two of you, and she has, I think, I think she felt that she'd done all sorts of exciting things in her life and now this was her time to focus on her child, and so we did everything together.  I remember Fridays, we went to the movies together.  I mean, we were very close and I sort of grew up in an adult environment.
Speaker 1: And that happens a lot when you have an older person, you know.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: 'Cause they're talking to you.
Speaker 2: And an only child.
Speaker 1: And an only child, that's right, that's right.
Story_ID: 106095
Speaker 1: So, so, by age ten, you're finishing the sixth grade?  That doesn't, God, that seems even earlier.  So you then, what school do you go to next?
Speaker 2: We moved to White Plains [New York] and, as I said, bought a house up there and I went to a public junior high school called Valhalla Junior High School [Valhalla, New York].
Speaker 1: So what was that community like there?
Speaker 2: It was an integrated community where our house was.  The school was a little distance away and was primarily white but our neighborhood was integrated but it was quite an experience for me leaving the city and going up there.  I had never ridden a bicycle because in Manhattan it wasn't something at that time that people did, as distinguished from today where everyone seems to be on a bike, but I had to learn to ride a bicycle.  I had never had Phys Ed [physical education] so I had to learn how to swing a bat to play softball in school and play basketball and do all of these things that I had not done before.  So I was a little bit of a fish out of water when I first moved up there.
Speaker 1: And that community, that would be more like suburban living at that time period?
Speaker 2: Very much so.  Oh, it was absolutely suburban living so it was really different for me.
Speaker 1: And that's what era we're talking about, 1952, '53 [1953]?
Speaker 2: We moved in '52 [1952].
Speaker 1: Okay, '52 [1952], wow.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so what else?  Can you describe the street that you're living on and the neighbors and--
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, I can describe the street.  It was a typical suburban street.  We had sort of a Cape Cod-style house, two-stories but just two bedrooms and a bath upstairs and downstairs, a bedroom, a den, living room, dining room, kitchen and bath, garage underneath the house and a nice sized yard and our next door neighbors, I remember pretty well, an African American family, I guess, and then on the corner, near us, was another couple, African American, whom I became close to because Mr. Tiller had severe rheumatoid arthritis and he was confined to a wheelchair.  His wife was a school teacher in the Bronx [New York City, New York] and so she went out to work every day and I ended up spending a lot of time with Mr. Tiller after school.  I would go there and we would play checkers or talk and I think now looking back on it how he must have enjoyed it, and I did too, but it was a change for him from sitting in the house by himself and it turned out that he had a niece who came up and became one of my closest friends.
Speaker 1: You know, and this is the time in the early '50s [1950s], I mean, suburban area, you know that's the rage, sort of--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, to move and have these developments, it's a new thing, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --people, it's the United States, as it's sort of coming to be and all of that.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, how, so do you live there how long then?
Speaker 2: We lived in White Plains, that was my official residence till I got married.
Story_ID: 106096
Speaker 1: And so tell me so, who, where do you go to school, you're in junior high at--
Speaker 2: Valhalla [Junior High School in Valhalla, New York].
Speaker 1: Valhalla, and then after, where do you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to Briarcliff Manor High School [sic, Briarcliff High School in Briarcliff Manor, New York] and I had a choice of White Plains High [School in White Plains, New York] or Briarcliff High and I choose Briarcliff because it was small and, I think mainly, because it was small.  The difference was that there were no black students there, it was a very upper middle class community and not diverse at all.  I don't think there were any poor people there.  There were no black people there but it was very good academically.  White Plains High was a huge high school that had all sorts of communities sending students there and I think I was a little frightened off by that so I went to Briarcliff.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you, is this a thing where you've went to visit the school or you knew what, you know, what the school was 'cause I remember, you know, when I was about to go to junior high school, my parents, I was like wanting to go to another school--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --you know, 'cause I wanted to go to a better school.  So, was that the deal or--
Speaker 2: I guess.  I don't even know if I visited the school.  I'm not sure if I visited either one or just went by what I learned about them or heard about them.
Speaker 1: So where was Briar, where was Briarcrest?
Speaker 2: Briarcliff Manor is in northern Westchester [County], up toward Chappaqua [New York] and that area.
Speaker 1: So you had to commute there?
Speaker 2: I did.  In fact, my stepfather [Clifford Wilson] had to take me, in a car, to where the school bus picked up a group of kids.  So it was complicated getting there and back.
Speaker 1: And you went there starting in ninth grade?
Speaker 2: No, tenth.
Speaker 1: Tenth grade.
Speaker 2: In those days it was seventh, eighth and ninth in junior high.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Story_ID: 106097
Speaker 1: For one thing, I was very studious and we didn't have a TV for the longest time.  My mother [Charlotte Wilson] was waiting for color and so finally she gave in and we got a television set but for a long time we didn't have a television set and I just read all the time and worked hard at school.  I've always been a plodder.  I always say that any success I've had has been attributable to hard work rather than genius so that's, that's really how I was, I think, from the beginning.  It's interesting because my mother never said, "Well I expect you to get straight A's" or she never said to me, "I'm disappointed that you got a 'C'" or something like that, never, but I was always driven on my own to be the best and I think the only bad grade I ever got was in Home Economics when I couldn't sew and I got, I may have even gotten a "D" in Home Economics but that was--so that was essentially my life.  I started, I think by the time I was fourteen, I started to get to know and be friendly with a fairly large group of black teenagers whom I met, I'm just trying to think, [HM] Gordon Parks, the photographer, lived down the street from me and his daughter [Toni Parks-Parsons] and I became best friends.
Speaker 2: In White Plains [New York]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: His daughter and I became good friends and through her I met Ronnie Brown [Ronald "Ron" Brown], who became [U.S.] Secretary of Commerce and I met my husband [HM Dr. Warren Goins], this is all when I was fourteen, I met my husband at Gordon Parks' home when Toni gave a party there and so I started to get to know a fairly large group of African American teenagers, most of whom were not from White Plains [New York] or Westchester [New York], but came up for parties and things like that at Toni's house.  So I ended up starting to see people in Manhattan [New York City, New York] and got a broad range of friends that were outside of school, where I had friends but they were all white.
Speaker 2: So Toni's house was Gordon Parks--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --Gordon Parks house?
Speaker 1: Yes, she is his daughter.
Speaker 2: Okay, she was his daughter, okay.
Speaker 1: And he had two sons that were there as well at the time.
Speaker 2: I see, okay.  Now, White Plains is how far from Manhattan?
Speaker 1: It's about a forty minute drive.
Speaker 2: Okay, and is this a community where people who--blacks who were of some means were moving into White Plains or what?
Speaker 1: Yes, I mean Gordon Parks had a swimming pool in his backyard and a lovely house and it was in sort of a mixed neighborhood people who, like my stepfather [Clifford Wilson], worked in the post office by then and people who were doctors and other professional people.
Story_ID: 106098
Speaker 1: Okay, now at the school that you went to [Briarcliff High School in Briarcliff Manor, New York], weren't you about fourteen when you entered tenth grade?  Isn't that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, it would have been the same, same year?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so you're meeting this black group but you're going to an all-white school?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, and is it a co-ed school or girls' school?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's a co-ed school, it's a public school.
Speaker 1: It's a public school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was the experience there?  And was there-- did they recognize you as black?
Speaker 2: Yes, they did but it wasn't talked about by them or by me and it was a little awkward at times.  I mean, I didn't date or have any boyfriends from that school ever, from any of the white kids, but I had an active social life with them because we did a lot of things in groups and so I was comfortable there, I have to say.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so what were you active with, you know, in high school?  And were you in part of different groups or organizations?  What subjects are you gravitating to?  Are you more into English or History?
Speaker 2: Oh, definitely.  In fact, I really liked Latin.  I had taken French from first through sixth grade and then in junior high [Valhalla Junior High School in Valhalla, New York] they didn't offer it and so I think perhaps in ninth grade I might have been able to pick up French, but maybe not.  I'm not even sure but in my sophomore year when I got to high school, I took first year Latin, I liked it a lot.  Took second year Latin and by the time I took third year Latin, there were only a few of us in the class because nobody else was interested.  But I was definitely more of languages, literature, history, not science and math.  I would study and do reasonably well, "B," "B" plus, in something like geometry but didn't like it and didn't really see the purpose of it.  It was, I think it was not well taught because if you understand, as my husband [HM Dr. Warren Goins] did, how it affects your whole life, you appreciate it more.
Story_ID: 106099
Speaker 1: So, Charlynn, how are you developing, you know, as a young person because, you know, for a young person to be on stage, there's a certain level of precociousness, you know, at that, at a young age?  But, you know, the picture that I'm, you know, drawing is of someone who's very studious but inward so I'm trying to understand what you were like, you know, as a young, you know young teenager, young, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't think I was particularly inward.  In fact, I think I've always been a real extrovert.  I love people, I love meeting different people and even a room of strangers I can go in and enjoy meeting people of all walks of life.  So, I don't really know how to describe myself.
Speaker 1: At that time?
Speaker 2: At that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you typical, you know how sometimes girls are into boys or, you know, they're, I mean, I'm just, because these are, this is--we're talking about the late '50s [1950s], right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Well, I finished high school in '59 [1959].
Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, I am, when you talk about being precocious, that might be the right word because I always dated boys that were much older than me so that when I was maybe 14 or 15, I was going out with somebody who was a freshman at Columbia [University in New York City, New York].  Yes (laughter), yes.
Speaker 1: And your mother [Charlotte Wilson] was okay with that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was.  Yes, and she knew him and in fact, his sister became my dear friend and then way later in life, my neighbor, when we were raising our children in New Rochelle [New York City, New York], but his name was Channing Dean and he was a, Channing Tobias was the founder [sic, chairman] of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], was it?  And it was his grandson and his granddaughter that ended up very close to me.  And when you say, did my mother approve, he helped me with my chemistry homework.  I mean, so he was very helpful and so we did a little going out and then my senior year I dated a fellow who, I think at the time was a sophomore at Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I, by then, had already known my husband [HM Dr. Warren Goins] for two years and I started dating him when I was sixteen and I've been with him ever since.
Speaker 1: That's nice.
Speaker 2: So, I'm seventy-one and we've been together since I was sixteen years old.
Speaker 1: So did your mother raise you to be a lady in that way?  You know, I mean to, I mean because a lot of, I mean I'm just trying to understand what life was like on a regular basis.
Speaker 2: My mother was very proper and formal about those kinds of things, you know, she did, yes, she felt it was very important to have the right table manners, the right way of greeting people.  I was, I was raised to be a lady.  My mother really aspired for me to move up from where she had been.
Speaker 1: And so are there parties at the home or are there, you know, are there any parties going on at the home?  Do you, what about holiday periods and things like that?
Speaker 2: Well, there were lots of parties back in those days because my friends were in clubs like Jack and Jill and my husband was a member of a club in Brooklyn [New York City, New York] called the Centurions and there were all these different clubs that would have holiday parties and parties throughout the year and then there were parties at people's homes.  So it was, it was really active, socially.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Jack and Jill was active?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and so--
Speaker 2: I was not a member but many of my friends were.
Speaker 1: Were members, okay.
Story_ID: 106100
Speaker 1: And so what is the black community like there in White Plains [New York]?  What was it like?
Speaker 2: You know, I can't tell you what the black community was like in White Plains because Toni Parks [Toni Parks-Parsons] lived down the road and Ron Brown lived nearby but other than that, our circle of friends were mainly from Manhattan [New York City, New York] and Brooklyn [New York City, New York] and other places.  So I didn't have a social life in the black community in White Plains.
Speaker 1: So your social life was in--
Speaker 2: Manhattan driven.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Even though--so I, that was not clear to me, okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: So even though you were living in White Plains--
Speaker 2: I lived in White Plains but I would get on the train or my parents [Charlotte Wilson and Clifford Wilson] would drive me in and I would stay with friends in the city if there were parties to go to.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.  So, what are you--where are you thinking you're going to--but you, before I let, were there any debutante--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yes, Warren [HM Dr. Warren Goins] and I went to a debutante ball in Brooklyn.  I was not a debutante but we would go to these balls that were held at the St. George Hotel in Brooklyn and we knew people who were debutantes.  In fact, my husband's club, the Centurions, one year they sponsored Liz Campbell, E. Simms Campbell's daughter, to be their debutante that was being presented.  So, yes, there were, there were a lot of parties that were black tie and quite fancy.
Speaker 1: So what, how did you meet Warren?
Speaker 2: I met him at Toni Parks' party.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we just knew each other for a couple of years and, in fact, once or twice double-dated and then he and I started seeing each other and it's history.
Speaker 1: So you start seeing each other when you were sixteen?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then by nineteen you're married?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 106101
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so let's talk about that.  So when it's time for graduation, what are you thinking?
Speaker 2: Graduation from--
Speaker 1: From high school [Briarcliff High School in Briarcliff Manor, New York]?
Speaker 2: From high school?  I am very excited about starting Barnard [College in New York City, New York] where I went to college and I dated Warren [HM Dr. Warren Goins] that summer and was just looking forward to a new experience at college.
Speaker 1: So you dated him and you started Barnard.  Now what are your, what are your decisions?  Why did you choose Barnard?  And are you looking at other schools?
Speaker 2: I looked at other schools.  I think I applied to Bennington [College in Bennington, Vermont], Sarah Lawrence [College in Bronxville, New York] and Barnard.  I think those were the three.
Speaker 1: So those make sense all together.
Speaker 2: Do they?  Because Sarah Lawrence and Bennington are much more art-driven and less, I won't say less rigorous, but rigorous in a different way.
Speaker 1: Different way, but they still are on the literature, arts--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, side?
Speaker 2: Definitely, definitely.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I have--
Speaker 2: I think I ended up at Barnard--I think it gave me more scholarship--oh, I'm sorry, more scholarship than the others did and I really needed scholarship at that time.
Story_ID: 106102
Speaker 1: So, I think that [scholarship money] was the reason I ended up at Barnard [College in New York City, New York].
Speaker 2: So what was the community there because Barnard is, is the female, it was always, it signals--
Speaker 1: Still, still all women.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But it's part of Columbia University [New York City, New York].
Speaker 2: Right, but it--at that point in time, was it, was it still part of Columbia or did it--
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: It was, okay.
Speaker 1: It's always been part of Columbia.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Barnard was an interesting place.  When I got there, I came with good grades from high school but was just shocked at the level of intellect of my fellow students and I had to work very hard, at least my first semester, and sort of gear up to study much more than I had ever studied before.  As I said, it was all women.  I'm a big supporter of women's colleges because what I found was that at a woman's college, you could be assertive, aggressive, answer questions in class, raise questions in class that probably if you were in a co-ed environment you might have felt less inclined to do so.  I think that a woman's college gives women who graduate from them a much more comfort in being aggressive, assertive and ready to take on challenges.
Speaker 2: A lot of people say that.  So, I, you know, I'm wanting to talk about the period of time because, you know, there are, and a lot of women during that time were interested in getting their "M.R.S."--
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: --degree and not so much, you know, being serious about, you know, moving forward in that way and, I mean, it was just the sign of the times--
Speaker 1: Definitely.
Speaker 2: --'cause we're talking, you know, we're talking end of '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s] and so it was just the different time period.
Speaker 1: Well that's why I had mentioned before that my mother [Charlotte Wilson] was quite different from other mothers of that era because she was not excited that I was getting married to someone [HM Dr. Warren Goins] who was a medical student and would have an "M.R.S." and on top of it be married to a doctor, that was something that was the goal of many mothers of girls and my mother was more interested in my, my career.  And I think that for a while she was probably disappointed because when I was at Barnard, excuse me, the president of the school, Millicent McIntosh, was a proponent of women with college degrees, staying at home when they raised their families and being community activists and perhaps politically involved but not pursuing careers until their children were much older and that was really an interesting approach and I bought it hook line and sinker and went through college planning to be a homemaker, well by the time I was engaged and then got married, I got married at the end of my junior year of college [1962] and I planned not to work longer than I had to when we were first getting started as a married couple, I was going to stay at home and be involved in various volunteer activities and that kind of thing.
Speaker 2: So that, you know, that is very interesting.  So, here's a woman's college and the president is basically advocating that and so are a lot of the women, are they getting married during their time at Barnard?  Did you--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Did you find that--
Speaker 1: No, there were only a couple of us that were married in my class that I was aware of, at least, and one was Martha Stewart and the other was a woman named Pola Rosen who was very active in the education world here in New York City [New York] and the two of them were married as well.  And Pola and I became friends because we were really odd ducks in the class.
Speaker 2: And so was the, what would you say about the education there in terms of even the courses and the classes that, was it standard, you know, what you would find at Columbia  or was there a difference?
Speaker 1: Oh, I think it was standard what you would find at Columbia.  We had two years of required courses and so much to my dislike, I had to take a year of biological science and a year of physical science.  I didn't have to do math, thank goodness, but there was, there were a lot of required subjects and I think that's very good because it makes you learn, learn things that you think you don't want to learn.  So it was a good experience.
Speaker 2: And were the instructors, were they male and female?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Well I think probably more than fifty percent male and many of them taught on both sides of the campus so, and, and actually, Columbia and Barnard allowed students to go to courses at each other's schools.
Speaker 2: And that still, that was the case then?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 106103
Speaker 1: So you get married [to HM Dr. Warren Goins in 1962]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you are so, can you describe your wedding day and, you know--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --or the preparation leading up to that?
Speaker 2: We had a beautiful day in June and--
Speaker 1: So you're a June bride?
Speaker 2: I was a June bride and we, I think had maybe a hundred people at the wedding, at a small church in White Plains [New York] and then an outdoor reception at the Women's Republican Club [Westchester Women's Republican Club] in Westchester [New York] and it was funny because Warren's got a very large family and so it was a matter of "Well, we're going to have a wedding of X number of people" and then I found out that his family made up that X number of people and so, anyway, it worked out and we had a lovely wedding, really a lovely wedding, and then lots of bridesmaids and groomsmen and then--
Speaker 1: How many?
Speaker 2: I think five, five and five, and then we took off and went to Cape Ann, Massachusetts for a few days' honeymoon.  We didn't have any money and so everything had to be done in terms of honeymoons and things, very downscale, and we came back quickly and started summer jobs.
Speaker 1: So where was Warren?  Now where was Warren in his education?
Speaker 2: He had just finished his junior year of medical school [Howard University College of Medicine in Washington, D.C.] so he would commute.  He'd come up on the Greyhound bus on weekends when he could and I stayed in Manhattan [New York City, New York] at Barnard but our rationale for getting married was that we had the summer between our junior and senior year together with both of us working but together every day and we knew that when he graduated from medical school, he was going to start an internship and every other night and every other weekend was how it was back in those days.  So we thought we would have some time together and then that senior year he commuted back and forth.
Speaker 1: And was that the case that you had?  I mean, did it work out that way?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That you had, okay.  Now the other thing, I have to ask you because, you know, I'm just struck by your age, you know, and nowadays people, you know, people can be in their late twenties, and people think they're young, you know.  So here you are really, I mean, 'cause, you know, when you were saying nineteen, you know I'm thinking, young, but you already are in, you know, past your junior year.  So did you ever feel, on hindsight, or maybe at the time, that you were too young going to college and things like that?
Speaker 2: No, never.
Speaker 1: Because you--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, and I mean I got married before my friends who were older than me so, no, I didn't feel that way.
Speaker 1: So you were always very mature then is what I'm hearing?
Speaker 2: I guess, who knows.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Am I mature now?  I don't know, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I suppose.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: I mean we both had great jobs the summer we got married.  It was a wonderful summer because I worked at Time Life.  [HM] Gordon Parks had helped me to get a job there and that was really fascinating and Warren was doing an internship at Manhattan Psychiatric Hospital [now Manhattan Psychiatric Center in New York City, New York] on, I guess, it's Roosevelt or Governor's Island [sic, Wards Island] and the psychiatrist that he reported to knew he was newly wed so he would tell him at four in the afternoon, oh go on home, you know, and it was really a very nice summer for us.
Speaker 1: So, where are you living and where do you set up, you know, house and--
Speaker 2: My aunt and uncle, the same one who took me to Coney Island when I was five, had a house in Queens [New York City, New York] and they had a basement apartment that we rented at a very reasonable rent for two years and that's where we lived.
Speaker 1: So you are, so after that summer--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now where is Warren in medical school?
Speaker 2: Howard.  He went to Howard.
Speaker 1: Oh, he went to Howard, okay, that's right, I knew that, okay.
Speaker 2: He was at Howard.
Speaker 1: So, he's commuting back and forth--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and then you're in school?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you, so are you seeing each other on weekends or--
Speaker 2: Yes, as often as we could.  It wasn't every weekend but, you know, we had the long holidays, Christmas and Thanksgiving and spring holiday and then we would try to get back and forth.  I had a cousin in Washington [D.C.] that I could stay with.  Warren generally came back to New York where we had our own apartment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 106104
Speaker 1: And who's your support system and who are your friends at this point 'cause you're going to school [Barnard College in New York city, New York], you're newly married, you know, your husband [HM Dr. Warren Goins] is, you know, in medical school [Howard University College of Medicine in Washington, D.C.], so?
Speaker 2: Well my aunt and uncle were right upstairs from us and they were very supportive.  I had close friends, the woman who--well, all of my bridesmaids were good friends and Warren's parents [Ernestine Goins and Jepther Goins] were wonderful.  I mean, they were always like really second parents to me.
Speaker 1: And now what is your mother [Charlotte Wilson], is your mother thinking this is a good thing too for you to be married or is she disappointed?
Speaker 2: Well, I think she, she always was happy with whatever I wanted to do and so I think she thought it was a good thing that I was married to somebody who was responsible and looked like he had a future.  I think she might have hoped that I was going to go on to do something with a career but she was enthused because right after Warren graduated, he did a one-year internship and then we went off to England for three years and she, she was excited about us doing that because she had lived abroad and I think she recognized what an experience it was in terms of personal growth and just exposure.
Story_ID: 106105
Speaker 1: Now, I want to provide some context for things, even though, you know, you're [Goins and HM Dr. Warren Goins] basically newlyweds and you're, you know, you have your circle of friends and everything so you're not thinking of it sort of in the larger context, but what are you aware of the world around you and what is happening in society that affects you or, you know, you're, or their conversations at dinner parties or, you know, or at school, you know that are, you know that affect you?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, that you're paying attention, that affect you?
Speaker 2: Well I can't say that I paid much attention to politics or what was going on in that regard.  I remember a very distinctive impression made when [President] John [F.] Kennedy was shot.  I was at work at the time.  I worked for a year after graduating from college [Barnard College in New York City, New York] at--
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from college?
Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963], 1963--
Speaker 1: That's what I have, at '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: And we went to England a year later--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and in between I took a job managing the language lab at Barnard where I had worked part-time.  I always had part-time jobs.  I was never without a job, summer, winter, fall, etc., and I had worked in the language lab and they needed someone to manage it and so I did that for one year and got as a perk some courses I could take at Teachers College [Columbia University in New York City, New York] so I did that as well but I was at work and I remember hearing that John Kennedy had just been killed and so that was something that sticks out in my mind to this day.  I remember it so clearly but it was not yet the era of, the coming of "black is beautiful."
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And we were in England for that whole period and missed it.  Came back and the world was really different from when we left.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: We were in England from 1964 to '67 [1967] and it was a different world when we got back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 106106
Speaker 1: We [Goins and HM Dr. Warren Goins] decided to do that so that we'd have a break and have some time together again and so we had a choice, two years in the United States, but if you signed up for three, you could go abroad.  And so we signed up because we could have ended up in Biloxi [Mississippi] and so we thought this would be a better opportunity.  We wanted France and they were trying to, the [U.S.] Army was, or the military, was trying to get doctors to make a career of the military and so they were very helpful in those days.  And when we decided we would opt for the third year so that we could go abroad, we asked to go to France but [Charles] de Gaulle had thrown the American military out of France and so we said, okay, England, and we ended up stationed in England.
Speaker 2: So where were you stationed in England?
Speaker 1: We were stationed on the border of Essex [England] and Suffolk [England] in East Anglia [England].  It was about an hour and a quarter drive to London [England] and thirty minutes to Cambridge [England].  It was wonderful.
Speaker 2: I went to the University of East Anglia [Norwich, Norfolk, England].
Speaker 1: You're kidding.
Speaker 2: So I'm familiar.
Speaker 1: Oh, my goodness.  Well, you might know towns, Braintree [Essex, England], Chelmsford [Essex, England], oh my God.  Well we were on the border right near Sudbury [Suffolk, England] in a village called Castle Hedingham [Essex, England], the population of 900 and we were fortunate we didn't have to live on the base and so we lived in a brand new house, with no central heating, but a brand new house in a little village and became friends of people, English people, and it was just a great three-year experience.
Speaker 2: So talk about that because this is really your first time out of the United States.
Speaker 1: Oh, certainly.
Speaker 2: --So Warren's--
Speaker 1: This is my first time on an airplane going to England.
Speaker 2: And what about Warren, also?
Speaker 1: Same, same.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 106107
Speaker 1: So how was--just describe the experience.  And so you're living off-base.
Speaker 2: We're living off-base, we, Warren [HM Dr. Warren Goins] went in as a Captain and--
Speaker 1: So he's-- as an officer?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, and with professional pay and all sorts of things, all sorts of perks, and so it was really a very comfortable life and the military families are very warm and welcoming because they don't have families around and so you become their family and we made dear friends who, when we got there, I was twenty-one years old, and we got there, I couldn't cook and military wives could cook up a storm, I mean, just because they've lived all over the world and knew all sorts of cuisines, so I had to learn to cook because the main social life was around dinner parties.  And so I got to be a very good cook.  I stopped as soon as I went to law school [Columbia Law School in New York City, New York], and haven't done it since, but I did a lot of cooking in those days and it was just wonderful.  We, every couple of months, would take a trip, even if it was a weekend in Paris [France], it was just easy to do and Warren got a lot of vacation time so we traveled on the continent all the time and for three years we just had a wonderful, wonderful stay.
Speaker 1: So he worked in the military hospital?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was a general practitioner on a small base, Air Force Base [RAF Wethersfield, now MDPGA Wethersfield, in Essex, England], and he had nice hours but he had to work, I think, every third or fourth night, he had to stay on the base and he treated mainly the women and children of military people on the base but there wasn't a hospital there.  The hospital was almost two-hours drive away and that was where I gave birth to our daughter.
Story_ID: 106108
Speaker 1: Now are you, oh, yeah, and you got pregnant.  So did your mother [Charlotte Wilson] come over?
Speaker 2: No, no.  We didn't see family for the whole three years.  Warren's [HM Dr. Warren Goins] parents [Ernestine Goins and Jepther Goins] came over before I had Hilary [Van Kleeck], the year before, because Warren's sister [Nancy Matthews] was in Germany with her husband in the [U.S.] Army and she had a baby and they flew over and then they came to see us in England.  My mother did not come and I never went back to the States in the three years.  We wrote letters and, in fact, we were just looking at some of the letters back and forth.  Letter writing has gone the way of the dinosaur and it's too bad.
Speaker 1: It is, because it's lovely to see-- you remember things in a different way then--
Speaker 2: It's amazing, yes.
Speaker 1: So now, when you, so you're there, so who's your support system as a young bride?  Other, other women were on the base?
Speaker 2: The other women on the base [RAF Wethersfield, now MDPGA Wethersfield, in Essex, England] and my next door neighbor, a wonderful English woman whom we're still friendly with, was very helpful 'cause I remember bringing home Hilary.  In those days you stayed in the hospital five days but she was five days old, I bring her home and haven't got a clue what to do with her, and Warren, even though he treated babies, didn't have a clue either, and so you just ask your friends and you learn by doing, trial and error.
Story_ID: 106109
Speaker 1: So you got to understand English lifestyle then, too, because--
Speaker 2: Oh, very much so.
Speaker 1: So what are your favorite things that you think of?  You know favorite foods, favorite traditions?
Speaker 2: Well, let's start with people.  My professor, history professor at Barnard [College in New York City, New York], had become close to Warren [HM Dr. Warren Goins] and me, he and his wife, and we would go to dinner at their home my senior year and that kind of thing and the year I was working at Barnard and when I said that we were going to England and specifically to East Anglia, he said, "Oh well, Katherine [ph.], my wife, went to [University of] Cambridge [Cambridge, England],"  I think she was class of 1919, or something like that, "and she has a classmate that lives nearby and I'm going to write a letter of introduction."  So, he did so and we get over to England and move into our house and I said, "Warren, we've got to call this woman, Lucy Tabor, and go over and see her.  We only have to do it once because, keep in mind, I think she's 65 and I'm 21 and so it probably won't be fun but we'll do it because I have to, my professor and, you know, had gone to this trouble."  Well, I called, she invited us for sherry, which is very common, and we got over there, loved her.  She was just a fireball.  She was such a wonderful person.  Never married, from a family in which all the streets, there was Tabor Street [sic, Avenue], Tabor School [sic, Tabor Academy], it was her family name.  They were very prominent people in Braintree [Essex, England], which was the town near us, and she had this fascinating group of friends and they included us in their parties.  They were all much older than us but they were all Cambridge grads, Labour Party, and claimed to be farmers.  And when I say "claimed to be farmers," they had, that was how they made their living but their hands were as smooth as a baby's and they all wore knickers and caps and tweed and it was just like going back a century in a way except they were Labour Party and very liberal, very progressive in their politics and we had such a good time socializing with them.  And then we made dear friends on the base [RAF Wethersfield, now MDPGA Wethersfield, in Essex, England] as well but when I think of England, I think of Lucy Tabor and the group she introduced us to and then I also think of our experiences traveling.  We went all over Europe by car and it was fascinating.  That's, the food in England was not--I'm sorry, you were asking?
Speaker 1: All around Europe by car?
Speaker 2: All around Europe.  We drove as far as Oslo [Norway] and we drove as far as Naples [Italy], and all the way east through Germany to Bavaria.  So, yeah, we really covered the continent, over three years.
Speaker 1: So you went, you took the car over the English Channel?
Speaker 2: Yes, on a ferry.
Speaker 1: Wow, and, 'cause I don't think of people, you know, I think of train, but I don't think of car.
Speaker 2: No, we drove everywhere.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  So this is a liberating time period in many ways.
Speaker 2: Oh, amazing.  I am such a proponent of living abroad somewhere because it just exposes you to the fact that the American way is not the only way and it's not necessarily the best way and you really learn that by living abroad.
Speaker 1: So you were getting ready to talk about the food.
Speaker 2: Oh, well the food is, it's something as I said, I was learning to cook, but English food at that time was not good.  It's very good today but it wasn't then and so that's why, as I said, there were mainly dinner parties and when we would go to France, or some of the other countries, we would really enjoy the foods.
Speaker 1: So talk about typical English food at that point.
Speaker 2: Boiled vegetables but boiled till they were almost disintegrating and not a lot of meat.  They were still quite frugal even though it was long after the wars but it was just not good.  Not good pastries, very ordinary and, or ordinary to less than ordinary.
Speaker 1: That's right but you had tea and crumpets?  They did--
Speaker 2: Oh, the scones with clotted cream, they were really good, yes.  Clotted cream and jam, loved those.
Story_ID: 106110
Speaker 1: Now what else were you learning about the world outside of the United States also in your travels during that time?
Speaker 2: Well you become aware of, first of all, the difference in social class.  I mean, England at that time was so stratified it was just amazing.  To give you an example, our next door neighbor was the general manager for an entire region of a big supermarket chain.  It was a big job.  He had a fancy car that was part of the job and he did very well financially but he came from working class people and in our village the people that he socialized with were the butcher and the baker, they owned their own businesses, but he wasn't able to move into a different social group.  It was so different to us from the United States where if you're educated and successful you can go any-- almost anywhere.  So that was a fascinating thing to learn.  It was interesting to be a black person in England at that time because the large migration to England had not taken place from the Caribbean and Africa and so people weren't prejudiced or biased because there hadn't been enough of us there to make them wonder, "Um, should we object to this" and so we were just considered different but not inferior and, as I said, it was because there were so few of us.
Story_ID: 106111
Speaker 1: So are you, what is life like?  How did your life differ from being in the United States?  And this is my whole thing, you paint a world in terms of the African American community but you know you could pass, if you wanted to, have you?
Speaker 2: Oh, I know, I know that and that can be difficult and I--when we [Goins and HM Dr. Warren Goins] were in England, it wasn't so much a factor because our, we had a lot of American friends on the base and they knew we were both African American.  I became much more aware of the color issue when I, in my career, spent a lot of time in Europe and then I realized that people didn't know what I was and it, it's not just I could maybe pass for white, but people would think maybe I was Middle Eastern or--
Speaker 1: Hispanic.
Speaker 2: Or even Sephardic Jew--
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: You know, or, there were so many possibilities and what was interesting was that if people would finally ask me, "Well you know, what are you?"  And I'd say, "I'm black."  They'd say, "Well, no you're not."  And I'd say, "Oh, yes, we come in all different colors but I am black" and they were saying, "That's ridiculous" and I said, "Oh, well, in America, if you've just got a drop of black blood, you are black.  And so that's how I identify," but it, I've had, in my career, times when I've had to suffer some ugly jokes about black people and that kind of thing because people were not aware.  They didn't realize.
Speaker 1: They were not.  So then my question is, none of this is happening when you're growing up as a young person?  That's what I'm trying--
Speaker 2: No, no, you know what's really interesting as I look back on it, here in this country, at least back in those days, there was a whole gradation of color and prejudice against people of dark color among the black community.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And I learned that that was the case, I think I must have been 25 or 30 before I realized that that was how some people thought because in my house, and in my family, there was never a discussion of color, never, and I was just shocked to learn of paper bag tests and that sort of thing.  I had no idea that that existed and I don't know how my mother missed it.  I think my mother was mainly in the white world and so it just wasn't brought up.
Speaker 1: And you mention that because this distinction about color existed in the black world?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So that's, so that's why you're saying you sort of escaped that because I'm sitting here, you know, I'm listening to your story and I'm thinking "There's some things missing," you know, because a lot of times it's been sort of interesting asking fair-skinned blacks about passing and, you know, and sort of people hedging around, you know, the story in some respects or telling stories--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --you know, of convenient, what they call convenient passing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you, I'm trying to sort of understand, you know, 'cause you are telling a story of growing up in the white community but still perceiving yourself as black?
Speaker 2: I perceived myself as black but as a junior high school [Valhalla Junior High School in Valhalla, New York] and more as a high school [Briarcliff High School in Briarcliff Manor, New York] student, I kind of hoped people would not think about the fact that I was black and I was fair enough so that I wasn't passing but I was hopeful that it wouldn't be discussed or raised, I found it embarrassing and awkward.  And I only really came to be comfortable when I developed a group of black friends and started to, to feel that it was fine to be, to be black and to be open and assertive about the fact that I am a black person.
Speaker 1: Because no one wants to be, I mean, lesser than.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I mean that's, that's the whole thing and people would say some really mean things a lot of times.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 106112
Speaker 1: So, let me ask, oh gosh, there was one question I forgot to ask you and I need to, I need to go back, if you don't mind--
Speaker 2: Not at all.
Speaker 1: --me going back to your childhood.  I can't believe I almost missed the favorites and-- I'd like to take you either back to White Plains [New York] or to, you said 14--
Speaker 2: Sixth Street [146th], yes.
Speaker 1: Forty-sixth [146th] Street [Manhattan, New York City, New York], and I want you to tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: I'm--
Speaker 1: Sights.
Speaker 2: Sights, our street in Manhattan and the Hudson River, looking down the street at the river.  Broadway, which was a big thoroughfare right up at the corner from our house.  We belonged to a beach club up in Westchester [New York] when I was a little girl and we would go up there and I had swimming lessons, I remember that I hated, but my mother wanted me to have every kind of lesson in the world.  I had dancing lessons, music lessons, swimming lessons, art lessons and I was terrible at swimming, art, music, dance I was better but, anyway, that's, those are some of the sights that I remember.  Sounds, my stepfather [Clifford Wilson] liked jazz and he did a lot of playing of jazz.  That's really the only sound I can--that comes to mind.  Smells, my mother [Charlotte Wilson] was a good cook and was always trying something new, whether it was bouillabaisse or something like that.  She would annoy her sisters and the rest of the family because if they came to us for Thanksgiving or Christmas, my mother just might fix bouillabaisse or some exotic thing when they were looking for ham, turkey and collard greens and so she wasn't, she was just different.  And so I remember the smells of cooking but that's really all I can think of.  It's a long time ago for me.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So I was just, you know, sort of wondering about that that's a question that we, you know, ask, so--.
Story_ID: 106113
Speaker 1: I want to go back to your time in England.  What else would you consider a significant--oh, it's okay 'cause I'm not--what do you consider significant about your time there in your sort of growth?  You're a young mother?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I think what was significant was just my exposure to Americans from all over the country, whom I really hadn't known because I was a day student at Barnard [College in New York City, New York].  I didn't live in the dorms and as a result, didn't get to have close relationships with my classmates who might have come from another part of the country but once we were in England, our friends in the military were mainly from the Southwest and the South and so I got to meet a different group of Americans and then, of course, I got to meet all the English people and when we traveled, to some degree, you'd meet some of the people in other countries, and that was, that was really different for me.  So it was the meeting of people, the exposure to different social values and foods and all of the kinds of things that you find going from country to country.  I had majored in English--in government but focus--and history minor, and focusing on the U.K. [United Kingdom], British government and history, and so being in England was really wonderful for me because we'd go to Cambridge [England] and, you know, I would just experience some of what I read about and I was an avid reader of The Guardian back in those days and so it was like being closer to what I had studied at college.
Speaker 1: And did you, so you, this is a time that you and Warren [HM Dr. Warren Goins] are able to gel, sort of, as a family too because--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know he, 'cause you're together--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --and you're together really, I mean without any family interference or anything--
Speaker 2: Just us.
Speaker 1: --you're, you know, it's just you so you, and you have your daughter, Hilary [van Kleeck].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Her name is Hilary.
Speaker 2: Hilary but we didn't have her.  We arrived in England in July of '64 [1964] and she was born in February of '66 [1966], so we had quite a bit of time before she--
Speaker 1: Oh, before--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --so you're really gelling--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you're traveling.  That's when you're doing a lot of the traveling around--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --and getting to see different places--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: So what were some of the favorite places that you went to?  I just, I've never heard of people driving like that.
Speaker 2: Oh, we, we would get in the car in England on the base [RAF Wethersfield, now MDPGA Wethersfield, in Essex, England] or near the base, and drive to the ferry, cross the [English] Channel, and one year we drove as far as Dijon, which is in almost eastern, Southeastern France, on our way to the Riviera, and then the next day we were in the Riviera.  I mean, we would put in long hours driving.  I would navigate, he would drive.  Remember there was no GPS [Global Positioning System] then, it was all reading maps and little country roads and we just went all over.
Speaker 1: How about your language skills?
Speaker 2: I was fluent in French and so--
Speaker 1: See, you didn't say that, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was fluent in French.  I had--
Speaker 1: You had studied in--
Speaker 2: I had studied it from first through sixth grade and then I took more in high school [Briarcliff High School in Briarcliff Manor, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause you talked about Latin--
Speaker 2: And I took Latin as well, and then when, in college at Barnard [College in New York City, New York], I actually got to the point where I was taking a [Marcel] Proust-course in French.  I mean, so I was doing literature courses in the language.  So I was comfortable in speaking French and that was the only language I knew at that point.
Speaker 1: So that got, so you are navigating sort of around, you're traveling.  What is your favorite place?  You didn't--
Speaker 2: I would think France was probably our favorite place--
Speaker 1: France.
Speaker 2: --but we had "Europe on Five Dollars A Day" and it really did work.  We would splurge and go to seven-fifty per person per day and so on fifteen dollars. we would have a hotel, three meals and any entertainment, and it was wonderful.  We may have had to walk down the hall to the bathroom at some of the hotels, but they were clean and at that stage it was fine.  We had a wonderful time.
Speaker 1: That's quite liberating for an African American couple.
Story_ID: 106114
Speaker 1: So, when you [Goins and HM Dr. Warren Goins] come back [from England in 1967], so when you come back, how is the transition back?
Speaker 2: It was exciting because we had not been in the States at all for three years and so, and we hadn't really seen family for three years.  So we had a one and a half year old daughter and Warren was starting a residency up at Montefiore [Medical Center in New York City, New York] and we had to find an apartment which was an interesting effort because the hospital was in the Bronx and so we were looking at apartments in the Bronx and realized that being black was not helpful and we ended up with a fantastic apartment but only because the resident agent was on vacation and we had to go and meet the owner of the building to be interviewed for the apartment and he didn't care that we were black and we moved into the building and the building was kind of scandalized that we were there but we ended up with a nice place to live.
Speaker 1: Can you describe the Bronx of that time period then?
Speaker 2: Yes, we were in a primarily Jewish neighborhood.  The Grand Concourse was the main sort of thoroughfare of very nice buildings in the Bronx and we were right off the Grand Concourse.  It was a neighborhood where, you know, you get to know the baker and the grocery store, the little deli kind of person, so it was--the only negative about it was that the parks, the playgrounds, where you take your children, were really in terrible shape and had, you know, broken glass and you had to worry about where to take your child to play and even then, I guess, I was sort of active to cross the Grand Concourse to get to the park, there were no traffic lights nearby and it was really dangerous and I remember calling our city councilman and trying to--I think we staged a sort of a pushing the baby carriages out into the Concourse to try to get a traffic light, we did get one but it was, it was a nice neighborhood.  We had a car and so I could get around to drive up and see my mother [Charlotte Wilson] or out to Queens [New York City, New York] to see family and Warren was working all the time as a resident.
Speaker 1: Now are you, do you go back to be in school at that point or no?
Speaker 2: No, I had finished.  I--
Speaker 1: You had finished?
Speaker 2: Barnard [College in New York City, New York]?  Yes.
Speaker 1: I thought you went, okay, no you had, wait a minute, I'm getting confused.  I thought--
Speaker 2: I finished college in 1963.  We went to England from '64 [1964] to '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: Seven [1967], okay, that's right.
Speaker 2: Came back--
Speaker 1: You had the one year work--
Speaker 2: --and it was not until 1973 when I went to law school.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Okay, okay.  So you are a mother and a housewife at this point?
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I had a second child while Warren was a resident.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your second child is--
Speaker 2: A boy, Jeffrey [Goins].
Speaker 1: Is a boy, is Jeffrey, okay.  So they're about two years apart?
Speaker 2: They're three.
Speaker 1: Three years, three years apart, okay.
Speaker 2: Three years apart.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 106115
Speaker 1: And before Jeffrey [Goins] was born, my mother [Charlotte Wilson] died and so that was another major event in my life.
Speaker 2: So can you talk about that?
Speaker 1: Yes, my mother at that point was still living in White Plains [New York], still in the same house, and I was living in the Bronx [New York City, New York] which wasn't too far away and our habit was to talk on the phone in the evening after I had put Hilary to bed.  My mother was always a voracious reader so she would go upstairs to the bedroom and read and we would talk on the phone.  Meanwhile, my stepfather [Clifford Wilson] would be downstairs watching television.  And I was talking to her and she said she'd been out for dinner, she had Chinese food and we were just talking about our day and she dropped the phone and I waited and nothing happened and so I hung up and kept calling and getting a busy and I called the next door neighbors that had been there from when I was growing up there but I hadn't seen them in a zillion years and I called them and I said, "I'm sorry to bother you but my mother has dropped the phone, she probably heard a crash in the street or remembered she had a teakettle boiling or something, would you go and tell her, tell my stepfather who's downstairs, to go up and tell her to hang up the phone."  And they said, "Sure, we'll be glad to."  And then I called, finally I waited about five or ten minutes and called again and my stepfather picked up and said, "Your mother's dead."  She dropped dead while I was talking to her on the phone.  Sixty-one years old.  So she had had rheumatic heart disease years and years before and she was a diabetic but well controlled with diet but it just happened.  So, that was very traumatic.
Story_ID: 106116
Speaker 1: So, do you, so how do you take her [her mother, Charlotte Wilson's] death?
Speaker 2: It was really very shocking and I had just become pregnant and had a miscarriage and we can only attribute it to the stress, or the shock, who knows, who knows if they were related but fortunately I became pregnant quickly, again, and had our second child [Jeffrey Goins].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I, I--
Speaker 1: But your mother had been a very important part.
Speaker 2: She had but we had not been close and I regret it to this day from when she told me who my father was and that I was illegitimate.  I was really very unhappy and disappointed to learn that and ashamed and it took me a long time to get over that and I really hadn't gotten over it completely when she died and now just, I mean, first of all, nobody cares if you're married or not when you have a child anymore and life is so different and I also think she would have been so pleased to see what I ended up doing with my life that I have regrets that she died so young.
Speaker 1: Right, so when she told you that, I mean, why, why did she tell, why did that incident, that, you didn't have to find out, I guess is what I'm saying.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, I didn't.  In fact, I guess, I don't know why she told me.  Well, one thing was that our financial situation changed dramatically.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And that might have been part of it but I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Was it because you asked a lot of questions or she just laid it out completely?
Speaker 2: I don't think so but I, again--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know we're talking fifty-five--
Speaker 1: Fifty-five years ago.
Speaker 2: --fifty-six years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, I understand, okay.  So you, so you had from that point on you had, you know, a difficult relationship with her, sort of?  Or you were dis--
Speaker 2: Yes, it was okay but not, not close.
Speaker 1: Right, well because you had a fairy tale existence up to that point, right?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: So it's--
Speaker 2: It was a real blow.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a fairy tale existence.  The other thing I find curious, when you said that you were, you weren't, you know, music and things like that, and I'm thinking, she was in theatre.  Remember you said that I wasn't good--
Speaker 2: Yes, but not, but not, I was acting, that was it, not--no music.
Speaker 1: No music or anything, okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 106117
Speaker 1: So here, so she [Charlotte Wilson] passes, then what, what happens?  But you have your son [Jeffrey Goins]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so there are two of you now?  You know, you have two kids?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this is your second son is born--
Speaker 2: No, I had a daughter and one son.
Speaker 1: No, I said, I'm sorry, your--
Speaker 2: Second child.
Speaker 1: Second child, sorry, I didn't mean second son, second child is born in 19--
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969], okay.  And are you living in the same place that you, you know, in the Bronx [New York City, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yes, when our sec--when our son was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were living in the Bronx but only for a few months and then we bought a house in New Rochelle [New York] and moved up there and--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --it was quite an effort.  My close friend, that had been my maid of honor in my wedding, called and said the house next door to her was for sale and so we said, "Oh, we'll come up and look at it" and we just loved it and then it was a matter of cobbling together the money to put down for it 'cause Warren [HM Dr. Warren Goins] was still a resident.  Warren was a resident but he had two other part-time jobs to make money so he moonlighted a lot.  And we had saved some money and we borrowed some money from my aunt and uncle and we borrowed money from someone who had been a mentor and a financial supporter of Warren going to medical school, which we paid back fairly quickly but we borrowed money for the down payment and moved to New Rochelle.
Speaker 1: New Rochelle was a lovely, lovely--
Speaker 2: Oh, we had a wonderful old Tudor house and on a corner lot.  It was really lovely.
Speaker 1: And you were living next to your best friend?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: That you can't--
Speaker 2: That was great and then our, well Warren's best man, moved across the street.  So, it was really like old home week.  And these were people we'd known since we were fourteen.  So, it was really very nice.
Speaker 1: So what are their names?  Who's living next to you and who's living across the street?
Speaker 2: Next door to me was Joyce Dean and she was married to a doctor named Roberto Reid, so it was Joyce and Roberto Reid.  And across the street from us was Stuart Taylor and his wife, Yvonne Carey Taylor [ph.].
Speaker 1: And so what did Stuart do so, 'cause you have two doctors?
Speaker 2: Stuart was a Ph.D. and I think when he moved to New Rochelle, he was a postdoctoral fellow who ended up at Mayo Clinic in some sort of research--
Speaker 1: Research, okay.
Speaker 2: Capacity, yes.
Speaker 1: So this is, I mean you're, you're in your mid-twenties still, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, when we bought the house, it was, I'd say 1969.  Yes, I was twenty-seven.
Story_ID: 106118
Speaker 1: And, and so what is New Rochelle [New York] at that point in time?  How, what is the community like and who lives there and--
Speaker 2: It was an idyllic community in that it was very well-integrated, mainly professional and well-educated people but there was a big effort to keep the neighborhood well-integrated and to that effect I was on a housing committee and we tried to sell all the houses through the committee rather than through brokers because brokers would only want to bring black people there and we wanted to keep the neighborhood balanced.  There was a great public school right up the street, an elementary school, that we wanted to maintain as it was and so it was a real, kind of, granola-like community.  You know, it was, it was great, just, do you know what I mean?  It--I loved it.  It was really a wonderful area.
Speaker 1: It's almost like it was a planned community in some respects.
Speaker 2: In a way, but they were old houses.  Our house was built in 1929 and they were beautiful old Colonials and Tudors and it was really a nice area.
Speaker 1: And so you are, so can you describe your block?  I mean, the area around?  So you had a friend next door--
Speaker 2: A friend across the street.
Speaker 1: A friend across the street.
Speaker 2: Diagonally were Helene--no Joan and Charles Jurgen, another doctor.  Over here was, across the street on the other corner, was a Jewish family, he was a lawyer, she was a teacher.  It was, it was really a very pretty neighborhood, beautiful old trees and flowers, and a lot of activity in terms of parties and gatherings of kids, children and the adults.  So it was a very close-knit community.
Story_ID: 106119
Speaker 1: And I became very active in local politics.  I was a district leader for the Democratic Party and I was on some not-for-profit boards and so that was what I did with my time.
Speaker 2: So what non-profit boards were you on and--
Speaker 1: I was on the board of the Negro Ensemble Company and, in fact, we started a "Friends of NEC" up in Westchester [New York] to raise money for the organization and then I ultimately went on that board and at that time, there were a lot of, [HM] Douglas Turner Ward and a lot of very influential black actors and directors were involved.  And then there was a Wildcliff Museum which was a nature museum which I also was on the board of.  And, as I said, I did the district leader job so.
Speaker 2: So you got very, very early on involved in the arts?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: 'Cause, I mean, still a lot of times I find that people are getting involved a little later than when you are, you know, like--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --like maybe in their mid-thirties, forties, you know, so you're, you, you start very early, then?
Speaker 1: I did everything early, I think (laughter).  I think so.
Speaker 2: So the Negro Ensemble Company, at that point in time, are [HM] Ossie Davis and [HM] Ruby Dee, in the company?
Speaker 1: No they were not involved [Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee were members of the American Negro Theater].
Speaker 2: They were not involved?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: But were they living in--
Speaker 1: New Rochelle [New York].
Speaker 2: --New Rochelle at that point?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes they were.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  And who else--but Douglas Turner Ward is the Negro Ensemble.  I'm trying to think 'cause we interviewed quite a few--
Speaker 1: [HM] Robert [Hooks], I can't remember the name.
Speaker 2: So what state is the Negro Ensemble at that point and what is your role?  You're, you're doing a "Friends of" Group?
Speaker 1: Friends of, that we would have benefits for them to raise funds and then, as I said, I did go on the board of the theatre itself and it was on St. Mark's Place [St. Mark's Playhouse in New York City, New York] down in the East Village at that time and was really active.  It had a lot of plays, some of which actually moved to Broadway.  So, it was fun.  It was really very interesting.
Speaker 2: So who got you involved with that?
Speaker 1: You know, I don't remember how I got involved with that.  I really don't.
Speaker 2: But see-
Story_ID: 106120
Speaker 1: But we have to also, I think we need to also talk about the, the medical, you know, black medical doctors and their wives and the support of the African American community.  I mean that, you know, you had, there was status and privilege that went along.  Am I--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes--
Speaker 1: You're looking--
Speaker 2: --back in those days.
Speaker 1: In those days, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, no, no, you're right but just as an aside, a couple of years ago we went to a dear friend, Gayle and Charles Atkins' party for their 25th anniversary and Gayle was talking to the whole group about the fact that--and she was talking about Warren [HM Dr. Warren Goins], she said, you know, "He and his group used to be really the hotshots of the black community but now they are way down the totem pole compared to the hedge fund guys and the Wall Street investment bankers," so it was really very interesting.
Speaker 1: No, because then the black--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --I mean that was, it was the top of black society.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's true.
Speaker 1: I mean, you know, in many ways and so, and the fact that, you know, that's why I'm struck about the twenty-seven to be actively involved in, you know, support of the arts and things like that, I just, I think it seems young but I mean, you still have two children so, you know, I mean--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 106121
Speaker 1: So, so what, so your time is spent raising your children at this point?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And is there anything missing, do you find missing about your life?  I'm just surprised that you ended up going back to law school.
Speaker 2: Well, what I found--
Speaker 1: And I know that's later.  I mean--
Speaker 2: It is but--well I was twenty-seven when we moved to New Rochelle [New York] and I had a new baby.  I think Jeff might have been four months old when we moved, so I was quite busy with two little kids at the time but as time went on and one went off to nursery school and gave me a little more free time and by then we could afford a little more in the way of babysitters and stuff like that, and I realized that volunteer work was just not fulfilling enough and back then, as opposed to now, no one gave you real responsibility if you were a volunteer and I guess the concern was you could walk away and not fulfill your responsibility and I just felt that life wasn't interesting enough for me with what I was doing and there's only so much tennis you can play and get-togethers with friends, so I started to think that I wanted to have a career and Warren and I talked about it and I said, "I think I'm going to go to social work school" and I said, "because I'm very interested in various social issues and helping people and I think I'll do social work school."  There's this new program, I think Fordham [University in New York City, New York] was offering it where you could get your master's in three years instead of two.  So I said, "So I could go part-time and get a social work degree."  And Warren said, "Well, I don't think you should do that.  He said, I work with social workers every day in my medical practice and they do God's work but they beat their heads against a wall," and he said, "You always said that if you were going to have a career you would be a lawyer, so why don't you go to law school?"  I said, "Oh that would be much, too much, of a burden on the family.  I don't think I could do it" and he said, "Of course you can.  That's what--if you really are interested in having a career, you ought to think about that."  I was so nervous going to take the LSAT's [Law School Admission Test] that he had to drive me because I didn't think I could drive myself.  I was so frightened.  I've been out of school ten years and, well nine years at the time I was taking the LSAT's, but anyway, I took the LSAT's and applied to law school for full-time and he was very encouraging and said, "You know, my parents will help us and I'll change my hours at the office so that I can be at home more during the week and maybe work on Saturdays when you're at home."  So that's what we did.  And I went off to law school.
Speaker 1: That's pretty forward-thinking at that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'll tell you, it was really forward-thinking and people were shocked.  At that time, I was on the board of Rye Country Day School [Rye New York] where our kids went to school.
Speaker 1: So they went to, they went to a private school then?  Was Rye--
Speaker 2: They had gone while I was at home, they went to public school, my daughter did.
Speaker 1: So they're at, they're--your--
Speaker 2: They were at the local elementary school.
Speaker 1: Elementary school.
Speaker 2: And then when I, I'm trying to think--
Speaker 1: So your daughter--
Speaker 2: Our daughter had just finished second grade, was supposed to start third grade when I went off to law school.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your son was--
Speaker 2: Our son was in nursery school.
Speaker 1: Nursery school.
Speaker 2: So he was, he was four and she was seven and I--but by then Warren was a partner in his medical group so we could hire somebody to come and work full-time for us during the week and she lived in with us and was wonderful.  I am blessed with having had two great women, one for ten years and one for twelve years that worked with us and were like family that helped with our kids.
Story_ID: 106122
Speaker 1: But, anyway, I went off to law school [Columbia Law School in New York City, New York], but I went off to law school to be a civil rights or a poverty lawyer and because that was what I knew from working in New Rochelle [New York], you know, doing different things with--
Speaker 2: Because you were involved politically?  I think we need to--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --I think we need to explore that a little bit because, you know, I went directly to the Negro Ensemble Theatre but I didn't let you explore.  You said you got involved in Democratic politics--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --and so, I wanted to--so explain what that was and what were the issues that you were dealing with and--
Speaker 1: New Rochelle was an interesting community in that it was on the north end of New Rochelle, a very well-to-do community but it's a large city.  I think at that time it had eighty thousand people and there was a very large housing project and a lot of poor people in New Rochelle who needed all sorts of social services and I don't think New Rochelle was delivering particularly well on those services.  Moreover, New Rochelle resisted having companies and stores, big stores, come in to the community and they all went to White Plains [New York] and White Plains prospered and New Rochelle's downtown just became a wasteland.  And so there were a lot of issues at the time that I was involved with and as a district leader, which is just a local, political person in the Democratic party.
Speaker 2: Okay, and so who was the mayor of New Rochelle and who were the council people?  Do you remember their--
Speaker 1: (shaking head no)
Speaker 2: Okay, but you got involved then?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, and that made you interested in social issues?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That's why the focus--
Speaker 1: Well, I was always interested in social issues and Warren [HM Dr. Warren Goins] practiced medicine in Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York] so he experienced first-hand the social problems and issues with poor and working class people and so I was very aware of them.
Story_ID: 106123
Speaker 1: So, what do your friends think when you're going off to law school [Columbia Law School in New York City, New York], though, and others?
Speaker 2: They couldn't believe it.  First of all, this was consciousness-raising time in New Rochelle [New York] and United States, but among our group in New Rochelle, right in our community, the women were starting, starting in maybe '71 [1971], I went to law school in '73 [1973], from '71 [1971] on, there was even--there were consciousness-raising group meetings where the women would get together and moan and complain about their plight and I never felt my consciousness needed raising and I didn't really participate in those meetings but I had friends who did and, you know, a lot of the attitudes were "If it weren't for my husband, you know, I would be in some very senior executive role somewhere and, but my husband is keeping me down."  That was the, that was a lot of the thought in those days and so when I picked up and went to law school, I mean, people were very surprised and some critical.  You know, you're deserting your family, you're going off, you'll have to be away so much, which wasn't the case, but anyway it was surprising.
Speaker 1: Right, 'cause you have a young, you had young children.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well they were four and seven--
Speaker 1: Seven, right.
Speaker 2: --when I went off to school.
Speaker 1: So were, who was more critical?  Were--what--was there a difference in reaction between the white and black, you know, your white and black friends?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: There wasn't?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  And I had some people who were so supportive and so encouraging.  Eleanor Holmes Norton for one, she and her ex-husband were our friends and Conrad Harper was a good friend and they were--Conrad was the--
Speaker 1: (unclear) that name.
Speaker 2: He was partner at Simpson Thatcher [& Bartlett LLP].  He was president of the New York City Bar Association at one point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was the legal adviser to the State Department under [President Bill] Clinton.  So he's had a lot of interesting roles but they were really encouraging and helpful.  So I had some who were very encouraging and others who said, "Oh, that just sounds crazy, how could you do that?"
Speaker 1: So, so how does your, so you obviously pass the LSAT?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Because you were saying you were nervous about that but you passed and then you're thinking that you want to go into poverty law or--now had you been involved at all in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund?
Speaker 2: None of those things, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 106124
Speaker 1: So you go off and what is the, the, both the racial and female/male ratios in law school at the time?
Speaker 2: At Columbia [Law School in New York City, New York], my first year, there was a decent number of African American students but not large.  I mean, I can't remember if my class--I don't even remember how large my class was but there might have been 15 or 20 blacks in the class, mainly men, and there weren't that many women in the school and there were virtually no older people.  So it was--I was a minority in many ways.  And I, I didn't get to know my classmates.  I had too much else on my plate.  For one thing, I drove to school every day from New Rochelle [New York] because getting to Columbia from Westchester is not that easy.  I would have had to take a train and then some buses and so I drove but there were no garages around Columbia at the time and so the first year I had to get to school, park, go to class, come out and then double park while the police went up for the alternate side of the street parking and I would eat lunch and read in the car for a couple of hours and then go back, and then I could move the car back across into a parking space on the street and go back into school.  So, I did that for one year.  So you could imagine I didn't know my classmates very well and then after that, for my second and third year, we were very fortunate--we were on the board at that time, a Boys & Girls Harbor, and one of our fellow board members was very involved at the Cathedral of Saint John the Divine [New York City, New York], he got me a parking space on the Cathedral's campus and so I was able to park and I could spend the day at class and go back and just get my car and go home.  But I really didn't get to know many people.  Some of the older women, the few of them that were there in my class, I got to know well but other than that, there wasn't any social life attached to school.
Speaker 1: What about the classes, though?  Because the first year can be somewhat daunting?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was so hard for me.  I mean, I had barely read anything but a magazine for ten years and to get to law school, I was really, really challenged and my first semester I did not do particularly well.  I didn't do well, period.  I was a very average student but then I got the hang of it and I ended up doing pretty well.
Speaker 1: So who are you, who are you discussing things with if you, you know, you're, you've got your family life and you're studying in your car, and you're driving back and forth?  Who are you, like a lot of times it helps to have study groups and things?
Speaker 2: No study group, ever.  Never had one, never even thought of having one, never.
Speaker 1: So, so once you, so, but you're, but Warren [HM Dr. Warren Goins] is being supportive this whole time?
Speaker 2: Oh, Warren was incredible, and his parents [Ernestine Goins and Jepther Goins] were incredible.  Warren changed his hours so that he was home all day on Tuesdays and then worked Saturdays instead and that way when it came time for braces to be adjusted at the orthodontist or there was a school play, he could take the time off to go to that and that way I could go to school and his parents would come at the drop of the hat and spend the weekend and just take over if I was studying for exams or something like that.  So, they were wonderful.
Speaker 1: So, it was like a modern day-- I mean, they were--everybody was supportive because--
Speaker 2: Oh, and I was terrified to tell my mother-in-law that I was going to go to law school.  She had been a homemaker her whole life and I don't even think she knew many people, women who worked, and when I told her I was going to law school, I was really afraid that she was going to be furious that I was abandoning my family and I was shocked.  She said, "If I had--if I were your age or had to do it over again, I'd do the same thing."  And she and dad were up there all the time helping with the kids, and summers even.  We had a house in Sag Harbor [New York], they would go out and spend a month with the kids and we would come on weekends.  So they were always right there for us, wonderful.
Speaker 1: So she was then, what she was feeling the same way that, not the same way, but had similar sentiments about desires?  Other desires?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  I'm not sure because she was a very reclusive person, not at all social, really only close to her sisters but not other people so I'm not sure she would have been comfortable out in the world.
Speaker 1: Right, but--
Speaker 2: But she was very supportive of me.
Speaker 1: That's, that's really--
Speaker 2: It was amazing--
Speaker 1: Amazing.
Speaker 2: --because I was really scared to tell her.
Speaker 1: Okay, I mean we're talking about the early, you know, the 1960s [sic, early 1970s].  I mean women are burning their bras by this time.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, there's women's rights coming into being but still, you know, people have their ideas about what is proper and what's not proper, you know.
Speaker 2: That's true, and I think that the African American community is slower to accept new ways.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: At least traditionally, I think, that's been the case.
Speaker 1: That was--that has been the case.  I mean, still, so you--and three years is a long time.
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: I mean, it's a long time.
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 106125
Speaker 1: So I'm gonna-- so, tell me what you do during the summers.
Speaker 2: Okay, my first summer after law school [Columbia Law School in New York City, New York], I stayed at home with the family.  Then that fall, the beginning of my second year, I interviewed on campus for a summer internship at one of the Wall Street law firms and I interviewed--I signed up for interviews at a number of them.  Some actually said, "oh, you're too old, you know, how could you--" and I said, "Well, I'm 31, I thought I had a few good years left" but they had never had the experience of having a new summer clerk or a new associate come in at such an advanced age.  But I did get offers from three firms to come as a summer intern and I choose Proskauer, Rose [Proskauer, Rose, Goetz & Mendelsohn, now Proskauer Rose LLP] and so that was what I did my second summer.  And then at the end of my internship there, they invited me to return as an associate upon graduation.  So, after taking the Bar exam, that third year, the summer after the third year [1976], I returned to Proskauer.
Speaker 1: So what are, what is the work that you did that summer and how large a firm are they?  And--
Speaker 2: They're a very large firm with offices in Europe and in California and Washington [D.C.].  They're one of the oldest and largest predominantly Jewish law firms like Paul, Weiss [Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison].  They'd been around since the days when the "A" students at Harvard Law [School in Cambridge, Massachusetts] couldn't get a job if they were Jewish, so they created their own firm.  They had a big practice, a labor practice, representing hospitals and medical groups, not on the plaintiffs side but on the defendants side and a big corporate department and a big tax department, not tax litigation but tax planning, also a large litigation department.  They represented the NBA [National Basketball Association] and they--David Stern was there, who is now head of the NBA and I knew David and I ended up doing international tax law.  I went to law school to be a poverty law person, a civil rights person and I got to law school and the courses I hated were constitutional law, all the things where I just felt that I was floating around with nothing to grab onto and what did I like?  Corporations, tax, all those courses.  So, that's what I ended up doing.
Speaker 1: You know, that's surprising even in terms of your description that you love the literature, and you know, and Latin, and you know, didn't like math or science and you end up--
Speaker 2: But, tax law is not about numbers and calculations and that kind of thing.  Tax law is like finding loopholes, looking for pieces of a puzzle and putting them together to plan how to structure an acquisition or a deal and it's really, it's supposedly the most intellectual area of the law, and never get a tax lawyer to do your tax return, or something like that, it's just not the same as accounting or economics.  I had taken economics at Barnard [College in New York City, New York] and didn't like it at all but I loved tax law.
Story_ID: 106126
Speaker 1: So you practiced-- so what part of law firms, this is 197-, oh, no, law firms are aggressive places still and, I mean--
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-six [1976] I started.
Speaker 1: No this is, yeah, this is a different time period so they're aggressive and so how are you--how old are your children?  They're--
Speaker 2: Ten and seven.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, they were aggressive places and when I was there I would take the train in from New Rochelle [New York] and I would be in the office [Proskauer, Rose, Goetz & Mendelsohn, now Proskauer Rose LLP] by eight in the morning.  Now lawyers generally drift in at nine thirty or so.  So that it would be me and the old senior partners who are like I am today, you wake up very early in the morning and so you go to work.  And so I would get brownie points because I was one of the only young lawyers that were there and I, as I said before, have always made up for lack of intellect by hard work and good organizational skills, which I really do have.  And so all during my work during the week, I would plan what I had to take home to do at home or on weekends what I had to do and I would make copies of cases and do everything so that I could work at home so that I would try to get home--I try to leave the office by six-thirty so that I could get home and check homework and oversee baths and bed and then Warren [HM Dr. Warren Goins] and I would have dinner like at nine o'clock at night.
Speaker 1: So you would get there, you said again, at what time?
Speaker 2: By eight in the morning.
Speaker 1: Eight in the morning.
Speaker 2: I was there, yes.
Speaker 1: Right, because usually, especially in New York [New York City, New York] law firms--
Speaker 2: Ah, they come at nine-thirty.
Speaker 1: They're getting there at nine-thirty to do that, right, right.
Speaker 2: Yes, but then they stay at night.
Speaker 1: Till longer.
Speaker 2: And I didn't want to do that.
Speaker 1: And the firm was fine with that?
Speaker 2: Yes, because my billing hours were very good.
Speaker 1: So how many, how many women are at Proskauer when you joined?
Speaker 2: I think there were two partners, two women partners, and there were maybe three or four of us in the, in my year, my first year associates, so they were pretty aggressive.
Speaker 1: That's very aggressive.
Speaker 2: Pretty progressive, I should say.
Speaker 1: That's very progressive.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I'm coming out of law school in 1980 and, oh never mind, and there was still a lot to be desired.
Speaker 2: Well there still is today--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you can, but, and certainly in terms of race diversification.
Speaker 1: Right, that's, oh it's--
Speaker 2: It's terrible.
Speaker 1: It's horrible and that's not changed too much.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So you, you work there for six years?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Is that right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was there for six years.  So tell me what else, I mean but you don't really--do you have time to do much of anything else besides work and--you can't.
Speaker 1: No, I did not.
Speaker 2: I mean, that's not even practicable.
Speaker 1: No, I was not involved in any kinds of not-for-profits or--
Speaker 2: Well, it's not practical.
Speaker 1: --you know, I never had lunch with a friend.  I mean it was--
Speaker 2: It's not practical.
Speaker 1: No, I just--I worked, I came home and that was it.
Story_ID: 106127
Speaker 1: So you are, you're, so what do you like--  I mean, this is something you've worked really hard to make happen and you are there [Proskauer, Rose, Goetz & Mendelsohn, now Proskauer Rose LLP] for six years so you're really an associate still?
Speaker 2: Yes, I am.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I did a lot of work initially for a tax shelter company [Integrated Resources, Inc.] that was Proskauer's largest client at the time and they--the client was really wonderful because I would do all this research for ways, again, legal loopholes to save money and provide tax shelters for individuals, and the firm and the client were very nice because they would allow me to come to the meetings with the client where they would discuss the work and they would make a big deal about, we're not charging you for her but we want her to be here to hear the discussion, and that was a real benefit because so often lawyers, the young associates do the work and haven't got a clue how it plays out in dealing with the client.  So that was great.  And I got to know this client and then I wasn't too keen on doing any more work for that client 'cause it was getting to be boring, it was repetitive.  And so the firm agreed that I could just do two deals a year of their sale leasebacks and that way I kept my hand in but I wasn't overwhelmed with it 'cause I was more interested in the international tax work.  And so that's what I did and I ended up with a major company in Switzerland that was a client and a company in South Africa that was a client and I ended up spending a lot of time in London [England] and in Zurich [Switzerland] for that client and so that was fascinating to do that, to try to figure out how U.S. tax law and Swiss or British tax law would mesh to do what we wanted to accomplish for the company.  It was really, it was a great experience and I got to know the Swiss client's families, wife and daughters, because they came to college in the United States and in Switzerland, keep in mind, in some of the cantons of Switzerland, the women still didn't have the vote when I was going over there, and so I was a real rare bird and the client liked the idea of his daughters getting to know me to see what life could be like outside of Switzerland.  So I did that and just had a great experience working at Proskauer but the more I was doing tax law, the more I was interested in the business side.  In other words, if a client said, "I want to acquire this company, what's the best structure?  Should we drop it down as a subsidiary or should it be a sister company or should we merge the companies?  What would be best from a tax perspective?"  That was my job to figure out.  I wanted to know why they want to buy the company.  What was appealing about that company and a sort of a broader view and so I--but I assumed I'd never get to find out those answers because I was pretty sure I'd be a partner at the firm.  It was eight years to partnership and I had two more to go and the client that I had done the tax shelter work with, asked me to come over as assistant to the president in a business role.  That was a New York Stock Exchange listed company and with young, very smart people, among the smartest people I've ever worked with, and so I was kind of afraid to make the change.  I had two years left, I thought I had a good shot at being a partner, I was getting all the right vibes from people, although you're never positive, and meanwhile at thirty-nine years old, did I want to make a career change?  And the firm was very nice.  "They said you can go over for a year and if you are not happy there, you can come back to Proskauer and we'll credit you the year."  And that was in their best interest because it was their largest client.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: But it also gave me a feeling that I could go and try it and I loved it.  Three months later I said, "I'll never practice law again."  This was just great.
Speaker 1: Wow, do you know, I mean, I'm just listening to this and I know people in law school have given their eye teeth, you know, to have this, this success in being able to, you know, to do that because, one, international tax was very hot at that time.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And became even hotter--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, as you had more, you know, even merger and acquisition, you know, work happening.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was really, it was very exciting.
Story_ID: 106128
Speaker 1: So I had a, I really had a wonderful run [at Proskauer, Rose, Goetz & Mendelsohn, now Proskauer Rose LLP] and I moved over to Integrated Resources [Inc.], this company, that was the tax shelter company--
Speaker 2: So who was the president of the company?
Speaker 1: Arthur Goldberg was his name.
Speaker 2: And you--
Speaker 1: Not the Supreme Court Justice but Arthur Goldberg and my job at--he had never had an assistant to the president before, so we were sort of creating the job but he had this flat management structure where it was Arthur and, I don't know, twelve or more people reporting directly to him, very poor structure.  And so he immediately gave me responsibility for just sort of administrative stuff like Human Resources, PR [public relations], communications, facilities management, those people immediately started reporting to me and then I was involved with anything that was new.  And they had just bought an insurance company so I was the one that was charged with trying to get it integrated into the parent company.  And I, I, I just had great experiences.  We had bought a company that sold tax shelters that are still very prevalent, 457 shelters for teachers and other public institution employees, where they could put away a portion of their money, tax exempt, or tax deferred, and we bought this company in California and we were hearing that there were rumors that things weren't going right and people were kind of slippery.  So I was put on a plane to go out there and figure out what was going on and I mean, I hadn't a clue how to approach this but I figured out that one of the people running the company was bad and had to be fired and the other one was salvageable and remains a friend today even though I fired his old partner.  But anyway, it was an exciting time.
Speaker 2: So you found you were very good at management then?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm good with people.  I don't mean to sound boastful, but I am good at managing people.
Speaker 2: 'Cause, you know, training for lawyers is not very good training for--
Speaker 1: No, no, it definitely isn't, no (laughter).
Speaker 2: Because the whole structure--
Speaker 1: Doctors the same.  I mean, they-- very narrow focus--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and, you know, in the business world you're looked at sort of from a 360 perspective and you have to get on and manage people.  You have to manage your bosses in a way.  You have to manage the people that report to you and you have to manage your relationships with your peers.  Lawyers really, it's just who's ahead of them--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --and that's it.
Speaker 2: And it's billable hours.
Speaker 1: And it's billable hours, that's, yes.
Speaker 2: It's literally, that's the (unclear).
Speaker 1: I learned when I was at the law firm that just knowing people's names, I mean, I had a guy in the mailroom who was an elderly black man, missing some teeth, Ronnie, and he was just great and I could ask him to do anything for me and he would because, you know, we were, we were office buddies and too many of the lawyers wouldn't speak to people or wouldn't acknowledge them unless they were at least their peers.  It was, I learned a lot about human nature.  But anyway, yes.
Speaker 2: So you, you went over and you did that, so you were his assistant but then you, you were his assistant--
Speaker 1: For only part of the time and then we created a company, a new company, that was a subsidiary, Integrated Resources International, and I was charged with building that company to do business in other, in other countries, to take us international.  And the reason we did that was that the insurance company we acquired had a license for insurance in Hong Kong and we had a broker who was with us who had grown up in Hong Kong and was, actually he was Korean but he had grown up in Hong Kong, and he was willing to go over there and build the business for us and he reported to me.  And then I had broker-dealer relationships to sell some of our products through a Swiss and a German broker-dealer and so I did business with them.  So I would go back and forth.  It was very interesting.
Speaker 2: And you did that how, from what, you did that from 198--
Speaker 1: Six [1986] to '89 [1989].  What, no, no--
Speaker 2: No, '82 [1982] you joined Integrated Resources.
Speaker 1: Yes, but then I left there at the end of '89 [1989] and it was only the last two years, from '87 [1987] or '86 [1986] to '89 [1989] that I was no longer assistant to the president, I was head of this subsidiary.
Speaker 2: I see.
Story_ID: 106129
Speaker 1: And the subsidiary [Integrated Resources International], how large did it grow to be?
Speaker 2: Not very large because in 1986, the tax laws changed here in this country.
Speaker 1: That was the big tax law change [Tax Reform Act of 1986].
Speaker 2: You bet and all of our tax shelters, which had passed muster with the IRS [Internal Revenue Service] because we had found legal loopholes for people, that changed and the law for the first time was made retroactive so that people who had bought our tax shelters and anticipated losses projected over the next several years, no longer had those losses.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's catastrophic.
Speaker 2: So it was really bad and so we muddled along for a couple of more years and then at the end of '89 [1989], filed bankruptcy, actually the beginning of '90 [1990], along with Drexel Burnham [Lambert], which had been our major financial supporter.
Speaker 1: You're sayi--
Speaker 2: So, so I didn't get much time to build the company.
Speaker 1: I see, but what, was that the case also in Integrated Resources [Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Yes, it--
Speaker 1: Because it was all based on these--
Speaker 2: Tax shelters.
Speaker 1: --tax shelters.
Speaker 2: Its, its traditional business was all tax shelter.  When I joined, they were just starting to try to diversify into other products like insurance and annuities and asset management, but until then, it was real estate and energy sale leasebacks, tax shelters.
Speaker 1: That's shocking that they would make it retroactive.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That I find sort of amazing.  I think a friend of mine's husband worked on that legislation, you know, in Congress 'cause I remember he was, you know, doing--
Speaker 2: It was a big deal, certainly for us, because it was really the beginning of the end and we struggled along a couple of more years but--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --at the end of '89 [1989], I left Integrated and it filed its bankruptcy papers a few weeks later.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.
Story_ID: 106130
Speaker 1: So what are you thinking?  Now that--those are very--there's a lot you were doing during this whole period of time?  I mean, 'cause you're talking about you were age thirty-four, I think, maybe thirty-four?
Speaker 2: When I finished law school?
Speaker 1: When you finished law school--
Speaker 2: Yes, 34.
Speaker 1: --got hired and then you're going--
Speaker 2: At Proskauer [Proskauer, Rose, Goetz & Mendelsohn, now Proskauer Rose LLP] I was 3- [34] I was turning 40 when I went to Integrated [Resources, Inc.] --
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --from Proskauer.
Speaker 1: That's right, and so by the time you leave, you're about forty-eight, really?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So, so that's a significant time period for, you know, a career and you are--but you're not, this, you don't really, you still don't have the time to really be involved in any activities?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You're, this is totally career?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Are you meeting other females who are doing well in corporate America during this time 'cause--
Speaker 2: Very few, very few, and most of my work was outside the United States or with non-U.S. people and so there were even fewer women there.  What I liked about international work though, both at Proskauer and at Integrated, was that when I left the U.S., I didn't have people asking me questions that they would ask me here, such as, "How much do you credit affirmative action with your position today?"  I mean, that was the kind of question you get here whereas in other countries, the fact that I was a woman was really strange for them but their attitude was, well, if they're crazy enough to send her over here and she's competent, we will deal with her.  But as I said before, Switzerland in many cantons had no vote for women when I was over there meeting with bank presidents and with clients and stuff.
Speaker 1: Wait, I want to understand something.  You're saying, in 19--there was no vote for women?
Speaker 2: In certain cantons, which are the equivalent of states or provinces--
Speaker 1: Women could not vote?
Speaker 2: No, they could not vote in the 1970s, in Switzerland, not in every canton of Switzerland.
Speaker 1: No, no, I understand.
Speaker 2: But some, yes.
Speaker 1: Wow, so are you, I-- you know what I just find amazing about your story because this is something that, you know, would be at another instance promoted on the cover of Black Enterprise [magazine] is really groundbreaking in some respects but, okay.  So, the other-- I need to ask one other thing.  I'm asking a lot of things out of order but you had said it wasn't until you were age twenty-five that you, you know, that people were saying, you know that people, you were in places where people didn't know you were black but they were saying things, you know, I thought you said, so what was that instance because you never--
Speaker 2: Well, when I was at Proskauer and I remember once on a trip to London [England] on behalf of a client, meeting with some British lawyers, and, I'm trying to think if it was at Proskauer, anyway, British lawyers made some negative remarks about black people and I took two approaches to that kind of thing.  If I was there to sell my product, I just zipped my lip and just sat there and took it.  If I was in a situation where I wasn't trying to promote my company or my product, I might say to them, "Well, you know you might pause here because I am black and so you might not want to continue this story."  But in many instances, I didn't say anything because I wasn't there to convert them or change their racial attitudes.  I was there to do business.
Story_ID: 106131
Speaker 1: So your experience, both at the law firm [Proskauer, Rose, Goetz & Mendelsohn, now Proskauer Rose LLP], and with this new company [Integrated Resources International], were quite positive?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: And, but because a lot of times people would have had the opposite, you know, situation because you were sort of in the heart of business, you know the--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --I mean tax, tax shelters, that's sort of the heart of a lot of business deals and, you know, more sophisticated business dealings.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Interesting.  Okay, different story.  Okay, but there was never, I mean, but while you're doing business, you're not experiencing people degrading you because you're a woman or, I mean, 'cause you don't--
Speaker 2: Oh sure, there were times.  You know, I can remember--
Speaker 1: 'Cause you're not talking about that, okay.
Speaker 2: Well, I could remember back in those days, the glorious '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s] when you traveled for a financial services company you traveled first class and so I can remember being in a first class cabin, I have no idea where I was going at the time, but I remember someone, another passenger, asking me to help with his suitcase and I was not cool about it, "I am not a flight attendant," I mean I really got on my high horse when all I should have said was, you know "I can't help you" or something like that but I had my back up because he just assumed I was a flight attendant and I had experiences of going, for example, to Japan and in order to go for possible business dealings in Japan with a couple of other executives from the company, the investment banking company that was organizing our trip had to send all kinds of information about me to the Japanese company because otherwise they would have assumed I was a tea lady and they wanted to prepare them that I was to sit at the table and to be a part of the business discussions.  And I got over there and that was quite an experience.  It was an actually pretty progressive company.  Some of the executives had been educated in the United States so they were not totally reactionary but at the end of the meeting one of them said to me, "You know Mrs. Goins, that all of our tea ladies normally don't like working the boardroom but in your instance, they all wanted to be in the boardroom to look at you."  And so, that was a big deal for him to say that to me but I had quite a few experiences as a woman where another instance, I met with the president and general counsel of Rothschild Bank in Zurich [Switzerland], along with my Swiss client, and the general counsel said to me, "Did he introduce you as Mrs. Goins?"  And I said, "Yes."  And he said, "Oh where is your husband?"  I mean, this is at eight o'clock in the morning or nine o'clock in the morning in a Swiss bank and I looked at my watch and I said, "Well by now he's in his office back in New York."  But, you know, there were lots of times that that happened but my attitude has always been to just take it lightly other than that time with the flight attendant question.  You know, I've always encouraged other women, if somebody tells you you have a pretty dress on, don't go and report them to Human Resources that they have said something offensive to you.  Try to have a sense of humor about things and that's what I've tried to do.
Story_ID: 106132
Speaker 1: Now did you, was, what was the, what were your challenges during this period because, now how are the, I know you have care at home with the kids, but is your husband [HM Dr. Warren Goins] thinking, now I'm, "I've said you could go to law school, but I mean, this is a little bit much."
Speaker 2: No (laughter), I never had that sense, no, and certainly not from him.  I never had that.  My--he tells a funny story about our daughter on one of my first business trips, she might have been 12 or 13 at the time, and I don't even know where I was going but I was going to be away and Warren said he was lying on his bed and she comes in and says, "Dad, if mom doesn't come back, don't think you can bring any other woman here to be my mother" or some such thing like that.  It was really--he said, "Where did she get that?"  I'm lying there on the bed reading a book and this is what she comes in and says.  But no, I, I had challenges, yes--
Speaker 1: What were your challenges?
Speaker 2: My challenges were, I think throughout my career I felt that I didn't get as much recognition and certainly didn't get as much pay as some of the men who were my peers and whom I didn't think did as much work or as good work as I did.  That was always a challenge and Warren would bring me down to earth and say, "Stop complaining, you make lots of money and you do well", you know, he was always grounding, grounding me.
Story_ID: 106133
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, so tax shelters go away?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, but you--
Speaker 2: Tried to diversify but it was a little too late--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --we hadn't done it in time.
Speaker 1: So how did that feel because you had really, I mean, it's almost, even though they were an established company [Integrated Resources, Inc.] with the new [Integrated Resources International], it's almost like your own company or start-up?
Speaker 2: Oh, I felt very close to the company and it was, it was devastating but on the other hand a fascinating experience because I had been with the company from 1982.  So from '82 [1982] to '86 [1986], the company was on this trajectory that was just forging ahead, doing very well, and then suddenly the tax shelter laws changed and things sort of tapered off and started to go downhill and then in '89 [1989] when we weren't able to meet an obligation to pay a note to Drexel [Drexel Burnham Lambert], and Drexel sort of pulled the plug on us, that very next day, the car service that the company used, cancelled our account.  I mean, it was like just a, a domino effect.  You know, you could be riding high and then the crash occurs and everything just starts to deteriorate quickly.  That was a very interesting experience and we had just bought a co-op here in this building and suddenly I don't have a job, or it looks like I'm not going to have a job, actually it was like six months later I left the company, but I can remember the interview with the co-op board here with, well, you know, "What's happening with your company?"  And, you know, I was very confident, "That's all right, I probably, it will close, but I will get another job."  And so we got in anyway, to the building, but it was quite an experience.
Story_ID: 106134
Speaker 1: So, when do you [Goins and HM Dr. Warren Goins] move?  Do you move from New Rochelle [New York] here [Manhattan, New York City, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: We moved from New Rochelle here in 1989, 1989.
Speaker 1: So what, what makes you decide to do that, you're, 'cause you're--
Speaker 2: Our kids are, our son was still in college, but our daughter [Hilary Van Kleek] had finished.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She finished college in '87 [1987].
Speaker 1: Now where did she go?
Speaker 2: Middlebury [College in Middlebury, Vermont].
Speaker 1: Okay, that's right.
Speaker 2: She went to Middlebury and Jeff was at Dartmouth [College in Hanover, New Hampshire] and we decided that we would like to try living in the city, where we wouldn't have to commute, where we could have more of a social life during the week and so we bought an apartment, a smaller apartment in this building but we kept our house in New Rochelle and--
Speaker 1: You would go there on weekends?
Speaker 2: No, no, but our son was still there and our daughter and her fiance moved into the house.  So, our daughter is like us.  She has known her husband since eighth grade and they started dating at the end of high school and then got married seven years later but were together the whole time.  And so they've been married for twenty-three years.  So we, both my daughter and I, started very early with our spouses.
Speaker 1: That's nice.
Speaker 2: So, anyway, they moved into the house and our son would either come and stay here or stay at the house in New Rochelle.  And then our daughter and her husband bought the house from us.  And so we went up and we would see our grandchildren in the same bedrooms that our kids had been in when we were raising them.
Speaker 1: So do they still live in the house?
Speaker 2: They just moved five years ago but they were there for a long time.
Speaker 1: Wow, that's a long history with--
Speaker 2: One house, that's right.
Speaker 1: --with the house in the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: That's nice.
Speaker 2: Oh, it's lovely.  It was really nice.
Story_ID: 106135
Speaker 1: So now you, then what happens at that point?  So, well, you know, (unclear) talk about the co-op in a minute because that's New York life in many ways--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and who you, who gets into what buildings and being interviewed--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --especially--
Speaker 2: That's quite something, especially for a black couple.  Do you want to do that now?
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: We saw this apartment advertised in the New York Times just as an individual ad without a broker and we came, I came and saw it and really liked it but I said, "It's the first apartment I'm seeing, I need to see others."  So we engaged a broker and went around and saw a whole bunch of apartments.  We saw one we liked on 70th Street, just off 5th, right across from the Frick [Collection] and said to the broker, "We're gonna to make an offer" and we had just been to see the apartment that day, she called and placed the offer and within an hour she called back and they said, "Oh, the apartment's been taken."  And we knew that it was color that was the issue.  And so we saw a lot of apartments but kept gravitating back to this building and we were fortunate in that the couple who owned the apartment said, "Well, there are no black people in the building but that shouldn't be an issue.  We're willing to accept your offer and, you know, you can get your package ready to submit to the board" and we really had no problem, no problem, but this building was focused more on financial health of the owners and my husband [HM Dr. Warren Goins] ended up being on the board here for quite a while and the board is just very strict about having enough capital so that if an assessment is made or something like that, you can pay that money.  And the building is very strict.  I mean, I cannot even have houseguests stay here if I am not here other than direct relatives, parents and children.  So if a friend comes into town and we might be at our house in Sag Harbor [New York], the friend can't stay here.  So, they don't want anything that smells like a corporate apartment where the key is passed around.  It's a great building but that's--there are very strict rules.  No subletting.  We, if we wanted to go away for a year, the apartment would have to just stay empty.  So, so that's--and we moved two years after we moved into the building, we moved into this apartment, which is bigger.
Speaker 1: I see.  So, what were you looking for when you moved?  You know, I mean, what were you wanting to have and what side of towns were you looking at and--
Speaker 2: We only looked on the East Side and wanted something that we could easily walk to a lot of places and Warren was not interested in, for example, the Upper West Side, which has great apartments but twenty-three years ago when we were looking was quite a mixed bag in terms of neighborhoods and Warren felt that he is in Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York] all day and he wanted a place that was quite safe and clean and so we were really looking at Pre-War buildings.  We wanted a building that has a fireplace and that sort of thing.  So that was what we were looking for.
Speaker 1: So Pre-War buildings, pre--
Speaker 2: Pre-World War II.
Speaker 1: Two, I see.
Speaker 2: Yes, and Pre-War buildings have certain features like beamed ceilings and fireplaces and very thick plaster walls and moldings.  So they're different from the post-war and modern buildings and, as a result, things like the electricity don't work as well unless you just gut the apartment and completely rewire it.  And your bathrooms and kitchens have to be upgraded because in some instances they're still the way they were 50 or 60 years ago.  And they have what are called, maid's rooms off the kitchen, ours is now an office but they were, they were constructed for a different era.
Story_ID: 106136
Speaker 1: Now, you know, the other thing while we're on places before we get to Prudential [Securities], Sag Harbor [New York], you mention, so when did you buy the place in Sag Harbor and then that's where you're going for all kinds of holidays, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well let's start with the fact that Warren [HM Dr. Warren Goins] took me to Sag Harbor when I was sixteen for the first time.  It was a big deal because we were going out to visit the--our friend that was best man in our wedding [Stuart Taylor], ultimately, and his parents had a house out there and so my mother [Charlotte Wilson] had to speak to Stuart's mother to make sure it was okay for me.  And she said, "Don't worry, she'll be in the bedroom with Stuart's sister" and everything was fine.  And so we went out there for the first time when I was sixteen and after we got married, we would go out and visit friends and stay with them and I guess when our kids were one and four, we rented for a month for the first time and we actually rented from this friend who I had visited when I stayed in the room with his sister when I was sixteen, we rented his house.  By then, he was over at Mayo Clinic so he wasn't using the place.  And we would rent, we rented there for ten years and then in 1980, we bought land and built a house, right on the beach, in Sag Harbor, and it's a wonderful community.  Our area is still predominantly African American, although that's changing as the prices of the houses go up so much, oh out in the Hamptons, but it's a great community.  And we started going there and renting because our kids were in school that was predominantly white, I mean, like overwhelmingly white, and--
Speaker 1: You wanted them to have the experience.
Speaker 2: The people of color that they would see were the staff at their friends' homes and so we wanted them to be in a community where everyone was just like them and they weren't anything special and Sag Harbor provided that.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now were your kids in Jack and Jill [of America] or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --'cause you didn't have time?
Speaker 2: Well it wasn't that.  We were blackballed (laughter).
Speaker 1: You can be blackballed from Jack and Jill?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: You can.
Speaker 2: What happened was that--
Speaker 1: Were you on The Links [Inc.] or--
Speaker 2: No, I, no clubs.
Speaker 1: Okay, no clubs.
Speaker 2: No clubs, but what happened was what we wanted our kids to be in the Manhattan chapter of Jack and Jill because that's where we knew everybody and we lived in Westchester [New York].  So we tried to use Warren's cousin's address and got caught and so we couldn't get into the Manhattan chapter and so we said, well forget it then, we're not doing it.  But neither of us were in clubs.  I mean, a lot of our friends were Boule members and Links and Northeasterners [Inc] and I didn't have time for that and nor did Warren.  We didn't want to spend a Saturday or a Sunday at a club meeting.
Speaker 1: Right, so, so really Sag Harbor became the outlet for you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: For your children?
Speaker 2: Right, and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but the friends that they made in Sag Harbor became their friends year round.
Speaker 1: Right, right, okay, so where were your children going to schools then?
Speaker 2: Our daughter went all the way through Rye Country Day School [Rye, New York].  Our son went to Rye Country Day through ninth grade and then to Fieldston [Ethical Culture Fieldston School, New York City, New York] for high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, and these are both private schools?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes, okay.  Now let me ask, so I've got that, so at Sag Harbor, who's your community?  Is it the same friends that you have or are you meeting new friends out there?
Speaker 2: Mainly the same friends.  We have many, many friends from the various things we've done in our lives but our core group of friends are friends that we've had since we were 14 or 15.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Which is really nice.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And they're all still married to each other.  It's, it's really, it's a nice thing.
Speaker 1: That's nice.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is lovely.
Speaker 1: So in White Plains?
Speaker 2: No, no, mainly Manhattan, Brooklyn.
Speaker 1: But mainly, okay, okay, okay.
Story_ID: 106137
Speaker 1: So, now in 1990, so this, this, you actually move into this apartment [in Manhattan, New York City, New York], the subsidiary of New Integrated [sic, Integrated Resources, Inc.]--?  What's the subsidiary called?
Speaker 2: Oh, Integrated Resources International.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, International, okay.  Now what happens with Integrated Resources?  Does it also peter out?
Speaker 2: It goes and, and parts of the company were sold off to Eli Broad with SunAmerica.  He took over, I think, the insurance aspect.  So it just was sort of broken up and sold off.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so what do you do then next?  How does the next opportunity come?
Speaker 2: Well, I said now what am I going to do with myself?  I've got to find a job and I ended up reading a newsletter that came out called Wall Street Letter and in it was an article on Prudential Securities.  The president of Prudential Securities told a reporter that he wanted to build his retail international business.  I wrote a cold letter to him.  Based on my experience at Integrated where the president read cold letters and when I first got to Integrated, the way I started to learn about the business was to attend every meeting that he had with both internal and external people and read all of the correspondence going in and out of his desk.  And he would read a cold letter and if the person sounded interesting, he would send me a note attached to the letter saying, "Meet with this person and see if there's a fit here."  And so I said "well, I have nothing to lose but some time and a stamp by writing to Jim Tozer [W. James Tozer, Jr.], who was the president of Prudential Securities saying, 'I see that you want to build your retail business in Europe, I have some experience in that, attached is my resume, attached are a couple of articles on me from Fortune [magazine] and Forbes'" and he called me for an interview and I went there and once again, was hired as Chief of Staff for him and it was a very difficult few months with him because he is a brilliant person, really, really, really smart and very able but a difficult person that many people didn't like and I found him difficult to work with and was considering quitting and he was fired.  And so George Ball, who was the Chairman of Integrated--of Prudential, what am I talking about of, where am I, Prudential, called me in and said that "The fact that Jim is no longer with us, doesn't mean you have to go, we'd like to find a place that would make you happy."  And so I ended up being asked to build a business in offshore mutual funds.  And so that's when I started doing that because I had the international experience.
Speaker 1: Well, now you mentioned one thing just now that I hadn't heard you mention, that you had been written up in Forbes and Fortune magazine--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the work that you had done with Integrated?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you were really, you were getting some note?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, for the work because that, you know, for being a female and doing international work in the background?  Is that it?
Speaker 2: I guess so.  Yes, I suppose so.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 106138
Speaker 1: So when you take on this, when you're given this opportunity for Prudential [Securities], what's the--
Speaker 2: Mutual Funds.
Speaker 1: --Mutual Funds?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you give context for the state of mutual funds at that point?  Oh, international work--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --where, what Prudential, what the state of the insurance industry is at that point?  If you could just give some context.
Speaker 2: Certainly.  Mutual funds were, by then, and we're talking 1990, a major investment resource for middle class and working people, either through direct investments in funds or because if they were savings and accumulating assets, or through their retirement plans, so mutual funds were a very important product for the financial services industry.  Prudential Securities had offices all over Europe.  They had a few in Asia and a few in South America but no mutual fund products for those offices because U.S. based mutual funds have terrible tax consequences for foreign investors.  So, special funds had to be created for that marketplace of all these international investors that Prudential already had.  And so my tax law experience came into play because I understood what the tax advantages and disadvantages were for foreign investors and so we created clones of the American mutual funds, whether it was U.S. equities, U.S. fixed income, short-term bonds, long-term bonds, we created funds that were exactly like our U.S. funds but were registered in an offshore location, whether it was Cayman Islands or Luxembourg or Ireland, those were the three places where people created offshore mutual funds.  So we built a series of products--
Speaker 1: And why those places?  Why Luxembourg?
Speaker 2: Because they had the right tax consequences and had built essentially an industry of creating, of making and administering offshore funds.
Speaker 1: Well what about Switzerland?  I didn't hear about Switz--
Speaker 2: No Switzerland was a great tax haven but its laws didn't--were not conducive to creating the funds there and it's very expensive there--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --as well to do anything.  So we created--
Speaker 1: But weren't the Bahamas also a place?
Speaker 2: Nassau, yes, some of the Bahamas but Cayman was more popular back at that time.  So we created a family of mutual funds but also signed selling group agreements, agreements whereby our brokers would sell other companies' mutual funds as well because if you are a client of Prudential and I, as a broker, tried to sell you only our products, you feel like you're not getting the full range of the best products.  You have to have other people's products along with yours and so we had other people's products, other companies' products along with ours.  And I was responsible for that business and I had wholesalers, people who were in our offices on a regular basis.  I had one for Europe, one for South America and one for Asia, and they would cover the offices there but I had to go over and make sure that they were doing what they were supposed to do and that I needed to touch base with our offices to find out what clients were really looking for, whether we would want to build more, or different mutual funds, for them.  So it was very interesting.  It was really--
Speaker 1: So what were the challenges because aren't there different laws still even with those laws and different cultures?
Speaker 2: Different laws and different cultures even from one European country to another.  Certain countries, like the U.K. [United Kingdom], would buy stocks, would buy equity mutual funds.  On the continent, the continental countries tended to focus more on fixed income and were leery about stocks.  This is, now we're talking about twenty some years ago but that was one difference.  So you had to learn what the country was interested in and then there were different approaches as to how you sell a product.  Some countries really resisted any aggressive kinds of sales and others were more conducive to that.  Some countries sold their products through their banks, sold funds through their banks, other countries had broker-dealers that sold the products.  So, it was, it was, you know, really a hodgepodge of things.
Story_ID: 106139
Speaker 1: And so you, what do you, what, what are you able, how large is the team overall and what are you able to grow the business to after?
Speaker 2: You know I was growing that business for six or seven years and I have to admit I can't remember the numbers any more, that's what age does for you, but I had a team of three wholesalers.  I had, each of them had an assistant, and then in headquarters, here in New York [New York City, New York], I had several people working for me that did various things in terms of administration of the funds.
Speaker 1: That's small, though, when you think about it.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was very small.  Yes, it was very small because it was still not a significant part of Prudential's [Prudential Securities] business by any means.  Prudential was, for the foreign offices, sold mainly commodities because that, those did not have negative tax effects.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we were just trying to build the asset management side for foreign, foreign investors.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 106140
Speaker 1: Do you know where that business [Prudential Securities] is today?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's completely broken up and gone.  Prudential Securities, first of all, Prudential Asset Management, which I was part of, was merged into Prudential Insurance Company out in Newark, New Jersey, and Prudential Securities was sold to Wachovia [Securities]--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --and then Wachovia, then--
Speaker 1: Blew up.
Speaker 2: Blew up and now some of the people that were brokers there, one of whom manages our money, is now at Wells Fargo Advisors, so it disappeared essentially.
Speaker 1: I see.  So because I had even, or my researcher had pulled information about PSI, which, is that PSI?
Speaker 2: It was Prudential Securities, yes.
Speaker 1: Because it said it was investigated by the SEC [Securities and Exchange Commission] for suspected fraud during the 1980s and '90s [1990s], and that the--
Speaker 2: It must have been late '80s [1980s], early '90s [1990s] because I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: You don't remember, okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't get there until '90 [1990].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, because it said that they had defrauded investors close to eight billion.
Speaker 2: Ooh.
Speaker 1: The largest fraud found by the SEC in U.S. history to that point, it says.
Speaker 2: That's small potatoes today.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's true.  That is true.  So, but, what are you learning from this experience?
Speaker 2: I'm learning how difficult it is to be in a large corporate environment.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you had been an entrepreneurial?
Speaker 2: Much more so, yes.  It's really dog-eat-dog and it was hard.  I had in eight years, I think I had seven different people I reported to and every time you start to report to someone new, you have to prove yourself all over again.
Speaker 1: And you have to explain your role.
Speaker 2: And explain your role and find out what their hot buttons are and what they like or don't like.  So that was a challenge.  Another challenge was the encroachment of Prudential Insurance Company on Prudential Securities, and by encroachment I mean Prudential Insurance Company was a bureaucratic mutual insurance company.  It did finally go public but it was a mutual insurance company and really bureaucratic.  Prudential Securities was a very fast-making, fast-making, or fast-going Wall Street firm and the cultures were totally different.  And so when Prudential started moving people over into the parent company, there were just, it was a different, different place, and that was also a challenge.
Speaker 1: So, after that happens, so you're really not able to make headway in a lot of respects?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And you didn't have a lot of people reporting--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --and there was a lot of area to cover?  A lot of the world--
Speaker 2: True.
Speaker 1: --'cause you had Eur--
Speaker 2: One for Europe, one for Asia, one for South America.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a lot of cultures and things, okay.  But they were wholesaling and then they were wholesaling to a retail network but is a concept of insurance viewed the same in all those different?
Speaker 2: No, but we weren't selling insurance, we were selling mutual funds.
Speaker 1: You were selling securities, mutual funds, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, this is securities, yes, so--
Speaker 1: Okay, that's right, okay, sorry, sorry, okay, but the concept of mutual funds, was that viewed the same way?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.  U.K. was very accustomed to them.  One of our more successful offices was in Monte Carlo [Monaco] where, you know, in Monaco, people were looking for assets, long-term investments, that sort of thing.  Other countries were not as interested and so it was a matter of trying to teach people the value of investing in a fund, so it was an educational process.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 106141
Speaker 1: So then you leave, you retire or leave?
Speaker 2: I, well, both.  What happened was that my little group for the international business was the last one left downtown, here in Manhattan [New York City, New York], and finally they said, "You have to move to Newark [New Jersey], move your employees to Newark," and I was not enthused about that.  We had moved to Manhattan and I, to the East Side of Manhattan, to get to Newark was going to be a real trek, and I had a new person I was reporting to and they wanted to change my job, to some degree, and I was starting to have health issues.  So I said, "I think it's time for me to retire," and I was fifty-six, and it was a good thing I did because when I would go over to Prudential [Securities], which I ended up having to do for a couple of days a week before the big move, that I never did do, I was finding in Penn Station [Pennsylvania Station, New York City, New York], it was really hard walking up the stairs, and there are a lot of stairs.  I have heart problems and so I left Pru and a little over a year later I had open heart surgery, in 1999.
Speaker 1: You're the--okay, 'cause you hear about women, you know, and now even when you go through airports now, you see what they say a heart attack, there are now ads that say what a heart attack looks like.
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't have a heart attack--
Speaker 1: But, but--
Speaker 2: --and I didn't have coronary artery disease but I had mitral valve prolapse, which is a valve problem and I had a lot of arrhythmias so they repaired my mitral valve and then two years later, I still had some very serious dangerous arrhythmias and so I have a defibrillator and I've had that for twelve years now.  So, I am a bionic woman.
Speaker 1: Was this, was this genetic of any--
Speaker 2: Well my mother [Charlotte Wilson] had had some heart problems so maybe so.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, I see.  Now--
Speaker 2: So I retired and took care of my health issues.  I started--I joined a hospital board--
Speaker 1: Which hospital?
Speaker 2: It was Beth Israel [Mount Sinai Beth Israel in New York City, New York] and then it became Continuum [Continuum Health Partners] which is a group of hospitals here in New York.  But I joined a hospital board and I did some consulting work for the Department of Commerce Minority Business Development Agency.
Speaker 1: Now who was, who was president at that time?
Speaker 2: [President Bill] Clinton.
Speaker 1: Clinton, okay, that's what I thought, that'sright.
Speaker 2: And I--one of my oldest friends was Ron Brown and his wife had known my husband since they were babies so when Ron was Secretary of Commerce, he had by then died, but I went to Commerce and did some consulting on a part-time basis.  But that was--those were the kinds of things I did after I left Prudential and then I joined my first corporate board, I guess it must have been in 2001 or so.
Story_ID: 106142
Speaker 1: So, you start getting asked in 2001 to join your--
Speaker 2: I was--yes, and it was a small community bank [The Community's Bank] in [Bridgeport] Connecticut that was acquired by someone I met who was also doing consulting for Commerce, and that's how I ended up going on that board.  It was a small bank and he had just bought the bank and so--
Speaker 1: Oh, so, he was doing consulting but, and he had just bought the bank--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and he met you--
Speaker 2: Yes, and asked me to--
Speaker 1: --and thought you'd--and liked your background?  And--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so I went on that board.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And that was my first board.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that, is that the Urban Financial Group?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then so what, what, how many are on the board at this point, of the bank?
Speaker 2: I think there were only about six of us.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what do you learn about being on a corporate board at this?
Speaker 2: Well I learned that companies that are highly regulated by government have a lot of challenges.  There are--the regulators can micromanage in a way and it was just very difficult trying to keep up with all of the responsibilities and reports that the government would want.  So that was interesting because it was a small bank and so I, I, that I learned there.
Speaker 1: So he was a community bank?
Speaker 2: It was a community bank.
Speaker 1: But banks have a lot, you know, they have this regulation--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that regulation but things happen bad with banks before.
Speaker 2: That's true, that's true.  Well I'm now in a really highly regulated business too so, but anyway, I've tended to be at mainly very regulated businesses but the community bank [sic, Community's Bank] was especially regulated.
Speaker 1: Right, right, and they're smaller banks.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, in trying to do things.  So is that, has, is that bank still exist?
Speaker 2: It closed about two weeks ago, which I was really sad to see and Peter had managed to keep it going and--
Speaker 1: Now who's Peter?
Speaker 2: Peter Hurst [HM Peter F. Hurst, Jr.] was the fellow who--
Speaker 1: I know Peter, I went to law school with him.
Speaker 2: Oh, you, were there at the same time?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Peter Hurst, yes.
Speaker 1: So his bank closed?
Speaker 2: His bank closed.  I got an email from him a couple of weeks ago that the State of Connecticut closed it down for inadequate capital and he was very upset because they did have somebody who was ready to inject five million into the bank and the regulators said, "No."
Speaker 1: I'm so disappointed.
Speaker 2: Oh, so sad, 'cause I love Peter.  He's a wonderful man.
Speaker 1: He's wonderful.  Well, okay, boy it's a small world.
Speaker 2: Isn't it?
Speaker 1: No, 'cause (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness.
Speaker 1: --'cause when you were saying that, I'm thinking, "Well Peter runs a Community Bank" (laughter) but never, oh my God, never thought, okay, that's, oh my God, so small 'cause, you know, he just got married a few years ago.
Speaker 2: I know, I know.
Speaker 1: Okay, oh, that's too--his whole bank?  He's no longer in the banking business?
Speaker 2: It's gone.
Speaker 1: You know, our community bank almost--it survived but it was having problems.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a whole lot of them do.
Speaker 1: ShoreBank.
Speaker 2: A lot of them do.
Speaker 1: It was--okay, wow, okay, I'll have to call.  Oh, that's horrible.
Story_ID: 106143
Speaker 1: So the other thing is, so what's next then, Mainstay Funds?
Speaker 2: Mainstay Funds.  Mainstay Funds are a mutual fund company that's the retail mutual fund company of New York Life Insurance [Company] and I was recommended by my friend, Conrad Harper, to be interviewed and I was chosen and there I was the only woman on the board.  I replaced Nancy Kissinger and, who had been on the board since the fund opened in 1986, and she was retiring and I replaced her and there were four or five men on the board with me.  And mutual fund boards, again, are quite regulated and they have to represent not your average shareholder in a company but more the working investors, people who have mutual funds in their 401(k)s and stuff like that.  So they have to really look at all of the aspects of the fund, including making sure that the contracts that the funds, the fund management signs with the service providers are fair and the fees are fair.  It was, it's a lot of work but it was interesting and so I was on that board for several years.
Speaker 1: Now is that, are those the type of boards that people stay on for a long time?
Speaker 2: In some instances, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There are no term limits and, when I was there, there was no age limit.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And I was one who was a proponent of changing that rule.
Speaker 1: You know a friend of mine had just gone on a board of mutual, I think it's mutual fund, and there are no age or term limits and she's like kicking her heels, thinking she'll be on--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --'cause she's the youngest one on it and they don't seem to like be inclined to.
Speaker 2: No, that's right.
Story_ID: 106144
Speaker 1: Well now I'm sorry that I got off it [the board of Mainstay Funds] because I just got booted off my next board because I aged off, so (laughter).
Speaker 2: So, but you got off because--
Speaker 1: Because I was invited to join the AXA Financial [Incorporated] board and AXA Financial owns [AXA] Equitable Life and MONY Life, which compete with New York Life [Insurance Company].
Speaker 2: So that's a major board?
Speaker 1: It's a, yes.
Speaker 2: AXA, you went up then to a major board?
Speaker 1: That's what I, that's exactly how I felt, and by being this U.S. subsidiary of AXA Group which is one of the three largest insurance companies in the world, we had an international aspect and the CEO [Chief Executive Officer] and chairman of AXA parent company came to all our board meetings and updated us on what was going on, worldwide, so it was much more interesting.
Speaker 2: So that, so how many when you join AXA, how many, what is the composition?  Is it male, female, how large a board, how often--
Speaker 1: There were three women on that board which was unusual.  That was a lot of women, three women, one person of color on a board of about thirteen.
Speaker 2: That is unusual to have three women.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, and you know a lot of times with the board situation, when it comes to women and minorities, one replaces the other--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: --meaning that, you know, there's a, one spot for a minority person, I'm not saying--
Speaker 1: No, you're right.
Speaker 2: --this is, and then there's a spot for a female.
Speaker 1: Yup.
Speaker 2: And what about the committees 'cause that's a lot of times, you know, what committees you get--
Speaker 1: Oh, definitely.
Speaker 2: --you know whether it's audit--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --you know, compensation.
Speaker 1: Well, I'm useless on an audit committee.  That's just not my forte.  I was on the nominating and, what did we call it, organization and compensation committee but it was essentially combining nominating and comp and governance and that was the committee I was on at AXA and now I chair that committee for Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association].
Story_ID: 106145
Speaker 1: Okay, and then, now when did Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] come?  So, you, at this point, you're on one board at a time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But then with AXA [Financial Incorporated], I was, I joined the Fannie Mae board five years ago, in 2008, and I was on both AXA and Fannie Mae until December of last year, 2012, when I aged off of AXA's board.  So I had two for four years that I was on at the same time.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how did you find that?  Because, you know, there are people, there have been people who served on a ridiculous number of boards.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But there's been a requirement now.  I mean, after, oh God, Sarbanes-Oxley [Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I think some of that went away--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --because--
Speaker 2: And there's still people who are on five or six boards and you wonder how they can manage all the work if you do it diligently.
Speaker 1: If you do it right?
Speaker 2: Yes, but being on two was fine--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --because I was also chairing New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation at the same time.
Speaker 1: So that came chairing New York Health, that appointment came--
Speaker 2: In 2004.
Speaker 1: Four [2004], okay.
Speaker 2: And I left there in 2008.
Speaker 1: Eight [2008].
Speaker 2: And then joined Fannie Mae, so actually I was not on Fannie Mae's board when I was New York City Health and Hospitals.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay, because you can only do, 'cause really if you take it seriously, now how often were your boards meeting?
Speaker 2: AXA's only met four times a year and Mainstay [Funds] meetings, I think, were four times a year.  Fannie Mae is six times a year plus extra meetings.  And our meetings at Fannie Mae are a total of twenty-one hours of meeting time.
Speaker 1: You mean each time?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And why is that?
Speaker 2: Because, Fannie Mae has lots of issues to deal with.
Speaker 1: And there are, the government regulation and a lot of things?
Speaker 2: All of that, yes.
Speaker 1: But see you--
Speaker 2: And it was in crisis.  I joined after Fannie Mae went into conservatorship because of the housing bubble and--
Speaker 1: So you joined after Frank Raines [Franklin Raines]--
Speaker 2: Oh, way after.
Speaker 1: Way after, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he really was the beginning.  His stepping down was the beginning, when I think of that.
Speaker 2: Well, well, he had to--they had to do a whole restatement of the finances after he left.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And then things sort of bumbled along and then from 2006 to 2008, when there was this fever of buying houses, both for your own sake or for investment purposes, and there were liar loans, you know, if you could breath, you got a mortgage and Fannie Mae had much higher standards than the private lenders, however, Fannie Mae didn't want to lose market share and ended up buying some of the mortgages from these private lenders that were bad, and that's why Bank of America just has paid us back 11.3 billion dollars and we're getting ready to get another four billion from Wells Fargo, I'm sorry JPMorgan Chase, because they passed on to us bad paper.  But there, as I said, I joined in '08 [2008], right after the conservatorship took place.  They abolished the old board and created a whole new board and there's just a lot of work to be done and it's been done successfully.  We're making more money than we ever made.
Speaker 1: That is amazing.
Speaker 2: And, by early next year, we will have paid to Treasury [U.S. Department of Treasury], more than Treasury lent us.  So it will be a profit-making investment.
Speaker 1: So, it's a success story even--
Speaker 2: Not that you would know it from reading the papers because the politicians are so dug into, "We have to wind down Fannie Mae" because it was really the target of all of the media early on, particularly in 2008 and 2009.
Story_ID: 106146
Speaker 1: Well, so you know what is interesting, so you're, the other thing about your board selections, or how, is it they have been consistent with financial and also banking?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, but then the financial--I've seen other people have things a little more diversified but you've stayed in that?
Speaker 2: Well, I would have liked it but these were the opportunities that came up for me.  I would have loved to have done something in healthcare, for example.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But that never presented itself.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what have you learned, you know, and how has the board roles added to your, sort of, knowledge?  They're very coveted, I mean, board positions--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --is, I can name a lot of my friends who are looking to be on corporate boards.
Speaker 2: Oh, I could too, I could too.  What have I learned?
Speaker 1: Because you see the world in a different vantage point?
Speaker 2: Yes you do, that you do.  You learn that you have to find ways to ask the right questions of management in order to get useful answers and it's easy to be just a rubber stamp for what management wants to do but you can't do that and so it takes awhile when you join a board to understand enough of the business to be able to ask the questions that evoke good answers and raise issues that maybe need to be delved into further.  So that's one thing that you learn.  I've learned that management can be resistant to board interference but if it's presented in the right way, and management realizes it's not in order to beat up on particular individuals or, or groups, but we're all sort of trying to attain the same goal, but you've got to be persuasive and gentle in your approach in order to get management to be comfortable with the board.
Story_ID: 106147
Speaker 1: So do you think, given what experience you had up to that date that the role that you played with New York Hospital's [New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation] board, did that help your private board?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, by chairing that, I really learned an awful lot, definitely.
Speaker 1: So, where are you now in your--well let me--'cause, oh, you even had a "Charlynn Goins Day" in New York?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Sorry.
Speaker 2: [New York City] Mayor [Michael] Bloomberg really appreciated my stint at HHC and, in fact, allowed us to use Gracie Mansion for our 50th anniversary party.  We had dinner for seventy there and it was lovely.  He's been very gracious in showing appreciation.
Speaker 1: So when did you meet Mayor Bloomberg, or Michael Bloomberg?
Speaker 2: In the course of being interviewed.
Speaker 1: Oh, not before?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't know him, no.  In fact, his, the woman who runs his office of appointments for all of the commissioners and the high level people, had called my friend Conrad Harper to ask for suggestions and he gave them my name because he knew I was on a hospital board [Mount Sinai Beth Israel in New York City, New York] and when Andrea called me, I said, I have no interest whatsoever and she said, "Oh, why don't you think about it" and I said, "Well, let me think about it but let me think of some other people that I might be able to suggest that you ask" because Warren [HM Dr. Warren Goins] said, "Oh, you'd be crazy."  "That's eleven city hospitals that are just a disaster and, you know, you'll be in over your head, it's a hornet's nest."  And I started asking around about HHC and found out that there was a really good CEO [Chief Executive Officer] and things had changed quite dramatically and the whole system was improving and so I started getting interested and I then said to Andrea, the placement person, "Gee, I might consider being a candidate," and so that's how it began, and I ended up being interviewed by him.  That was the first time I met him.
Speaker 1: That's amazing.
Speaker 2: So, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so what was different about that experience than your other experiences?
Speaker 2: Well, it's city, it's municipal government and so the beauty of Mayor Bloomberg is that he really ran the city, or runs the city, like a company and he brings in good people to run various divisions and then let's them run those divisions, and as he said at my swearing in, "Just don't screw it up" and so it was very helpful and it, it enabled you to cut through some of the bureaucratic morass that exists in city government, but not all of it, and you also find out what I learned at Commerce [U.S. Department of Commerce's Minority Business Development Agency] as well, and that is that there's a cadre of really smart, hardworking people who are in the public sector, and then there are those who turn off the computer at five of five so that they can be out the door at five o'clock and I think there are more of that second cadre in the public sector than there are in the private sector.
Speaker 1: All right, but this was, 'cause up to this point, well Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] also, but wait, did the hospital, the hospital preceded Fannie Mae?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, because both, well Fannie Mae is private-public, it's--
Speaker 2: Private but public--
Speaker 1: --public.
Speaker 2: --as you said.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is a New York Stock Exchange listed company and it's still a private company.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 106148
Speaker 1: So are, so where are you now with everything in your--
Speaker 2: Well, I am still on the Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] board.  I chair the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee and I am pleased to say that the original board that was created five years ago, everyone but one, is the original board member and from the beginning there had been three African Americans, out of ten, on the board, and there were three women but one left, there are two women on the board, and I'm pleased to say that I have found another woman who has just been approved and she's coming onto the board.  And I chaired the search for the CEO [Chief Executive Officer] of Fannie Mae last year and that was a learning and interesting experience which I had never done before.  So, I've really had great experiences there.  I have a year, a little more than a year before I think I'll have to retire from that board.  And so I'm doing Fannie Mae and for four and a half years now, I have chaired New York Community Trust, which is a large, very large, community foundation.  We have over two billion in assets, give away about a hundred and thirty million a year, and I've been doing that--I've been on that board for twelve years but I've been chair for four and a half.
Story_ID: 106149
Speaker 1: So, you, what-- what, when you look at your civic engagement versus your corporate/legal, you know--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --experience, how do you, how would you assess those both because sometimes people are not, you know, they're in one path or the other?  You know, they may not be as civically involved.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, I think they complement each other, at least they have for me, in that early on when I made the decision that I was going to go the international tax law route at a Wall Street law firm, as opposed to being a civil rights lawyer, I felt that perhaps I could be helpful and be civic-minded but still be on the, in the private sector and make significant money, and so I felt I could balance one against the other, and I feel I've been successful in doing that.
Story_ID: 106150
Speaker 1: Okay, so where are you with your life right now?
Speaker 2: Where am I with my life?  I'm having some health issues.  I've been in the hospital a couple of times in the last few months.  I just got out two weeks ago from having some heart surgery but, so that's making me sort of sit up and take notice that I'm getting old, and don't like it a bit, because I'm not one to sit in a rocking chair and, you know, do nothing.  So, I'm just going to keep on going until I can't go any more but if I rotate off corporate boards because of age, I'll probably do more in the not-for-profit sector if someone wants me to and that I find interesting, and Warren [HM Dr. Warren Goins] has just retired this summer, and he's seventy-five.  So when we have our health issues resolved, we plan to do a lot more traveling and, although we've always done a lot, but I want to continue doing that.
Speaker 1: When you look back, and when you look back on your life, how, what do you think in, you know, of what you've accomplished at the time you accomplished, because--
Speaker 2: Um, I think that for a woman of my generation, I have been fortunate enough to do a lot of really interesting things that most women, and certainly most African Americans, have not had the opportunity to do, and I feel very lucky.
Story_ID: 106151
Speaker 1: So, what are your hopes for, and concerns, for the African American community because you've seen it from, you know, well you've seen it from a seventy-year perch, you know?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  My hopes are that the African American community can heed [HM] President [Barack] Obama's message that we have some responsibility for ourselves and we need to focus on our children's education and I think parents, in some cases, need to be educated so that they know that education for their children is important.  I would like to see that.  I have great concerns about our black men and boys and their plight and I would like very much to see something done to change that.  I think that when I look back, we have advanced.  You know, there are a lot of people now on Wall Street heading companies and doing things which never took place before.  I look at television commercials and advertisements in magazines and see black people looking like they're in responsible positions in the advertisements, you know, and that's encouraging but I don't think we've gone far enough and I think there's still tremendous racism in this country.  I think it affects people's approach to President Obama and that's very disturbing.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what about women, as your role as a woman?  What are you thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: I think the women are doing a whole lot better than black people and I have been on a number of panels regarding board diversification and I always say that "Although I am on this panel, because we're focusing on having more women on boards, my primary concern is getting more people of color on boards" because I think women are moving ahead quicker than people of color.
Speaker 1: Now some people feel that we're moving backwards and not forwards but--
Speaker 2: I think we're sort of static.  I don't--I'm not sure if it's forward or backward, but it's not what I'd like to see it.
Story_ID: 106152
Speaker 1: And, you know, I do want to ask because I, you know, today and the first time I was in your apartment, struck by your art, your beautiful art collection, and I know that you say Warren [HM Dr. Warren Goins], your husband, you know, has played a leading role in that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --but can you, have you played a role at all much in--
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm enthusiastic but he's the one that's more the scholar about it because if you would look in our library, we have all sorts of books out of print and in print on African American art and he reads all the time and really knows the artists and their whole stories and he's much more involved than I am.  And he also has been the one that has tracked down advertisements for auctions and seen the painting that's going to come up for auction.  So he's been much more the activist in this than I have, but I enjoy it.
Speaker 1: So, what is, what are your favorite pieces that you have here?
Speaker 2: My favorite pieces are the two little ones here on the wall that are by Edward Mitchell Bannister.  I, I really love those.
Speaker 1: And do you know the years that those were created?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --he will but I don't.
Speaker 1: So--
Story_ID: 106153
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your marriage [to HM Dr. Warren Goins] because not many people, I mean, your marriage, your daughter's marriage, your friend's marriage, unusual, but not many people, but let's talk about your marriage, not many people have successfully can say that they met their husband at fourteen.
Speaker 2: Fourteen.
Speaker 1: And are still married and have had, you know, a successful union and partnership.  And so what would you credit that to?
Speaker 2: I think my husband more than me.  He is--he would tell you, "It's a lot of compromising" (laughter), that's what he likes to tell people, but Warren has always been very self-confident and he has never been threatened by anything that I have achieved and when I at one point in our marriage was making more money than he was, he was enthusiastic about it and hoped that I would make even more, so that he's always been comfortable in his own skin and very supportive of whatever I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: That's a blessing.
Speaker 2: It really is.  I really lucked out.
Story_ID: 106154
Speaker 1: You asked what I want to be remembered for?  Well, I have had a wonderful life but I would like to be remembered as a person who was fair and treated people the same regardless of their station in life.  And I have been characterized as "Tough but fair" and I'm comfortable with that characterization of someone who reported to me and whom I was very close to once told me that and it has stuck in my mind because I am someone who probably is too much of a perfectionist.  I know I am and that drives me, and that's not such a good thing necessarily, but it's just the way I am and, as I said, so I've been tough with other people because I have standards that I want them to meet but I would like to be considered fair-minded and concerned about those who have not been as fortunate as I have been.
Story_ID: 106155
Speaker 1: Okay, and your legacy, what would you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I've never thought about my legacy.  I don't know that I have a legacy.  I really--seriously, I mean, I've never given that any thought other than saying what I had said before in that I'm seventy-one so I'm of an older generation and I guess you could say that the fact that I have had the opportunity to accomplish certain things and reach certain positions at various companies and not-for-profits as a black woman is something to be remembered, I suppose.
Speaker 1: Well I can say this that, you know as someone who, you know, is coming behind you, I mean, you really, you did a lot of things, you have a lot of ability to multitask and handle a lot of things well.  So, that, you know, because it's not easy.  You know it wasn't, I mean, to sort of navigate.  The thing is that, I think to be able to navigate, you had a supportive husband [HM Dr. Warren Goins] but you had a professional husband too.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And to be able to navigate all those.
Speaker 2: Organization--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --is the key.
Speaker 1: That, but see--
Speaker 2: That is the key and that has been always one of my best characteristics.  I can juggle a lot of balls in the air at one time and that makes all the difference.  You don't have to be so very smart if you work hard and have good organizational skills and treat people nicely.  Those, I think, are three things that can offset, perhaps lack of great intellect.
Speaker 1: You can't say that because that's not true.
Speaker 2: Well, I've been around people who were so smart--
Speaker 1: Smart.
Speaker 2: --that they left me in the dust and so I recognize that.  You know, there were people in school who could study just the night before an exam and not have done a thing all semester and they get an "A" and I had to really work hard and maybe get an "A minus" or a "B" or a "B plus."  So I know.  I recognize that.
Speaker 1: Right, but I found, you know, Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] did this whole study when we were there and it was the middle of class that went on and did the best things.
Speaker 2: Isn't that interesting?
Speaker 1: That was the study they did--
Speaker 2: That is interesting.
Speaker 1: --and it backfired on them, you know, in that way, you know, so I think a lot of times, I mean, you know, it's that passion, it's that desire--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --that makes, separates people more than, you know, native gifts if you have both--
Speaker 2: Oh, that's--
Speaker 1: --you're a rocket star.
Speaker 2: --well, then yeah, that's wonderful.
Speaker 1: But is there anything else you'd like to say?
Speaker 2: No, other than thank you.  I've really enjoyed this and I didn't think I would.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, thanks a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay. Thank you, okay, we're done.
Story_ID: 106156
Speaker 1: That's my husband, Warren [HM Dr. Warren Goins], with two of our grandchildren who were born the same year and I think they must have been about six or eight months old at the time.  On the left is Emani [ph.], who is my son's [Jeffrey Goins] daughter and on the right is Jackson, who is my daughter's [Hilary Van Kleeck] son.
Speaker 2: Did you need this mic on me?  I wasn't--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, yes, sorry.
Speaker 2: That's all right, I hope you got the recording.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  You should have an assistant with this one.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh really.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  This way?
Speaker 2: Will that do?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  No, that's--everything down.  Okay, go ahead and tell us about the previous one again.
Speaker 2: Oh, the photo is of my husband, Warren, and two of our grandchildren when they were babies.  On the left is our granddaughter, Emani, and on the right, and Emani [ph.] is our son's daughter, and on the right, is our grandson, Jackson, who is my daughter's son.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, they probably can hear anyway, but--for sure.  Can you tell us about this one?
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of us having just finished our marriage ceremony.  I was nineteen, my husband was twenty-four and we were walking down the aisle in--at a little church in White Plains [New York].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, thank you.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: This was a photograph of my family and [New York] Mayor [Michael] Bloomberg after my swearing in as chairman of New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation, in July of 2004.  Going from left to right, my son Jeff, my daughter Hilary, Mayor Bloomberg, me, our grandson, Jack, the little guy, our granddaughter Isabel, another granddaughter India, my husband's in the background and on the far right is my son-in-law, Randy Van Kleeck.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: You can put them anywhere on the couch or anywhere you want to put 'em.  I can hold them if you'd like and that way you don't have to move back and forth.  Oh, gee, let me get these in some sort of order as to age.  You don't care?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  It doesn't matter 'cause they'll all be captured in photoshop, somebody'll type up the captions, so it'll be--
Speaker 2: Okay, because--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  They can reorganize them when they go in the computer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My husband Warren and I attended a dance given by a club in Brooklyn [New York City, New York] called The Comus Club [The Comus Social Club, Inc.], which was mainly African American professional men and they had a formal dinner every, a formal dance every winter and that was us attending it in 1989.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Do you want all of these?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  You're exactly right, one or two.
Speaker 1: Do these.  This one.  This was a photograph taken of me when I joined Prudential Securities back in around 1990.
Speaker 2: And this one was taken at Integrated Resources [Inc.] in--somewhere in the early '80's [1980s].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: Okay, you don't need all of these.  Let me, let's see.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of me feeding our son, Jeffrey, when he was a very young baby.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, let me close this door.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Voices down please.
Speaker 2: Oh, God.  Let's see, I was--this is a photograph of me taken when I was two months old.
Speaker 1: This was a picture taken at my third birthday.  I am standing up next to my mother [Charlotte Wilson] against the wall, the third person on the right.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, looking away.
Speaker 1: Oh, looking away from the camera, yes.
Speaker 2: In this photograph I'm seated--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  We're recording.  Okay.
Speaker 2: In this photograph I am seated with two of the men who ran the repertory theatre called Blackfriars Guild [of New York, also known as The Blackfriars Theatre] for which I acted in a couple of plays Off-Broadway.  I must have been around six or seven at the time.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah but that's just our kids.  I have a couple of them left.  Let's see.  I have no idea.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  You've got Frank's phone number.
Speaker 2: This is, this is me at, I guess a recital of some sort and looking at the photo I must have been, I would say, five or six.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: These are very boring.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Well, you know, if you think they're boring, just remember, hopefully people are going to look at these hundreds of years from now.
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  You know they'll be really interesting then.  Oops, what's going on?  What did my camera just do?  I've been having problems, equipment problems, all week for some reason.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's terrible.  Did you come from Chicago [Illinois] too?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Uh-hum.  Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother is on the left and the photo was taken when we were visiting my husband's parents [Ernestine Goins and Jepther Goins].  Warren and I had just gotten married.  So my mother is on the left and on the right is my husband's sister, Nancy.  And this was in 1962.  I think that's it from these.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: I'll get this one.  Oop, I can get.  I got it.
Speaker 1: And, maybe you should just focus on this one.  This is my kids when they were little, but this was my mother and my grandmother, so.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: On the left is my grandmother, Lilly Mae Wright [ph.] and on the right is my mother, Charlotte Lucille Wright and my mother looks very young in the photo, it was way before I was born but I'm not sure when the photo was taken.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Are there more?  I can pause, you can collect them.
Speaker 1: I don't know if she'd want--
Story_ID: 106157
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay, on the left is my husband's [HM Dr. Warren Goins] great-grandmother, whose name was-
Speaker 1: (DR. WARREN GOINS):  My great-grandmother, Ellen.
Speaker 2: Ellen Morton.
Speaker 1: (DR. WARREN GOINS):  Yeah.
Speaker 2: And on the right is my husband's grandmother, Nancy Matthews and her husband, Alfonso Matthews.
Speaker 1: And this is a later photo of my husband's great-grandmother and her husband.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Names?
Speaker 1: This was Ellen Morton--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, that's--
Speaker 1: And what was her husband's name?
Speaker 2: (DR. WARREN GOINS):  Not really sure of this.
Speaker 1: You can't remember?  I don't know if I ever knew your great grandfather, Mr. Morton, yes.
Speaker 2: I'll hold these.  I'll hold this one.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Wait, this is your family?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (DR. WARREN GOINS):  Yeah, that's mine.
Speaker 2: I said my husband's great-grandmother and great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: On the mother's side?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And this is Warren's mother and father, Ernestine Goins and Jepther Goins as young people.
Speaker 2: We believe this might have been Warren's father's mother because we found the photograph in a suitcase that Warren's aunt had and it's I think it's a daguerreotype.  It's really old but I--we're not sure but since it was with all sorts of family photos, we think that could have been Grace Goins, who was Warren's grandmother on his father's side.
Speaker 1: This photograph memorializes our, one of our granddaughter's holy communion.  Her mother is Catholic and she had communion.  She was twelve and the photo on the left is Warren, my husband.  The girl with the orange in the front of her hair is one of my granddaughters, Isabel, and then the other man in the photo is my son-in-law, Randy Van Kleeck, to the right, our daughter, Hilary Van Kleeck.  I'm on the right in the pink jacket and below is India Van Kleeck in a white dress just behind the communion celebrant, and that's my grandson Jack Van Kleeck.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, sorry.  We were walking out of the church in East Hampton [New York] where our daughter had just gotten married.  So on the left is me, and on the right is Warren, and behind Warren is my son-in-law's mother, Joan Van Kleeck.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is our daughter, Hilary, and her husband Randy Van Kleeck on their wedding day in September of 1990.
Speaker 2: Thanks.  This is another photo of Warren's parents, Jepther and Ernestine Goins.  And the photo was taken outside our house in New Rochelle [New York].  You can see it in the background.
Speaker 1: These are Warren's parents, Ernestine and Jepth Goins and Warren's in the baby carriage.  You just can't see him.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Hiding?
Speaker 1: Yes.  What you looking for?
Speaker 2: (DR. WARREN GOINS):  No idea.
Speaker 1: The field, okay.
Speaker 2: This is a vacation photo.  We were all in Cabo San Lucas in Mexico in 1986.  On the far left is the man who became our son-in-law, Randy, our daughter, Hilary, Warren, our son, Jeff, and me on the right.
Speaker 1: This is another photograph of our daughter's wedding day and it's our daughter, our son-in-law, Warren and me, my mother-in-law and our son, Jeffrey.
Speaker 2: Now you did all these here, right?  Did you do all those?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Here we are at a party that [HM] E.T. Williams and Lyn Williams [Auldlyn Higgins Williams] gave for us for our 25th anniversary.
Speaker 2: And this is--
Speaker 1: Do you have anything from law school graduation?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Showing your practice?
Speaker 2: This photo is of Warren and me at Gracie Mansion [New York City, New York] celebrating at a party for our 50th anniversary, a year ago, June of 2012.
