Story_ID: 7511
Speaker 1: Today is August 26, year 2002. And today is Monday.  And I'm the interviewer Adele Hodge. And the camera person is Matthew Hickey.  And we are conducing an interview with a--on an interviewee Bettiann Gardner.  And we're going to ask-Oh.  And we are in The HistoryMakers Office at 1900 S. Michigan Avenue in Chicago [Illinois]. And we'll ask Mrs. Gardner to give us her full name, and spell it for future reference.  And her birth date and then her parents--both parents and spell it out.  And also tell me your home town.  So but start your name.
Speaker 2: Bettiann Louise Gueno Gardner.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Would you spell it for us?
Speaker 2: All of them?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm (laughs).
Speaker 2: B-E-T-T-Y, capital A-N-N, capital L-O-U-I-S-E, capital G-U-E-N-O, capital G-A-R-D-N-E-R. [later spelled Bettiann Gardner]
Speaker 1: Wonderful.  Your birth place?
Speaker 2: Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: And birth date?
Speaker 2: 6/26/30 [June 26, 1930].
Story_ID: 7512
Speaker 1: And your mother's full name?
Speaker 2: Ula Catherine with a "C" Gueno.
Speaker 1: And your dad?
Speaker 2: Joseph Claude Gueno "G-U-E-N-O".
Speaker 1: And where is their birth place?
Speaker 2: My mother is New Orleans, Louisiana. My father is Houma, Louisiana.
Story_ID: 7513
Speaker 1: I wanna start with your grandparents believe it or not.  What do you remember of your maternal grandparents?
Speaker 2: My maternal grandmother was living when I was born.  But my grandfather was not.  And she was a petite little French Creole lady. And very much into the girls in the family being ladies.  Little ladies.  And showing us all the social graces.  Teaching us French along with the neighborhood kids.  Before we even went to school. (laughs)  And that was exciting now that I look back on it.  At the end of a summer, she had a dinner. All the kids in the neighborhood. And we had to ask for everything in French.  We could not speak English.
Speaker 1: Do you have any idea of when she was born?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Gee.  How old were you when she died?
Speaker 2: I was thirteen.  And she was seventy-three.  Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: So then, so then you had a very strong relationship with your maternal grandmother.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  We all lived in the family home.  My mother [Ula Catherine Gueno] and father [Joseph Claude Gueno] and my two brothers and my aunt and her daughter and her husband.  It was a big home.
Speaker 1: Do you have any other grandmother stories you wanna share?
Speaker 2: Well I used to write letters for her to the different relatives.  And I just recently found--discovered that she would send pictures of everything.  Graduations and other occasions to a cousin of mine in Cincinnati [Ohio] who was her son's daughter.  And I've connected with her in recent years.  And she sent me picture that I didn't have.
Speaker 1: Oh that's very nice.
Speaker 2: So that's very nice. I plan to go to Cincinnati to meet with her and get some more pictures.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.  Your father's parents.  You said his--your--they were deceased?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Well your mother--your paternal grandmother was deceased. You didn't know her.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's the father.  Grandfather.
Speaker 1: It was the father.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm who I didn't know.
Speaker 1: What do you remember of your paternal grandmother?
Speaker 2: My maternal grandmother and grandfather lived about a block from us.  They lived on the same number 4700 block on Champlain [Avenue in Chicago, Illinois] we lived in.  They lived in 4700 block of Langley [Avenue] which was one block over.  So we were--it was no problem running over to their house.  And having a close relationship with them.
Speaker 1: Have you ever heard any one say how your grandparents were when they moved to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: How old they were?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.  They came there very (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) My mother was nine years old when they moved to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Do you know what kind of work your grandparents did?
Speaker 2: Well my grandfather was a Pullman porter.  And my grandmother was a homemaker.
Speaker 1: Now that brings us to your mom.  So she--your mother was a very young woman when the family came to Chicago.
Speaker 2: Yeah, nine years old.
Speaker 1: Nine. Okay.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your father, he--they came--.
Speaker 2: I don't' know when his family came to Chicago.  But my mother and father met when--well they married when my father was twenty-one and my mother was nineteen.
Speaker 1: And they probably had a grand wedding like your own.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Mm-hmm.  She has the picture of them.  They married--I think they married in our family home.
Story_ID: 7514
Speaker 1: Any special stories you wanna share with us, Mom stories?
Speaker 2: My mother [Ula Catherine Gueno] was very active in civic affairs.  And she was a precinct captain for about fifteen years.  And so I experienced her involvement with our community.  Very helpful to anyone and everyone who needed help.  At any hour of the day or night.  And so it was very exciting.  And my father [Joseph Claude Gueno] on the other hand was not involved. He just worked and came home and then he was with us when she was doing her precinct work.
Speaker 1: So then therein lies the origin of your own activity and generosity with (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh yes. My mother was very generous.  Very generous.
Speaker 1: Any special stories you remember about your dad?
Speaker 2: My dad was a tennis player.  After work.  And he played at Washington Park at the [Chicago, Illinois] Washington Park courts.  And I often when I had the occasion to pass down now [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] drive, I reminisced about how all the fellows who played tennis wore the long white pants, the white shoes, the white cap, short sleeve white shirt.  And how different it is now (laughs).  But it was very, very thrilling for me to reminisce about that. 'Cause two weeks of his vacation he would spend one week playing tennis.  And my mother worked.  And so did he.  But we would spend his vacation, his week out there with him on the tennis court.
Speaker 1: Oh that's really nice.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Oh your mother worked.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh surprise.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, yeah.
Speaker 1: What did she do?
Speaker 2: She was with the board of education in special services.
Story_ID: 7515
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Hmm.  My favorite food is probably gumbo filet (laughs).
Speaker 1: And what is your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well now or then?  Now it's the Caribbean.
Story_ID: 7516
Speaker 1: Now it's the Caribbean.  And before what was your [favorite vacation destination]--?
Speaker 2: Well we had an aunt, my mother's [Ula Catherine Gueno] older sister who lived in Cleveland, Ohio in the Phillis Wheatley [Association] home there.  And that was for young women. And we would visit her.  And the uncle lived--my uncle lived in Cincinnati [Ohio]. So some summers we would go to Cincinnati, then Cleveland to visit the two relatives.  Then Detroit [Michigan] just visit that city.  We had no relatives there.
Speaker 1: Mm-mm-mm.  That's nice. What is your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Hmm, I have many. (laughs)
Speaker 1: Share a couple of them.
Speaker 2: Oh I can't think of any.
Story_ID: 7517
Speaker 1: What kind of child were you growing up?
Speaker 2: I was a very, very nice little girl.  I always wanted to be a good little girl and do what my mother [Ula Catherine Gueno] and my grandmother told me to do.  And I did.  Of course, I was a tomboy too.
Speaker 1: But wait.  How did that jibe (laughs)?
Speaker 2: Well when I was younger I think I was this, you know, little prim proper little girl.  But I had two brothers--one older and one younger.  And so I had to be a tomboy.  Riding the wagon and, you know, all that kind of stuff (laughs).
Speaker 1: So that was a good spot for a girl to be in the middle of two boys.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But was it limiting too?  Or just very freeing?
Speaker 2: Well my older brother was five years older than I.  And my younger brother was three years younger.  So I was closer to my younger brother.  I was kind of like his second mother or little mother (laughs).
Speaker 1: And you'd ruled the roost.
Speaker 2: But he was a nice little fellow. We got along very well.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.  What was life like growing up in the Gueno household?
Speaker 2: Hmm. Well it was no--we knew what we had to do.  We knew we had to do the best we could in school and be the best kind of people we could be at all times.  We just knew that.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any special story that kind of illustrates, you know, what kind of average day in the life--or if something significant then stood out.
Speaker 2: Well my mother worked.  But my grandmother was home with us.  So that was, that was good.  Because she took care of us and she cooked the dinner. And just made sure that everything was, you know, the way it should be.
Story_ID: 7518
Speaker 1: What were your neighbors like?  What was life on the street like?  What was street was it you grew up--?
Speaker 2: Champlain Avenue, 4700 block, [Chicago, Illinois].  To one--to the right of our home were the professional people--doctors, lawyers dentist, school teachers.  And to the left of us we were kind of in the middle. Were the working people, the blue collar people.  And the stay-at-home moms.  A lot of stay-at-home moms.
Speaker 1: But--so the vitality of the day-to-day life, do you have any story you can tell us about? You know that kind of illustrates the exchange between the neighbors?  And, you know, block club events? Anything special that stands out? The sights, the sounds, the smells you used to associate with growing up?
Speaker 2: There were no block clubs at that time.  But by my mother [Ula Catherine Gueno] being a precinct captain, you know, we knew everybody.  We spoke to everyone and everyone spoke to us. And talked with us.  So it was a very nice association.
Speaker 1: Did you go to the Bud Billiken Parade?
Speaker 2: I was in the Bud Billiken Parade.  When I was five years old.  My mother made a dress for me out of crepe paper.  And it was beautiful (laughs).  I had a little hat on my head.  I guess that's why I like hats now (laughs).  And then later when I graduated from grammar school when I was thirteen, I was on a float in the parade.
Speaker 1: Were you a majorette and all that?
Speaker 2: Oh no.  Just sitting--I think I was with mutual--on the Mutual Life Insurance float.  One of my neighbors had an affiliation with that company.  And she and her niece were here from St. Louis [Missouri]. And we were on the float with our graduation dresses on (laughs).
Story_ID: 7519
Speaker 1: Was your mother [Ula Catherine Gueno] a Republican or Democrat?
Speaker 2: Democrat.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  I bet your mother knew my mother.
Speaker 2: Probably.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) precinct captain.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Mm-hmm.  We were the 4th ward 54th precinct [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Oh you really (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That's imbedded in my brain (laughs).
Speaker 1: Who was the, who was the--who were the politicians at that time?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Well I remember Mayor [Edward Joseph] Kelly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She worked, you know, for to get him elected.  And she wasn't in politics after that.
Speaker 1: Do you, do you remember any of the names that you may have heard your mother say they were state legislators or aldermen?
Speaker 2: William Dawson and (pauses)--I can't remember any others.
Story_ID: 7520
Speaker 1: What was your church home?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was Seventh Day Adventist, and Shiloh Seventh Day Adventist Church was her church.
Speaker 1: Was it one in the community?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was about three or four blocks from us.
Story_ID: 7521
Speaker 1: What was it like for you in grammar school?  Do you remember any of your favorite teachers or a special experience?
Speaker 2: Yes, mm-hmm.  From kindergarten and all through--all through the grades I had a--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Are there any stories that stick out of school?
Speaker 2: When I was in eighth grade one of our teachers had a--Mrs. Smith had a contest.  I don't remember what the contest was.  But I was one of the winners.  And there were like six or seven of us. And one Saturday morning she took us down to The Chicago Theater to see a movie. And then on the way back we stopped at 47th Street [Chicago, Illinois].  The Morris's [sic, Morris] Eat Shop.  And that was a very, very exclusive-looking place from the outside. Curtains and everything. And we had lunch there.  And it was very--a very thrilling experience for me.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) properly (unclear).  How many kids did she take?
Speaker 2: Six or seven of us.
Speaker 1: High school.  When you got into high school what was high school like for you?
Speaker 2: That was very exciting.  I took it in my stride.  I wasn't involved in any of the like the cheerleaders.  My mother [Ula Catherine Gueno] would not let me be one (laughs). I remember that.  And I was in the social club. Where again I was able to use the social graces that my grandmother had taught us.
Speaker 1: What kind of things did the social club do?
Speaker 2: They hosted an event for the seniors.  They hosted events for the new kids coming in.  Different clubs, the history club, things like that.
Speaker 1: Did you ever like--were you like the president?  Or did you take an active role?  Or did you just--.
Speaker 2: I was not the president.  But I was very active. I was very interested in it.
Speaker 1: Give us an idea of some of the things that you pulled off for the social club.
Speaker 2: Well I was more or less with the group.
Speaker 1: But you know, that--in my sense is that you have a way of leading without beating people over the head with--So--I can understand that even though you are--may have been part of the group, you--I just would like a sense of from your side of how you get things done with--from the groups that you are responsible for.
Speaker 2: I knew what are--what we were supposed to do.  And I went about doing it.  And I--You know. So I don't remember whether anyone whatever, except we all did it.  I don't know who the leader was.  Maybe I was.  I don't know. (laughs)
Speaker 1: Just get it done.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: What was your high school prom like?
Speaker 2: Oh.  I went to one military ball.  And I went to my prom.  My senior prom.
Speaker 1: And so, so then growing up social life was like the activities of the social club and these major events. Yeah.
Speaker 2: Did you do the debutante thing and all?
Speaker 1: Nah, nah.  My mother didn't believe in that (laughs).  And I did belong to a club of some students from my grammar school had formed a club. One of the teachers had a daughter who was in our class. And so we formed a club. And we would meet at the [Hyatt] Rosemont social room.  And--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The Rosemont what?
Speaker 1: Social room, Social room in the Rosemont.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause they lived--she and her mother lived in the Rosemont.  And that was very exciting.
Speaker 2: Give me an example of what made it exciting.
Speaker 1: Well we would have parties, get-togethers. And it was a nice group of girls.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) Did you wear broomstick skirts (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Oh yes, mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Your mother, did she sew?  Or did your grandmother?
Speaker 1: My mother didn't make any of my clothes.  Except for the paper dress. (laughs).
Story_ID: 7522
Speaker 1: So you're getting through high school.  What was on a young student's mind now that you're getting through high school and going on to either home life or career or whatever? What was it like for you making the transition out of high school?
Speaker 2: High school?  I went to Wilson Junior College [later Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois].  And I, I knew that I didn't wanna be a teacher. 'Cause my mother [Ula Catherine Gueno] told me I didn't want to. (laughs)  And so I really--I was interested in library science.  Because I had worked part time in the library when I was in high school.  And I really liked that.  The Hall Branch Library on 48th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue]. And so I went to Wilson.  And just took the general courses. And that's where I met my husband [Edward Gardner].
Speaker 1: Oh that's right. Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well he was at [Chicago] Teacher's College [probably Columbia College].
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: And I went to Wilson in '47 [1947]--September of '47 [1947], right after I graduated from high school.  And he was there--I think he had been there a semester or a year.  And so, you know, I met him there.
Speaker 1: You introduced--What was the event that--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) A friend of his just in the hall walking in the hall. I had a best friend who went there too. And we were just walking.  And this fellow that was a friend of his was very, very gregarious.  So he was always talking and, you know. And that's how I met him.
Speaker 1: And what--Did you like date right away?  Or--?
Speaker 2: Well no. In the lunchroom I would see him. And he would call me over and, you know. He and his friend and my friend and I would sit and have lunch together.  And I met him about in October, maybe November. And it wasn't until that following February that he asked me for a date.
Speaker 1: Hmm. Did you (laughs) give him a hard time?
Speaker 2: Well--.
Speaker 1: When he asked you for that date (laughs)?
Speaker 2: No.  Because his approach was when could he come over and meet my--my parents.  Which was really the right thing for him to have said (laughs).  'Cause he would have to get the approval. (laughs)  So he came over.  And my mother knew him.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: She had seen him--at--on the bus in the morning when she was going to her school out in Morgan Park [Illinois].  He was going to Fenger [Academy] High School [Chicago, Illinois]. And she would see him on the bus.
Speaker 1: And so how long after you started dating did you like set the date?
Speaker 2: Oh let's see. That was in '48 [1948] that we had our first date in February.  So by that (pause) I guess that Christmas.  That next--That December we were engaged.  And--and then we married in '50 [1950].
Speaker 1: With your grandmother and her background for all the graces of good living and (unclear) social activity, you had a large wedding for that period. Would you tell us what it was like in the African American middle-class social situation? Set that scene for us up. A large wedding and (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well it wasn't really a large wedding.  I think 300 people in our family home.  (unclear) 300.  Maybe 300.
Speaker 1: You don't think 300 people is large? (laughs)
Speaker 2: Well I guess because it was in our family home. And my mother had a beautiful setting with the (unclear) ferns and candelabras and everything.  So it was very, very nice.
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you this.  There is--there seems to be a little discomfort or reluctance to share with us what I know had to be a very rich, rich period for you growing up from just say birth through the school years.  Is there any reason that you have--and you don't have to answer this--that you would not like to tell us more about how life was for the Gueno family?  And then later on? You weren't even (unclear) yet then.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mm-hmm.  We always had a car.  Like they say, I was almost born in a car. (laughs)
Story_ID: 7523
Speaker 1: Did you have any stories of your grandfather used to bring home from the road?
Speaker 2: (pause) You know, stories about, you know, the executives. Now I know them as executives who rode the train going to and from whatever.
Speaker 1: 'Cause both your grandmother and your grandfather the orientation was to, you know, a better life.  'Cause that was a very good job--,
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --(Unclear) for an African American to have.
Speaker 2: Right.  Mm--hmm.
Speaker 1: And I was wondering if you heard any stories just, you know, like you hear old folk share. That kind of is an indication of life.
Speaker 2: Well since he was deceased, you know, we would hear that, you know the stories maybe that my grandmother would tell. But there wasn't anything extraordinary.  Except that he must have been very good.  Because, you know, they bought the home that my mother [Ula Catherine Gueno] still lives in today.
Story_ID: 7524
Speaker 1: Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois] was bustling at that time.  What do you--what was Bronzeville--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Like from your point of view?
Speaker 2: Well the New Re--, The New Regal Theatre was at 47th and [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]  drive. And every weekend my brothers and I would go to the Regal.  We would put on our Sunday best and go to the Regal for what, what was ever playing there.  And so we enjoyed that very much.  And saw all of the--these people who are stars today.  Billy Eckstine and Dizzy Gillespie and everybody was there performing.
Speaker 1: And well since you mentioned the Regal, now let me ask you about when you decided to do the Regal.  Would you tell me how that whole idea to create the New Regal [Theatre] Foundation, how it actually started?
Speaker 2: Well my daughter [Terri Gardner] had a friend, Ed Wilkerson. And he and his group would play at all kind of terrible places.  Down in the basement, up in the loft with part of the roof gone (laughs).  And they were excellent musicians.  And very clean--cut fellows. And so I always said, "Well, you know, with the way that they play in all these horrible places and they do such a good job with their music, they really deserve to play somewhere where it's really a nice atmosphere.  A nice place."  And so we thought of the--(unclear) the Regal Theatre was for sale.  Not the Regal, the Avalon Theater was for sale.  And we thought that would be a very good venue. And (pause) so that's what--you know, one of the reasons.  And then we felt that plays should be on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]. Because we attended a lot of plays. And we'd have to travel north up and down one street. And, you know, really hard to find places to--where performances were being held. So we felt that something should be on the South Side for entertainment and entertainers.
Story_ID: 7525
Speaker 1: It was reported in the press, and I guess kind of rumored too that Mr. [Edward] Gardner gave you the [New] Regal [Theatre] for a birthday gift.
Speaker 2: (Laughs).
Speaker 1: Can you (unclear) that for us?
Speaker 2: Well not--It was something I wanted. And so he, you know, went to see it and everything. And said, he thought, you know, that that would be the right place and everything.  And I agreed.  But he could not give it to me. Because its owned by the New Regal Theatre Foundation, which is a not-for-profit 501(c)3. So I think that was just a, you know. Just a saying that just, you know, was cute.  But it was not accurate.
Speaker 1: And actually it stood in the way of really the Regal being able to do--the foundation being able to do or attract as many donors and contributors.
Speaker 2: No.  I don't think that, that was--because that was just a very light thing that was said.  And, you know, it was not really taken to seriously.  The fact that we owned Soft Sheen Products was really the factor.  People felt that we didn't need any donations or any contributions.  Because we owned the Soft Sheen Products.  And, you know, we could afford to have the Regal--or operate the Regal.  You know, even though it was a not-for-profit foundation.  And whenever I spoke, I always talked about the New Regal Theatre Foundation being not-for-profit 501(c)3.  and I don't think that my husband was as conscientious or as conscious of making that point clear. Because it--even to this day people still think that Soft Sheen Products owns it. Or owned it. And that has been what I think has been the biggest hindrance to contributions and donations.
Speaker 1: Do you find today that people still know that it's--know that it is somewhat non--for--profit?  How is the theater doing in the community now?  Is it still active and viable?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well we have a managing director.  And she is experienced in not--for--profit theater. And she's doing a wonderful job of bringing various plays and entertainment to the theater now. And there was a few years when,when the artists were traveling and were putting and performing in all the cities, going on tour.  We did really well. But then that stopped about three or four years ago. And they're just to touring like they were.  And--but she has managed to get some really good plays that are written by African Americans and performed by African Americans. Although we're not opposed to any other people coming in. As long as it sells the tickets. And so we were doing quite well in this past year with the performances. And the theater really had come alive. Where it was something going on every week or every other week on 79th street at the theater.
Speaker 1: Okay.  that's really good.  I was always impressed by the vitality--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mm--hmm.
Speaker 1: It brought back to the area.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And the children programs which are close to your heart.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Mm--hmm.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about that.
Speaker 2: Well I've always been a proponent of our children.  I've (unclear)--Our children have always faced what children have faced all these years.  The conflict resolution, peer pressure.  And I said, "I wanted our plays--our children's plays to address those things."  Self--esteem being another. And so we--she's always tried to get plays for the children that address that. And this, this coming season starting in October [2002] Jackie Taylor has written several plays which address that. And so I'm very, very thrilled about that.
Speaker 1: If you had--if I were a fairy Godmother and gave you a wish regarding the Regal Foundation--The New Regal Theatre Foundation, what wish would I be granting?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Having a play that would come in and be so successful that it would run for a year maybe more.
Story_ID: 7526
Speaker 1: Now, of course, the New Regal Theatre Foundation is not the only recipient of your personal largess over the years. You wanna tell us about some of your other--?
Speaker 2: Well I'm a founding board member of the Chicago Sinfonietta. A midsized classical orchestra that performs at Orchestra Hall [Chicago, Illinois].  And we're into our sixteenth season now.
Speaker 1: And that's a very, very vital cultural institution.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Since what year?
Speaker 2: Well this is the sixteenth year.  In fact, it started along the time when The New Regal Theatre opened.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--and you were chairman of that for a long time?
Speaker 2: No.  I was just a--I was a board member.
Speaker 1: Mm--hmm.
Speaker 2: Of the Sinfonietta, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh you're currently the chairman of the Advisory board?
Speaker 2: Chairman of the honorary board.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have any favorite stories about any of your, you know? Donor organizations or any favorite stories about your activities with the various organizations you're with?
Speaker 2: Well with the Sinfonietta having been a board member for many years, and a participating and active board meetings, I was always very aware of things being done in a good businesslike way.  Because of my position in our company. I was secretary--treasurer and then a little later co--chair of the board along with my husband [Edward Gardner]. And I was always aware of good business practices being in place at all times.  That's one of those things that you wanted before (laughs).  And with Sinfonietta, participating in a board meeting was very much like participating in a board meeting in a company--my company.  Only not quite as primary.  But I always felt that whatever I learned in business, those were the principles that I would be an advocate of in our board meetings at the Sinfonietta.  And they listened.  You know. And then I'd always say, "Well put your money where your mouth is," (laughs).  Because whenever they would fall short of some money and I would contribute. But I would always say, "Well, you know, this really shouldn't be happening."  And I would give them a solution. And so they followed it.  Because I said, "Well I'm not gonna bail you out again," (laughs). But they did adhere to those really necessary procedures.
Story_ID: 7527
Speaker 1: Another very active area for you is the Committee of 200, is that right?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me something about your (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) yeah.  (unclear) the Committee of 200 and something a group of women. And we're like 400 strong now of preeminent business women entrepreneurs from all over the world. We have Japanese women. We have--one of them [Wanda] Ferragamo [CEO of Italy's Salvatore Ferragamo] is in there.  And quite a few women whose names would be recognizable.
Story_ID: 7528
Speaker 1: Certainly your business formally--forming owners of a major corporate entity and the United States having participation in global--in a global sense has had a very large impact on the African American community in the business sense.  But the philanthropic endeavors of the Gardner family has also had a big impact on the life of local, national, international.  Let us go back to the beginning of the business.  Can you talk about that from your side?  When the family started the trip to what we know ended in a great, great, great success?  Would you trace that for me?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's very, very vivid (laughs).  My husband [Edward Gardner]--I was a stay at home mom by choice. My mother [Ula Catherine Gueno] was a career woman and I wanted her to be home baking the cookies and going to Parent and Teachers Association [PTA] meetings. But she was a career woman. And so I said, "Well when I get married and have my kids, I wanna stay home with them."  And it just so happened that I married a man who believed in the same thing.  'Cause his mother was a stay at home mom. But that meant that he had to have two jobs.  Because after we married in 1950, we--I worked at the Chicago Public Library.  And he was teaching.  And so we saved our money diligently.  We lived at his parents' home, a couple blocks from where our--a couple of doors from where our home is now.  And so we were able to save money. Because we weren't paying a whole lot in rent.  And so we broke ground for our home a couple of doors away in February of '52 [1952].  And in June of '52 [1952] our home was ready.  And we moved in.  And that's when we started--planned to start our family.  And then Gary [Gardner] was born like four years later. Our first child was born four years later. So my husband had an extra job to make up for the salary that I was not bringing in.  And it happened to have been selling hair care products.  Name brand hair care products.  And he was very successful at it eventually.  'Cause he's a born salesperson.  And he formed a route. Every week he would go to the same beauty shops a certain day at the same time.  And they said, "No, we're not gonna ever see you again.  So we're not gonna even let you in." (laughs) So he went back the second week and the third week. The second week they told him the same.  The third week. The second week they told him the same. The third week they said, "Well maybe you are for real.  You know.  That we will see you again.  'Cause we've seen three weeks in a row, you know, weeks in a row on the same day about the same time."  So they started opening their doors for him. And that was the beginning of his success as a salesman to the beauticians.  And then they started telling him that they didn't like what they had to use--the products that were available to them.  And he would come home.  And  on the weekend he would experiment in our basement and take it to them the next week.  And they'd say, "No.  It's too much of this or too little of that."  You know.  So he would come back and try again.  Until finally they told him, "This is it.  This is great.  Now don't change it."  And so when he told me that, then I said, "Well okay.  I'm gonna go down there in the basement with you with my pad and pencil and I'm gonna write down everything you put in and the quantity."  I said, "So that it will become a formula and you'll be able to duplicate it every time the same way."  So we--We did that.  And so thus our products was born and consistent.  And we used the highest grade of--There were no chemicals in our first product.  The highest grade--really pharmaceutical grade which we really didn't have to use.  But we didn't know any better.  But it cost more money.  But we were not into profits per se like, you know, some companies wanted the pro--all the money to be profit. But we didn't know.  Plus when we did know, we still continued to use the best in our products.  I think that's why they were so successful.  'cause people would call and place an order. And they would say, "What else do you have new? 'Cause everything that you all make is good."  And that was so wonderful to hear.  And by that time I was the only girl in the office and in the plant (laughs).  But enjoying it.  Mm--hmm.  I really enjoyed it.  And getting the kids oriented. Well they had to--On holidays from school they had to be with me. Because I wasn't gonna leave them home alone.  Couldn't afford a babysitter. And so they were with us on holidays, summer vacation.  And I'd go home in time to--I wouldn't leave until after they had gone to school and then I'd come home in time for lunch or when they were coming home.  So they were not latchkey kids.  You know.  To me they were the most important people or things in my life.  That I be, you know, a mother to them and be there for them.  And so that's the way that went.
Speaker 1: So when that first big round of success hit, where everybody was clamoring for the product, how was that?  That must have been stressful--Good but stressful time?
Speaker 2: Yeah well we moved--We were on 71st [Street] and South Chicago [Illinois].  First at a one store front.  And then when we outgrew that in a couple of years, we moved across the street to two--to a double storefront.  And three years after we moved there we moved next door to a much larger place. It was like a three--triple storefront. And--but each time we moved because we had to.  We were bursting at the seams. And by that time the kids were in high school.  Well two of them were in high school and two were in upper grades and grade school.  And so they, you know, had to be there with us on summer vacation. But by that time they were used to it and they really liked to--they didn't always like to be there when they were a little younger. But I told them that they--I wasn't leaving them at home and this was where I had to be.  So they had to be there and make themselves useful.  Which they did.  And so by the time we moved on 87th Street, which was in '77 [1977], they were well into--a couple of them were in college.  And the two younger ones in high school.  They were well into deciding what areas they wanted to work in.  And through the whole process they were just wonderful.  They were very dedicated.  And without us even saying, you know, "You've got to be this and you've got to be that."  They just felt the vibes I guess from their father and I. Our genuine commitment.
Speaker 1: So was--That was very gratifying to see them automatically take to it.
Speaker 2: Mm--hmm.
Speaker 1: And that enabled the family to handle the success of the big product.  I guess--What  was it Care Free Curl--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yep, yep.
Speaker 1: Was the first big hit.
Speaker 2: Mm--hmm. After twelve years of being in business. And they--they went to college.
Speaker 1: Mm--hmm.
Speaker 2: All of them went to college and would work with us on the weekend or at holiday vacations.
Speaker 1: Give us their names and tell us what they did in the business.
Speaker 2: Okay.  The oldest was Gary.  And he was involved in our marketing and production department.  And Terri our daughter was involved in our advertising and photography areas.  And Guy our third child, second son was involved in manufacturing.  And Tracy our youngest son was involved in research and development.
Story_ID: 7529
Speaker 1: So was it really hard for the family to decide to give up the company after all those years?
Speaker 2: Well they were very young.  In fact, Terri had been in the business since she was eight (laughs).  Gary ten, Guy five and Tracy three (laughs). So that's all they had known, you know from those ages. And like I said they had gone to college in the areas that they were interested in. Gary has his J.D. [Juris Doctorate].  He got his joint degree from Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois].  His MBA [Masters in Business Administration] in marketing and his J.D.  And Terri had her degree in photography, University of Illinois [Urbana--Champaign, Illinois].  And Guy finally got his degree from IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois]. But he worked in the plants long hours.  And so it took him thirteen years to finish. (laughs)  But he finished.  And then he had dabbled in a lot of other areas in school, economics and business and along with mechanical engineering.  'Cause he was--He a natural mechanic.  He could--Not just mechanic. But he could make machines.  He could--he was responsible for our machines running and for placement of machines.  He would place a machine where nobody ever thought another machine could go (laughs).  So he really is very--Well we called him a genius at that. We'd have a repairman come in and fix a machine. He'd watch him.  We'd never have to have a repairman come again for that machine (laughs).
Speaker 1: Did he stay in that area when he left the company--I mean when everybody transitioned into something else?  Did he stay in--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No.  He's in development. Housing, buildings.  Mm--hmm.  And then Tracy was--He's the only one who went to school knowing exactly what he wanted to do.  He went to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois].  And he has his Bachelor's in chemical engineering. And then after he finished that, he went to U of C [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and got his Master's in finance international.  'Cause he was interested in that after working.  You know, in those areas for a while.
Speaker 1: So what kind--After the company is up and growing and successful and--What kind of day--to--day business challenged did you have bridge?  And do you think those challenges came at you in any different way, being an African American group, rather than being, you know, a Caucasian white or whatever?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well there were the banks.  There were the banks.  Mm--hmm.  A lot of stipulations. And not that much money. And even in--even, you know, after being in business for twenty years, you know still there was not that free--That feeling of free flow. And when you'd read about some company that went bankrupt, you see what they had owed the bank and what they had borrowed from the bank.  And that was a bit discouraging.  But it was a fact of life.  So we had to deal with it.
Story_ID: 7530
Speaker 1: Having gone through all the traditional challenges of business period, but certainly those that accompany being an African American business, that whole growth thing is always such a challenge.  'Cause you just need to, to have the thrust to go in the direction that you see you can and need to go in.  And often the financing is not made as easily available for African Americans or other minority groups.  So--and if you weren't as judicious with the use of the money you did actually make--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: I guess your success story would have never been written.
Speaker 2: Right, Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: So would you take us back to the time now when it--when it became apparent that, "Okay, we're gonna go in a different direction"?
Speaker 2: You mean like selling the company [Soft Sheen Products]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Well--.
Speaker 1: What was it like even before you were approached to--and did--whatever the state of being, did that help you make the decision to go forward?
Speaker 2: Well [son] Gary [Gardner] had been our president for about fifteen years.  And he was forty years old.  And there was like a pattern that he followed.  His father [Edward Gardner] married at twenty-five.  He married at twenty-five.  His father had gone into business at forty.  So he in following that pattern it was--He was forty years old.  And he was president of the company.  And he told us that he would like to try something else on his own.  And that he was forty and he wanted to do that.  And we always, you know. He had done a good job for us and been there for us.  So we should be there for him.  And so we started looking for a president.  And I was not thrilled at having to look for someone.  Because our philosophy and our values, they just--And our sophistication just did not lend well to outsiders.  Who especially had been in corporate America, and African American?  And so after two years of looking, and not really coming up with anyone that we felt could do the job and to follow what our philosophy was, he said, "Well I'm forty-two now." He said, "So I've got to go.  Because I'm not going to, you know, to--It'll be too late." You know.  So we looked even more diligently.  And we had some consultants come in and work in the different areas to see just what exactly what kind of person we would really need to do--to take up the mantle.  And after the consultant was there three weeks.  He came to me and he said--he said, "I have your--You have your president." And I said, "Oh?" And he said, "[daughter] Terri [Gardner]." And I said, "Why didn't I think of that?" Of course, when he told her that, she ran out of the room (laughs).  But then she recovered and--very quickly.  And she said, "Okay.  And I'll give you all five years." And so then he was glad.  Because he knew that we would be in good hands with her.  And so he was able to go off and start his own company.  And so she took over.  And she did a wonderful job.  And she was doing a wonderful job.  And Janu-, One December--She had been with us I think about two years, maybe three years.  And someone from L'Oreal called and asked her, you know, would we be interested in selling.  And she said," "You know, I'm busy running the company.  You know, and all you all are doing is fishing and wanting to see, you know, how we do things and everything." And she said, "So leave me alone." (laughs) So they called again about two or three weeks later.  And she told them the same thing.  And--'Cause when they--They wanna come in and due diligence and you know.  And that's looking at everything.  And you don't necessary want people or just anyone doing that. So they called a third time.  And she said, "Well you know, maybe I better talk to, you know,  the family about this." And so she did.  And my husband has the philosophy, "Well I'll listen to what anybody's got to say." So [son] Tracy [Gardner] worked with them.  And--but he told them, "Well you all have to be in and out of here in six months.  You cannot tie up anything and--because we're running a business here." And they adhered to what he had said.  And they came up with, you know, yeah they wanted to buy us." So we had a meeting.  And here the kids were all older.  I mean--old adults (laughs) in their--in their forties.  You know, Terri was forty-five.  No, she was forty-three at the time.  No, she was thirty-something.  But anyway, they were adults.  You know.  And we felt that they should be able to, you know, choose whatever they wanna do.  Because they had been with us since, since their childhood.  And so then we decided to sell.
Story_ID: 7531
Speaker 1: That was about the most--well the swiftest and I should say most peaceful transition in the history of business.  Whether black, white, gray or green.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.  Well we met with the upper level of executive, the chairman and the president.  And they came to Chicago [Illinois] to meet with us.  And the beginning of L'Oreal was very much like the beginning of Soft Sheen [Products].  It was a husband and wife who made the products during the day and they went out and sold in the evening.  So that was very inspiring.  And the executives, you know, seemed to really be very well grounded, and very much likely.  And so we, you know, felt very comfortable with that.  So we felt that, you know that this was really the right thing to do at the right time.
Speaker 1: So in a lot of ways L'Oreal's interest was really in--a little beyond the business interest. There was, you know--.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.  Yes.  And they recognized our products as being you know high level products.  And on the cutting edge.  And that--and the kind of people that we were.  And so it was really a good match.
Speaker 1: That is really great.  And even though this was a very for lack of a better word right now, kind of peaceful transition, what kind of things pulled at your heart strings as you really decided and, you know, moved forward out into the next level?
Speaker 2: Well nothing.
Speaker 1: Oh really!
Speaker 2: 'Cause I had--I gave--when I do something, I give it my all.  And then when I see that there's like, you know, the sell, then I just cut it off.  I just cut it off and I enjoyed--I enjoyed the business.  If it hadn't been for the business, I would have not been out in it.  I would still be a homemaker.  And since my retirement, I have gone back to being in my home and enjoying it.  And just you know.  I have no regrets.  I enjoyed every minute of the business.  Every minute of it.  Even those hard times when you go into the bank and, you know.  They were being banks.  And but I still enjoyed every minute of it.
Speaker 1: And that's quite a statement to make over the course of a long, you know, business.  And (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Thirty-four years we were in business.
Speaker 1: That's great, and then Terri stayed another three or four?
Speaker 2: Yeah, three, three years.  Mm-hmm.  And then she--well she's forty-six now.  So she told them like in February [2001] her three years was gonna be up in June.  And she told them in February.  And they were upset.  So then they asked her to stay on until they found someone to take her place.  And they found a young African American woman [Candace Matthews] from Atlanta [Georgia] with Coca-Cola [Company].  And then they asked her to stay until November.  Because that's when the new president could come.  And so she did.
Story_ID: 7532
Speaker 1: And so Terri is doing then a lot like you now, doing her stay at home thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Mr. [Edward] Gardner shared with us that she wants to adopt a--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.  She's applied to adopt a child from Ethiopia [Africa].  Well here there's very few.  She wants a girl of four or five years old.  And they're very hard to come by here.  So--and she's even enrolled in Loyola [University, Chicago, Illinois].  And she working on her master's in social work.  And she's enjoying it.  She is really--and she said, "It's so nice to be out in the daytime shopping." (laughs) So she and I go to lunch.  And we go shopping.  We do things together.
Speaker 1: That's great.  Well you've both certainly earned it.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Story_ID: 7533
Speaker 1: Tell me the philosophy on which all of this was built? Both personal and professional philosophy.
Speaker 2: Of--we always believed in whatever we did for it to be top level.  Top level, very best.
Speaker 1: And it's kind of a rarity that both of you--I know that Chicago [Illinois] is not certainly--Chicago as well as the national community really do adopt the Gardner family in a very special way.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes.
Speaker 1: Because the Gardner family has maintained that appro--approachable sense of being.  And it seems to me in having talked to you and Mr. [Edward] Gardner it comes from that family thing again.  And the family being so much in agreement on how to execute day-to-day--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right.
Speaker 1: --Life.  And (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: I mean what on your side of it--What is your feeling about how the Chicago [Illinois] and national community has responded to what your family has certainly shared with them?
Speaker 2: Hmm.  I'm very pleased that, you know, we've been accepted the way that we have been.  Because we are--what you see is what you get.  That's another one of my sayings.  I couldn't think of 'em when you asked me before.  But we are genuine sincere people.  And that's the only way we know how to be.
Speaker 1: And I think the vitality in the family way of being extends way beyond the Soft Sheen years.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Which is really great.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 7534
Speaker 1: What do you think you would be remembered for? Or what would you like to be remembered for? Both of those?
Speaker 2: (Pauses) That's hard to say.  I'm a very modest person.  I don't know if you realize that.
Speaker 1: Oh no.  How would I know that? (laughs)
Speaker 2: So really I don't--I don't think that you know, what we did was so special.  It was just something that came naturally.
Speaker 1: But because of that modest naturalness, honesty, sincerity, whatever you call it.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And because of what this Chicago [Illinois] community (unclear) have perceived, what do you, do you think that's really largely what the Gardner legacy will be?
Speaker 2: I think so.  Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: I think that seems fair.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.  Honesty, sincerity.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Honesty and sincerity. Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Now I'll just ask you if you can put that in a statement for me.  So that later--I mean we know what we're saying.  But later they'll be able whoever is referring back to this information will be able to.  So let me ask you this question.  What do you think your legacy will be?
Speaker 2: (Pauses) Hmm.  "They did it their way."
Story_ID: 7535
Speaker 1: Is there anything relevant to us knowing something else about Bettiann Louise Gueno Gardner? (laughs) I remembered.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Is there anything I didn't ask you maybe I should have? Or something that you would like to comment or share with us as we come to the wrap-up?
Speaker 2: Well we didn't mention 'ShopTalk'--publication that I was publisher of.  Which was another vehicle for communicating with the beauticians.  I think they're called cosmetologists.  Some call them cosmetologists.  But that was to give all the things that we knew and also international news that we brought to the beauticians from around the world from all over this country.  When we first started there was a magazine publication called--I think it was 'Beauty Trade'.  And I would read that.  And in the morning when I'd go to the office and I would read it from cover to cover.  And just learned a lot about the industry.  Who is in the industry.  Who was in the industry and what was going on and everything.  So madam--not madam, but Dr. [Marjorie Stewart] Joyner did a column that I found most interesting to the beauticians coming up.  How they should carry themselves.  How they should look in their shops.  And so then that magazine was no longer.  So therefore, 'ShopTalk' took that place.  And we tried to fill that void.  Which I really think that we did.  And we had articles and very helpful.
Speaker 1: That's an extremely successful trade magazine.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, yeah.  Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Now when did you suspend publication?
Speaker 2: Hmm, I don't remember exactly when.  But--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) But it lasted about what ten or twelve years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my--one of my best girlfriends Jean Brandon was the editor.  And she had had editorial background.  Plus she was a teacher.  And she did a really good job with that.
Story_ID: 7536
Speaker 1: Another thing that a lot of people don't know, your--are you the only female stockholder with the Chicago Bulls?
Speaker 2: Yes, African American.  Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And how did you come to make that decision?
Speaker 2: Well some one--my husband [Edward Gardner] was on a board with call him a Sunday--on a Sunday morning and asked did he want to be an investor in the Bulls.  And he's always liked, you know, basketball and the Bulls.  So he jumped at it.  And somehow he--his investment included me as my own person.  But he paid it all.  I didn't pay anything. (laughs)  Anyway, I am not Mrs. Edward Gardner, I'm Bettiann Gardner and he's Edward Gardner.  We're two separate entities as owning stock.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you were fortunately owners during the heyday years of the Chicago Bulls .
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, a little before the heyday.
Speaker 1: Right.  I mean but during that period.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) When it went into--yeah, Michael [Jordan].  And yeah.  It's been a great investment.  Mm-hmm.  And a great privilege, you know for me to be the only African American woman to be an own--an investor.
Speaker 1: Do you think they'll come back to their [Phil] Jackson--Jordan years of glory?
Speaker 2: (laughs) I don't know.  I think maybe they--they have a chance now with the new players that they have.  And with my husband hope springs eternal (laughs).  He is really a diehard fan.
Speaker 1: And (unclear) What have you done with the rings?  You got six of them.  [National Basketball Association's World Championships of 1991, 1992, 1993, 1996, 1997, 1998].
Speaker 2: Yes.  Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Do you ever wear (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Not all at once.  'Cause they only fit one finger on my hand (laughs).  But when we go to the games.  Or we have, you know, guests coming to the games I wear them.  Or to some affair where, you know, people wanna see them.
Story_ID: 7537
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your grandmother years. (laughs)
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you have how many grandchildren?
Speaker 2: We have two grandsons.  One nineteen and just finished [University of Chicago] Lab School [Chicago, Illinois] and he's gone off to college.  And our younger grandchild--son is seventeen.  He'll be graduating next year.
Speaker 1: And what are they interested in?
Speaker 2: Oh well get--the older one is interested in biology.  And the younger I think is interested in finance.
Speaker 1: What kind of relationship do you have with each one of them?
Speaker 2: Very, very good.  Very close.  They're so busy.  We have to make an appointment. (laughs)
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have any favorite grandmother, grandchild stories?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Not really.  We used to go over when the first one was born, we'd go over to Gary [Gardner] and Denise's home to baby-sit every Thursday.  And tell them to go and do whatever.  They would leave for like five minutes and come back. (laughs)  So finally they, you know, started staying away a little bit longer.  We convinced them we were competent. (laughs)  So and then, you know going to their plays and to the soccer games and things like that.  That was fun too.
Speaker 1: So you're about to add to that title twice again.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  And Tracy [Gardner] and his wife have been married five years and they're expecting in February.
