Story_ID: 500307
Speaker 1: Sir, I want to once again introduce myself.  I'm Larry Murphy; our videographer is Mr. Matthew Hickey and our observer is Dr. Julieanna Richardson whom I believe you know already--
Speaker 2: Yes, we have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) over the years.  Sir, would you please state your full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My name is Everett Francis Greene, Sr. [HistoryMaker Everett Greene] that is E-V-E-R-E-T-T, G-R-E-E-N-E.
Speaker 1: And where were your born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-four [1934]--I started to include all of that but February 16, 1934.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date can you state that for us?
Speaker 2: Today's date is November 12, 2007 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) November--okay. And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: We're at 1900 South Michigan Avenue--okay, I wanna, okay--Michigan Avenue, Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: All right thank you sir.  I'm gonna begin as we normally do with what we call our People magazine type questions.
Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  Wait, wait, stop, stop. I'm sorry. Okay, just--I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Speed.
Speaker 2: Our People magazine questions.
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  No, occupation.
Speaker 2: Okay I'm sorry.  It's not on my list.  And your occupation sir?
Speaker 1: Well I am an entertainer.  I retired from the job several years ago and for the last twenty-five years I have been fulfilling my dream in entertainment full time.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And that includes--basically I'm a vocalist but I also do some theater, narrations and voice overs.  So I have the chance to do the whole gamut of it.
Story_ID: 500308
Speaker 1: Some things, just general interest about yourself: what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My favorite food, I would think, I would say sweet potatoes.  I love sweet potatoes in every--anyway you can fix them mostly the pie form but, you know, baked, boiled, fried sweet potatoes is the top of my list.
Speaker 1: How about your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.  I like fall mostly because of the colors.  You know, when you look at the magic of the leaves changing colors in the fall is just something that I just marvel at whenever I can get an opportunity to observe, you know, (unclear) mainly if I can get to a hilltop just to look over into the trees and fall is just a beautiful time of the year for me.
Speaker 1: Speaking of colors, what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red (laughter).  You know we use red as always a stop color, you know, you can't use it in so many different scenarios, you know, but it is just a good color for me that I enjoy.  I enjoy watching or seeing people in red, make me think of happiness.
Speaker 1: Now you travel quite a bit, and I'm sure you've been to many places around the country and perhaps indeed around the world.  What would be your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, you know in my field, my vacation is like every day.  I say that and people say, "Oh my goodness.  You can't be on vacation all the time," but in my work I like to try and make my work my play.  So in some of the places that I have had the opportunity to perform if I were just to go just for a vacation, I think I would spend time in Italy.  I have really enjoyed being in the southern Italy.  It was a beautiful place to be, beautiful scenery and I thought it was really interesting.
Speaker 1: And finally, what would be a phrase or saying that kind of resonates with you that you might say this is my favorite phrase, my favorite saying?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I have a saying that people relate to me was keep looking up.  That's one of my favorite sayings, keep looking up, because I think it comes from if you look down, you know, if you look back, someone may be catching up to you but I enjoy keep looking up.  It's on my answering machine as well as my checks, keep looking up, you know, so.  'Cause there's always a brighter day up there somewhere, you know.
Story_ID: 500309
Speaker 1: I'm going to move now to some questions about your family background.  What is your mother's name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Lillian Lewis Greene.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in the Washington, D.C. area as well.  All of my family was born in the Washington, D.C. area.
Speaker 1: She spent all of her life there in D.C.?
Speaker 2: She spent the majority of her life in Washington until she moved to Indiana with a job.  In fact, that's how I came to be in Indiana, came to spend a weekend with her, and my weekend turned into fifty some years, you know, so.
Speaker 1: Tell me something about her background.  She was born in Washington, D.C., something about her background.  What was her rootage?
Speaker 2: Well, my mom was one of what seven kids, and I think she may have been somewhere in the middle of the group and again I guess that's where the singing part of my life comes in because my mom was a beautiful singer as well as her sisters.  And I guess just living just that normal life of working and raising ten kids.  You know, as I have like nine siblings and my mom was a taskmaster, you know, the judge and the jury.  So she kept everything in line, all of us in line, and we did what she said.  We weren't afraid of anything else or anybody else but just mom.  You know, you couldn't do wrong because if mom got the news then you were in trouble, you know.  Some folk were afraid of the police or other folk, but that wasn't our case so I'm so glad of that.  I think it made me and my nine brothers and sisters the people that we turned out to be in life, you know, so.  And I say nobody in trouble that you could really say trouble.  My mom used to have a saying, I heard my mom tell someone one time that it really hurt her to have to discipline her kids and then maybe a hour later she'd say, "Oh well, they're in line because I knock them down and think nothing of it."  You know, that was something that I really have a good laugh about when I talk about my mom when I speak of her, and--just.
Story_ID: 500310
Speaker 1: There were ten of you, you say.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Give us the names of the ten in order and where you fall in that line (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, I--my oldest brother was Lawrence Greene, Jr. [Lawrence Greene] and there was Ruth Lorraine [Ruth Greene Dawson], Arthur Frederick [Arthur Greene] and I'm number four, Everett Francis [HistoryMaker Everett Greene] and there's Donald [Donald Greene] and then there is June Laverne [June Greene Lambert] and Phyllis [Phyllis Greene Wyatt] and then I have twin brothers Rodney [Rodney Greene] and Ronald Greene and my youngest brother was Ralph [Ralph Greene] so that adds up to ten, there.  I lost my oldest sister Ruth about three years ago so I have eight living.
Speaker 1: Eight living?
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wow.
Story_ID: 500311
Speaker 1: You were speaking rather affectionately about your mother [Lillian Lewis Greene] and her rearing practices.  You were raised, then, by your mother in the household there?
Speaker 2: Yes my mother and dad [Lawrence Greene] were there, but my mom was the main taskmaster, you know.  My dad was a musician as well he worked for the government for forty-five years as well as being a drummer in some of the local bands in the Washington, D.C. area, and I guess that's one of the ways that I got my love of music.  Because some weekends I get a--would have an opportunity to go with him to listen to the band or to help carry the drums to make sure they don't come in with holes in the heads you know after they may have had a couple of drinks or something you know how that went.
Story_ID: 500312
Speaker 1: You said that your mother [Lillian Lewis Greene] had certain sayings and certain ways about her.  Tell us some more of your special memories of your mother, stories perhaps that she shared with you.
Speaker 2: Well, I, I remember some of the tales that she would tell about her childhood.  You know, back in--my mom was born in 1912, and I guess back in those days, you know, it was nothing like--nowhere near like it was when I was coming up, just like when my years is nothing like the kids of today.  But they would talk about some of the things that they would do which was mostly a family oriented things, you know.  They would do a lot of singing, a lot of family gatherings, you know, and everybody loved each other.  You know, and you'd talk about how they would all look out for each other.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear).
Speaker 2: So as far as some of the sayings that you would say, a lot of them I can't recall right off hand or just maybe in the later years I think of how my mom loved to cook, and, you know, she was always having a--I won't say an excuse but a method of getting us to let us know that, "Okay I've cooked a special meal or one of your favorite dishes, so come over and have some," without really asking you, you know.  She may say, "I've cooked some chicken and dumplings today and I'm getting ready to sit down to dinner."  So I'd say, "Okay I'll be there shortly."  You know, so that's a way of inviting without saying well come over for dinner, you know, so.  You know moms have certain ways of doing things that you listen to that you hear all through your life and you begin to recognize what they mean after a while, so.
Speaker 1: So your mother was quite impactful on your life.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  My mom sat me on her knee when I was four years old, taught me a song, my--the first song, and I think fifty years after then I had an opportunity to sing that song for her.  I was doing a concert and my mom, she liked to make her entrance, because, you know, she loved hats and she would always make her grand entrance with her beautiful hats.  And when she walked in the auditorium that particular day, I just stopped the song that we were preparing to sing, because my mind went back to that day when I was four sitting on her knee and I thought about that song and I said, you know, "If it wasn't for that day I may not have been where I was at that particular time."  You know, so I like to think that started me on my way to wanting to become a singer.  So it was something that maybe she didn't even remember, but it was something that impacted me.
Speaker 1: Would you sing that song for us?
Speaker 2: Would I? I was--the song was entitled 'Standing in the Safety Zone' it says (singing) "While strolling along the highway there rose a mighty storm. I heard a voice a whispering you're standing out there alone and then I thought of Jesus and then I folded my arms and I started out for heaven and I'm stepped in the safety zone.  I'm standing in the safety zone.  Sometimes I have to stand alone, but if you want to get to heaven you've got to stand in the safety zone."  And that's something that I've always enjoyed, you know, and you think about that.  When you're traveling, my mind runs back to so many of those different things and, you know, and I think of how traveling along that dangerous highway and skyways you think of that fence being around you when you're standing in that safety zone.
Story_ID: 500313
Speaker 1: I take it your mother [Lillian Lewis Greene] was a woman of faith, a woman of the church.
Speaker 2: Yes, very much so and, you know, every time the doors opened, you know, she was there and as a youngster, you know, you get, "God, do I have to go again?"  But after a while you get to the point where you enjoy going, you enjoy services and you can't wait to--well I was it was my mom and my sister who used to sing duets and I couldn't wait to go to church to hear them sing.  You know, that was one of my main reasons for going when I was very young, you know, so.  So not realizing what else it was all about I just wanted to hear them sing.
Speaker 1: What church was that?
Speaker 2: It was Bethlehem Baptist Church in Washington, D.C. and that was my--the church for many, many years in my mom's family.
Speaker 1: Do you remember, who was the pastor at that time?
Speaker 2: I remember the pastor--the one that I remember as a youngster was Reverend Lomax [ph.] that was his name.  He was also a wonderful singer.  That's one of the reasons I remember his name, because I too enjoyed hearing him sing.  You see, everything comes up now, it's related to singing, you know, so.
Speaker 1: Bethlehem Baptist Church--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in, in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: That's right on it.
Speaker 1: You and your siblings all attended that church?
Speaker 2: We all attended Bethlehem Baptist, yes.
Speaker 1: As a weekly family participation?
Speaker 2: Weekly family participation, and sometimes, you know, through the week as well, you know, when they had things going on, because in those days they had a lot of things going on with youngsters, you know, so you always took a little time out to stop your baseball game to go to church for the youth services and so forth.
Speaker 1: Your mother and sister sang duets.  They were in the choir.
Speaker 2: Now, my mother and my sister were in the choir together.  You know, later on in life as we got older my mother and my brother and my sister and I sang together.  We had a little group called The Greene Singers [ph.], and we would go out--you know how moms do.  They wanted to show you off all the time so every time someone is having an affair she was, "Oh let me bring my kids and we will sing for you as well."  You know, although at the time we may have some other things that we'd much rather be doing, but we would always go when she said it's time to go.
Speaker 1: Were you involved beyond the choir in the church as a youth?
Speaker 2: Not a lot.  No, I wasn't one of the leaders in my Sunday school.  We--I started singing at an early age with a quartet, and because we were so involved with the singing, you know, we didn't get a chance to do a lot of--although we did go to a lot of the functions, we weren't per se one of the leaders, one of the youth leaders, you know, but we tried to participate in quite a few things that was going on there.
Speaker 1: How about your mom was she involved in other auxiliaries or organizations there in the congregation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  She was in all of the choirs and other--a couple of other organizations.  I can't recall wh- the names of some of them but I know there were times she would spend a lot time visiting or at the church when she could.
Speaker 1: It sounds like church was central to your family's life (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Church, church was.  You know, it was a good background, you know, and it makes wonderful roots, you know, so--to know what it's all about and we still learned.
Speaker 1: Oftentimes in those youthful years, one is encouraged to sit on the mourner's bench to get converted.  Do you remember an experience like that?
Speaker 2: No, to be sure, be true, I never experienced that type of--that mourners' bench thing.  You know, I hear so much about it and mostly--I guess my church was one of those modern day churches.  You know, we had the pianos and the organs and things like this, you know.  You'd hear about the mourners' benches mostly in the little country churches, you know, although I've been to a few of those whereas they had those type things.  When we were singing, you know, we would travel to churches all over the South actually as a youngster.  And like I said being fourteen/fifteen years old I really didn't have a whole lot of knowledge of what they were all about, but you know, I knew that's what they were.
Story_ID: 500314
Speaker 1: Any other special memories of your mom [Lillian Lewis Greene] that you want to share with us?
Speaker 2: Well, it's--she was just a special person.  She loved to cook, and I, well we all miss her.  When my mom passed, I used to spend a lot of time at the cemetery talking to her, and everyone thought that I was over doing it but, you know, we had things to say.  Things that you don't get an opportunity to say that you wish you could have said.  Although there are so many things that I found that I wish I could have done or said while my mom was still living.  But a friend of mine sent me a song, and somewhere in the song it said regardless of what you do, what you have done, what you want to do is never enough in your mind because this is the person that brought you to this world.  So there is nothing you can do, nothing you can give her that is good enough so just be happy that you were able to have a good life with her, you know.  And I marvel at people who have good relationships with their moms and their families and siblings.
Speaker 1: And the connection goes on.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did she share with you any stories about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Not a lot.  I guess my mom must have had a pretty rough time coming up with her family.  You know, I--so it wasn't something that they did a lot of talking about other than a lot of the singing.  My mom was a well-read person, although she didn't have a lot of schooling.  She was very, very articulate and I could ask her anything and seems like if she didn't know it she would know where to go to find out to see, to give me the answer if not right away, you know, so.  And her sisters they stuck together, you know, the brothers and all of them they all were good friends of Billy Eckstine actually coming up.  My uncle [Robert Lewis] was a very good friend of Billy Eckstine.  Eckstine really spent a lot of time from what I understand at my [maternal] grandmom's [Margaret Lewis] house, and my grandmom, she said, didn't like Billy Eckstine because he didn't have any manners.  So that was one of, just one of, of the stories that I learned about them coming up, so.
Speaker 1: She was one of seven children.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Born in 1912.  That means she would have been born in that period when African Americans were migrating from the South to the North.  Was her family a part of that migration?
Speaker 2: No my mom's family was from Washington [D.C.].  Now my grandmother's family, where they were from, I don't know.  That's one of the things that I kind of regret that we didn't get a chance to delve back into the history tree--to the family tree to find out more about, about my relatives.  I have a niece now who is really going gung ho trying to get information about the family tree, you know, so.  But the ones that I am mainly affilit- affiliated with are my mom's family and my dad's--my mom's mother and father [William Lewis] and my dad's mother [Geneva Greene], but they were all right there in the Washington, D.C. area.
Story_ID: 500315
Speaker 1: Want to learn something about your father. We've gotten a good deal of rich detail about your mother [Lillian Lewis Greene]. What was your father's full name?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Lawrence Lorenzo Greene [Lawrence Greene].  He was born in 1910, and for most of his life he worked for the U.S. government.  I think for forty-five years he worked for the government, and he was a musician as well.  He played drums and piano.
Speaker 1: Was he born in Washington [D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Also from a family of seven he had seven siblings or six siblings rather.
Speaker 1: Where did he fall in that line of seven?
Speaker 2: I think my dad was third; he was third in the, in the line.
Speaker 1: Do you know those siblings' names?
Speaker 2: Oh boy.  Yes, I have to get my--Ella, Ella Smith [Ella Greene Smith], John Greene, Lawrence Greene, Viola [Viola Greene] and Etta [Etta Greene], Beatrice [Beatrice Greene] and Oneida [Oneida Greene].  How many did I name?  Was that six?
Speaker 1: I think I got them all (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that was six.
Speaker 1: And one--my dad has one sister still living, she just turned ninety, Oneida.  My mom has one brother; he just turned ninety-one.  He was the one that was a friend of Billy Eckstine.  His name is Robert Lewis, wonderful singer.  Right now his voice is strong as anything, you know, so.
Speaker 2: When did this family come to Washington?
Speaker 1: Well as far as I know they were there.  You know, I--from following them, they were reared in Washington.  But I think my grandfather may have been somewhere in the Maryland area but as a very youngster--as a really youngster they were in the Washington, D.C. area.  And when he was born, I don't know, but I know he was a good old man.  He was my--I guess it's one of the reasons why I like the affiliation with my grandkids, because I had such a wonderful relationship with my grandfather, you know, so.
Speaker 2: Your grandfather was--what was his name?
Speaker 1: Garfield.
Speaker 2: Gar--
Speaker 1: Garfield Greene, yes.
Speaker 2: Tell me about your father.  How would you describe your father?
Speaker 1: My father was a fun-loving man.  He loved to joke; he loved to be the life of the party.  You know, He always wanted to have the microphone, you know, when he is in a crowd.  You know, he always had a story and to see my father's family when they would get together all of the brothers and sisters and my grandmother [Geneva Greene] and grandfather it was like sit back and pull up--get your laughing cap on, because you're going to laughing the whole time they are there, because they had so many stories to tell on each other, you know, so.  But he was a, he was--my father loved to go to the racetrack, you know, so when he wasn't at the navy yard or playing he was at the racetrack.  Sometime he would come home with pockets full of money; sometime he would just have his slips, you know, but that was one of the things he enjoyed doing.
Speaker 2: He worked for the government in the navy yards?
Speaker 1: Yes he worked at the navy yard for, oh god, many years and then in his last years in the government he worked with some organization that furnished things in the White House [Washington, D.C.].  You know, my dad used to have a saying that they would ask him when he was going to retire and he would say, "I'm retired on the job.  When I take a vacation, I come to the job and take my vacation, because I have absolutely nothing to do," you know.  So he, he was in Washington, D.C.; he stayed in the Washington area when my mom moved to Indiana so I would get an opportunity to come hang out with him quite a bit.
Story_ID: 500316
Speaker 1: What year was that that she [Greene's mother, Lillian Lewis Greene] moved to Indiana?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-three [1953].  I was in Korea at the time in the, in the mil- in the [U.S.] Marine Corps, and she moved while I was in Korea.  And I came to the West--I'd come out to Indiana just to spend a weekend with her and she convinced me that I needed to spend the week.  One week turned to two, and then I learned what hard work was all about.  You know, I got a job at a foundry, and--learning that music was so prevalent in Indiana at that time.  I--while I was in Washington [D.C.] as a youngster, I sang with a quartet and after moving to Indiana I got a chance to hang out a little and see some of the world renowned musicians with guys--they were local at the time but they in time became some of the world's greatest musicians.  You know, the Wes Montgomerys and the Freddie Hubbards and Larry Withers [ph.] and people like this.  They were all local musicians in Indiana.  So that kind of gives me a little inspiration to want to learn to sing solo.
Story_ID: 500317
Speaker 1: Going back to those early years in Washington, your growing up.  What are some of your memories of those years of growing up there in D.C.?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, I remember in my early years I look at the camaraderie that we had with the neighbors, with the neighborhood.  You know, we didn't have a lot, but we had everybody glad and happy to--in fact where I lived in Washington, D.C. Barry Farm area everybody was--they were proud people, you know, and you took care of the things you had, and you had, you had fun together.  We had recreation departments that competed in sports, you know, all over Washington, the Washington area.  You know, we had our basketball, football teams, baseball teams.  My dad [Lawrence Greene] too was a baseball manager and he managed the Anacostia ACs.  So I'd get a chance to go and watch a lot of baseball, Homestead Grays and these guys--these type ball players.  I was a tagalong I guess you would call it.  I wanted to go all of the time so after a while they wouldn't have to ask, "Can I go?"  They'd say, "Okay, come on.  Let's go."  We'd go many, many time out to--some of this is coming back to me now--we would go out to some country ball field whereas you travel along little dirt roads and you finally get out there, and this is where the guys were playing ball.  This was the only places that they had to play, you know so, kind of, you know, brings things back.  Now when I look at--when I look back at it, you know, I did across Indiana taping in In- not too very long ago, maybe a few years ago about the Indianapolis Clowns and that ragtag team that the Negro baseball league then I think about all of those teams and all of the wonderful players that they had on those teams who couldn't play anywhere but there in someone's cornfield, you know, or they made up a--cut the grass and made a baseball diamond for these guys to come out and play, so.
Speaker 1: So in your early years, those were some of the venues that you experienced trailing along with your father and his management (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes and as a youngster, you know, we, we, we played.
Story_ID: 500318
Speaker 1: We had fun together as youngsters, but at--like I said at an earlier age we wanted to get involved.  Everybody wanted to do--to be a singer.  You know, there were so many of the quartets that were very popular.  All the guys who were singing they got all of the attention from the ladies.  So you want to do all you can to get in, get in on that action to get that attention going.  So I sang at an early age, as--I sang tenor back in those days and I heard a singer Jimmy Ricks of The Ravens sing bass for the first time one day, and that was what I wanted to do so I tried to imitate this guy, so.
Speaker 2: You said at an early age, how early an age?  What age were you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'd say thirteen, early teens, you know that's when you're learning a little bit about harmony, learning a little bit about singing together, harmonizing together, standing on the corners, you know.  I'll never forget I think I may have been about fifteen or sixteen and we had this pretty good group going called The Melodaires, you know, and we would practice wherever we could.  We would sing--you were always practicing and the first time I was out all night we were on the corner singing and at six o'clock in the morning my mom [Lillian Lewis Greene] came past going to work and I said, "Oh wow.  I think I'm in trouble."  But she knew that no one was doing anything wrong, she knew that we were just there singing so she didn't have to worry about that.  You know, so but that's--see all of things are just coming as we go along now, you know, recollecting some of these inci- incidents that happened back then.  But singing was the thing.  That was one of the things that we really got involved in really wanting to do.
Speaker 2: Now, you said around thirteen, fourteen so that would (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Thirteen, fourteen.
Speaker 2: --mid-'40s [1940s], thereabouts.
Speaker 1: Yes, somewhere around there.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, you know, getting into--I sang--when I was in elementary school [James G. Birney Elementary School; Thurgood Marshall Academy, Washington, D.C.], I sang with a glee club, and I think there may have been about seven of the guys in the glee club that--and we had an opportunity to travel all around Washington [D.C.] in the schools.  Well, not all over but quite a large area, singing, and I guess after I came back to visit Washington after moving to Indiana, I happened to go to one of the old hangouts, and was talking to some of the older guys, some of the guys that we grew up together and I found out that every one of those guys that sang in that glee club, all of them went on to become professional singers, you know.  So that was something that I was really, you know, in awe about, so.
Story_ID: 500319
Speaker 1: You mentioned your elementary school.  What was the name of that school?
Speaker 2: Birney Elementary School, James G. Birney Elementary School [Thurgood Marshall Academy] on Nichols Avenue which turned out to be Martin Luther King [Martin Luther King Jr. Avenue, Washington, D.C.] later on in li- in years.  And it's still standing there, I think.  Well, the last time I was there it was still there.  I was in Washington [D.C.] earlier this, well earlier this year and it was--the building in which I thought was a monstrosity at that time, you know, it looks like a little garage now, you know (laughter), so.
Speaker 1: It is an elementary school still standing there in Washington, D.C. now.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What year did you--what years were you there at Birney School?
Speaker 2: What? Maybe '39 [1939], 1939, I guess.  I was born in '34 [1934] so I guess '39 [1939] when I went to ele- went to kindergarten there, you know, for the six years that I was there, and going on to a couple of the junior high schools that we had at the time, you know.  But I, I loved school; I couldn't wait to get to school to--
Speaker 1: So even in elementary school you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I loved it.  I was just gung ho for--and all of that changed a little later on in life but because of singing.  You know, like we--you get through elementary and junior high school, you know, with all of the gusto and wanting to learn and wanting to learn.  You get into high school and there are four recesses and there's someone singing at every recess so you wanted to spend all your time singing (laughter) at the recesses, so.
Story_ID: 500320
Speaker 1: Go back to your, your neighborhood [Barry Farm, Washington, D.C.] to learn more about the environment that shaped you.  You were born in 1934.  That's on the trailing edge of the Depression [Great Depression] area--era.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What impact did that have on your family?  How did that interface with your neighborhood, and, and the flow of life there in your family?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, when you're, when you're a youngster of that age and--you don't pay attention to where things are coming from.  I look back at it later on in life and I would see when you would go to the relief, you get big bags of powdered milk, you get bags of food stuff, and at the time I didn't realize where it was coming from. I just knew that we ate every day, you know, with a family of ten.  My dad [Lawrence Greene] was working the majority of the time, and, you know, with the relief I guess they would call it, you know supplying foodstuffs for larger families.  You know, I can't ever remember being without a roof or without food, you know.  We may not have had all of the clothes and shoes and things that some of the other people did, but I think everybody was--most people were in the same boat at that time.  You know, you're poor but you don't realize it, you know, because you have what you need and you have neighbors who would feed you in a minute.  Just like my mom [Lillian Lewis Greene] would feed many of the neighborhood kids, you know.  It was something that was share and share alike.  My mom used to make--something I'll never forget--she would make a ten pound bag of flour every Saturday, and she'd make rolls and all of the neighborhood would come looking for rolls, you know, and she expected this that's why she made so many of them.  You know, so it was something that everybody shared what they had.
Story_ID: 500321
Speaker 1: That leads me to ask, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells that remind you of your childhood?
Speaker 2: Well, I lived next to St. Elizabeths Hospital [Washington, D.C.], and they had a big, big, big cornfield right on the other side of the fence in the area that I lived in.  You know, and you think of when they're harvesting the corn or when they're preparing the fields, you know how they used the fertilizer to get the fields together. You, you spend a portion of that time inhaling the fertilizer that they're preparing the fields with, but then later on when the harvest comes through you can smell the fresh corn, you know.  So many a time we would like make a little trail across the fence and supply all the neighborhood with corn (laughter), so.
Speaker 1: Sights and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So but there, there--that was some of the smells and things that I had.  You know, but we, we--I sat--from where I lived I could look over into Bolling Field [Bolling Air Force Base; Joint Base Anacostia-Bolling, Washington, D.C.] and see the sights of--I could see the Monument [Washington Monument, Washington, D.C.] in the Capitol [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.] from where I lived if we sat up on the hill and I'd look at the air shows they would have in Bolling Field.  I'd look at the fireworks on the 4th of July and things like this, you know.  And, and we couldn't wait 'til Sundays when your parents got the streetcar passes and you would--I think three or four people could ride on one streetcar pass and we would ride to the zoo [National Zoological Park; Smithsonian's National Zoo and Conservation Biology Institute, Washington, D.C.], spend the day at the zoo and just ride all over town.  You know, so just having something to do and that was our reward for being halfway decent, you know.
Speaker 1: Fascinating detail about your family life and its day to day goings on.  Some of the sounds that give you reminiscences of your, your growing up.
Speaker 2: Well it was always music going on at my house, it was always music.  Like I said there was a piano and my dad [Lawrence Greene] always had drums.  My brother was a singer and either his group would be rehearsing or my group would be rehearsing.  We had one of those old player pianos, you know, the roller pianos whereas if my dad wasn't playing you could put the rollers in and you could just pump and you could just hear music all the time so that, and the radio was always playing if there wasn't singing.  Most times it was always singing and we had--I look at--I look back at a lot of my friends who would come to my house when we were doing some of the rehearsals and they got their start in music, you know, being around--you know, we had--I think there was a saxophone that someone had there and one of the guys came up and was just being the saxophone player (imitates saxophone) wasn't playing a note, but he went on in life to become a wonderful saxophone player.  One of the guys that I sang with could not play the piano but he would sit down and tinker on the keys, he went on to become a club player in the Washington, D.C. area for many years playing and singing.
Speaker 1: The fellow you were just referring to, what was his name?
Speaker 2: The saxophone player?  Big Steve they call him.  His name was Albert Stevens--Stevenson [Albert Stevenson (ph.)] and they called him Big Steve and he was a saxophone player.  He went on to become prolific saxophone player and Icky Tillman was the piano player.  He played in a lot of the--one particular club I think it was--oh god, I can't call the name of the club right this minute, but he played there for many, many year.  Hm, well, that's one of the things that's gone, but like I said, but in the early on he could not play the piano he just sat there and he would pick at it--try to pick notes and things like that, you know, so.  It was, it was always about music, you know, in some form or another, you know.
Speaker 1: So musical sounds in the household (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Story_ID: 500322
Speaker 1: One of the things that also reminds people of their early years are family holidays and family traditions.  We're in a holiday season now.  What do you recall about ways in which your family celebrated the holidays?
Speaker 2: Well Christmas was always big at my house, you know, although we always had big meals most of the day especially with ten kids, but at Christmas and Thanksgiving you had the wonderful family gatherings.  You know, once ten kids got together you didn't need very many more people to be around so mostly it was just my immediate family at Christmas, I mean at Thanksgiving, but at Christmastimes, we would go to visit the grandparents and my, my mom's mom [Margaret Lewis] and dad [William Lewis] passed when I was very, very young, but we would spend a lot of time at my dad's [Lawrence Greene] family's house during the holiday seasons.  And then again like I said with ten youngsters, you know, Christmas at my house especially on the good years was a thing to behold, you know.  Whereas you come into a room and you say, "Wow, where did all these things come from?"  So those are the things that make me think god was I ever poor--was my family ever poor?  Because we always had things.  We always had clothes, we learned at an early age how to take care of our own clothes, keep your clothes in order, and keep them clean.  So here they are and it's your job to take care of them, you know, so.
Story_ID: 500323
Speaker 1: You mentioned the [maternal] grandparents that were deceased.  What were their names?
Speaker 2: William Lewis and Margaret Lewis.
Speaker 1: And they passed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't know, I didn't know William Lewis, but I--my grandmother passed when I was four or five I think. When I was about--
Speaker 1: About 1939?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And the grandfather close in time to that or--?
Speaker 2: Well yeah I think he passed when I was, maybe infant, one or two years old you know so I didn't remember him much at all.  That's my mom's [Lillian Lewis Greene] dad.
Story_ID: 500324
Speaker 1: But you mentioned that you did have a relationship with, with your father's [Lawrence Greene] parents.
Speaker 2: My father's father and I were, were--in fact, I was talking with some of my cousins here last year and they were telling me that I was the only one that my grandfather liked (laughter).  So I could get away with anything so it was fun times that we used to have.
Speaker 1: What was his name, and there (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Garfield Greene.  They called him Gip and I was Gip's boy that was my nickname, you know, so.  I'd see him get dressed up in his little flat top straw hat and his White Owl cigar and we'd go heading off down the block.
Speaker 1: With Gip.
Speaker 2: With Gip, yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us more about those special times with your grandfather.
Speaker 2: I have sat on my grandfather's porch many a day, you know. Just he and I and my grandmother [Geneva Greene] and I think I learned so many things about them and a lot of my family never knew because I spent so much time with them.  Well not a lot of time but I spent more time I think than most of my other cousins or brothers and sisters and they would just tell me tales about things that had happened.  My grandfather would talk about the time he was--he worked--he drove for a vegetable company, and they delivered foodstuffs to stores and also to the St. Elizabeths Hospital [Washington, D.C.].  He told me a tale about when he was driving the truck through Anacostia [Washington, D.C.] going to St. Elizabeths trying to get there before they closed at four o'clock and he got stopped by the police for speeding.  He was doing twenty-five miles an hour and the policeman stopped him and he told him, he said, "Well, I'm trying to get these potatoes to St. Elizabeths before they close up."  "Well, you better slow that thing down.  You'll kill somebody going that fast."  So he finally got to St. Elizabeths and he pulled in and he saw a fellow there and asked the man, said, "Hey man, where do you want me to put these potatoes?"  And the man said, "Just put them under that tree over there."  So when my grandfather unloaded that whole truck of potatoes somebody in authority came along and said, "Hey what the hell you doing with them potatoes under this--?"  "Well, this man told me to put them there."  "Well that damn man is crazy.  Put them potatoes back on that truck," (laughter).  But that was one of the things that when I finally relayed that to my other cousins we all had the biggest laugh about that was something they had never heard before, some of those tales that we used to, I used to enjoy listening to him tell.
Story_ID: 500325
Speaker 1: How would you characterize your [paternal] grandfather [Garfield Greene]?  He, he seems like a fascinating person.  How would you characterize him?
Speaker 2: He was a strong man, a strong man and when he said something it was bond, you know.  His word was his bond and when he said it, he didn't say--he didn't want to say it--he didn't repeat himself a lot, Okay you do this and it was done.  And, you know, he was a strong family man, you know, to raise his family, take care of his family and all of the grandkids.  Like I said he would have--I know there were more of us that he helped, but I think he helped me a little more than everybody else.  I like to think that personally, you know, but he was a man that--strong convictions in what he did, you know.  And I used to enjoy rubbing his head, scratching his head, pulling his fingers and putting a little plaster pad on his back, you know.  Although it wasn't for the reward, but I knew that twice a week I would get a little reward to--and I thought I was rich, you know, with the little change that I were receiving but I just enjoyed being with him, you know, so.
Speaker 1: Why do you think he took to you so specially?
Speaker 2: You know I, you know I really don't know that; I really and truly cannot say that.  I don't know why, you know, sometime I think it's the way your kids respond to you, because I have several grandkids myself and I have--my youngest grandson--my oldest grandson rather who responded to me pretty much the same way that I responded to my grandfather and we were always together in his early years.  We would hang out; we would travel together.  You know, we travelled across country one, one week and we just took our time driving and nobody knew where we were, we were just talking and enjoying each other's company, enjoying each other's music, you know.  That was one of the big things about that trip I had to listen to rap music and he had to listen to my jazz music.  So before the trip was over he was really enjoying jazz music, and I was tolerating some of his rap music, you know, so.  Today he is one of my biggest fans.  Whenever I'm working somewhere that he can attend he is there with all of his friends.
Story_ID: 500326
Speaker 1: Tell more about your neighborhood growing up there in D.C. [Washington, D.C.].  How would you describe your block in your community?
Speaker 2: Well, in, in Barry Farms [Barry Farm], Anacostia [Washington, D.C.] it was wide open spaces, wide open spaces, you know.  It was a lot of single homes and I guess during the Second World War [World War II, WWII] they started building some of the project housing there, and where we lived we finally moved into that particular area.  Well-kept places and it was like--it took a lot to get into it, and it took a lot to stay in them.  But with that particular area that was the only project area in Washington--I mean in Barry Farms at that time.  All the other spaces were wide open spaces, you know, individual homes.  Everybody knew, knew each other, you know, all the people in Barry Farms--most of them because you'd come to the playground and you congregate; everybody was there.  You know, we had all kinds of sports basketball and football and baseball and track so you would eventually meet everybody from the whole area, whole Barry Farms area.  I think it was like everybody in the area stuck together.  You know, you had the guys from Southwest [Washington, D.C.], you had the guys from Georgetown [Washington, D.C.], the guys from uptown you know everybody just had their own area and everybody knew each other.  It was a, it was a wonderful place to grow up, you know, and everybody knew you and if you did something wrong you hear that little cliche that's been used so many times that all the neighbors would whip you and then your parents would whip you too, but, you know, I didn't get much of that but everybody knew you and if you did something wrong the word would get around real quick, you know.
Speaker 1: Was Barry F- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) With the neighborhood grocery and everything in that neighborhood, you know, so.
Speaker 1: Was Barry Farms a development, a discrete development, or was it just the name for an area?
Speaker 2: It was just the name of the area.  The area is Anacostia and then Barry Farms is a little area that we lived in, you know.  I can't even begin to tell you how it originated or just how far, you know, it--in Anacostia you had Barry Farms, Garfield [Garfield Heights, Washington, D.C.]--and, god I can't--well that's the only two that I can--Livingston but that starts getting a little further out of Washington, city limit area, Livingston.  It was just an area where anybody could go anywhere they wanted to go.  You didn't have to worry about anything or anybody at all, you know, being out of place, you know, or doing something wrong.  You could just go and feel safe, you could walk the streets because I would walk oh god three or four miles for a five cent ice cream cone, you know, and you'd think nothing of it.  You know, you, you look at that distance when you leave your home, when you walk all the way to Anacostia, all the way to Anacostia River to High's Ice Cream store for a nickel cone of ice cream and you'd get enough ice cream that you would be eating that ice cream cone halfway back home, you know.  They would put three or four ladles of ice cream on your--on one cone for a nickel.  You know, I mean I--those are some of the things that I really, really remember.
Story_ID: 500327
Speaker 1: When we worked--well, we would carry groceries sometimes or at the grocery store, we'd take our little wagons.  Sometimes we'd put a little box together and find some wheels and make a wagon and go to the grocery and carry people's groceries home.  That was how we made our money, you know.  I wasn't much of a shoeshine boy, but some of the guys would get the little shoeshine kits out and shine shoes for a nickel.  But I was, I was death on that wagon and the groceries, you know, and on weekends I was at Safeway [Safeway Inc.] and the Giant Foods [Giant Food] carrying groceries from early morning 'til the store closed, you know.
Speaker 2: At what age were you at that time?
Speaker 1: I guess ten or eleven, twelve, you know.  In those early formative years whereas--like I said being at that age and being able to do those things, I wouldn't dare let my kids go out today at that age to have the freedom to go places that we did then, you know.  Nobody worried about it, you know, nobody worried about anybody bothering you; you did what you do.
Speaker 2: Were the other fellows and girls in the area as industrious as you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.  Everybody had their wagons, you know, and it was--back in those days people didn't drive to the grocery store.  They walked to the grocery, and they relied on the guys with the wagons to take their groceries home, you know.  So you made your ten/fifteen cent, twenty-five cents whatever it was you made and if you were a good hustler you could make a nice little, nice little piece of change on the holiday.  You make enough to go catch your serials--your movie serials at the Carver Theater [Washington, D.C.] which was in that area, you know.  Every Saturday they would have a serial of 'Zorro' or 'Destry Rides Again,' something like that.  So you, you looked forward to those things.
Story_ID: 500328
Speaker 1: Was there any racial issue with attending the local movie theaters?
Speaker 2: No we had our own movie--we had, we had our own movie.  You know, you think of the interracial things--you know, back in those days we didn't go to the Anacostia movie [Washington, D.C.]; it was the white movie.  We had our own movie, the Carver Theater [Washington, D.C.], and if we wanted to go uptown to the Lincoln [Lincoln Theatre, Washington, D.C.], the Republic [Republic Theatre, Washington, D.C.] or the Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.], we went all the way uptown.  But there was no--you didn't go--I guess it was a thing whereas you knew where you could go.  You knew where you could spend your money, and you didn't worry about going where someone didn't want to take your money.  And that was the way I felt then; that's the way I feel today.  You can always feel when a person not too happy to have you in their establishments, you know, so that's when I turn around; don't say a word just turn around, you know, so.  But back then we had our own places, and if anything the white race would come to our, to our areas.  We didn't very many coming to the Carver Theater but at the Howard Theatre you may find people coming to see some of the shows things like that, because we use to have some of the great show, the great musicians to come and perform at the old Howard Theatre.  I guess it was like--what's the theater?  The Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York]?  What is it?
Speaker 1: The Ap- the Regal.
Speaker 2: The Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois] here, yes.  You know, we had things like that where people would come, acts would come and perform and you knew you could go to 47th Street, you knew, you knew where they didn't want you to come, you know, so you stayed in your area and you did.  That's one of the things I tried to explain to my grandkids that there were times when there were places you couldn't go.  So it's, it's--would be to your advantage to learn about some of that history.
Speaker 1: What were some of those acts that came through the theater?
Speaker 2: Oh man Count Basie, Duke Ellington, Tiny Bradshaw, all the big names were there.  Sarah Vaughan, The Ravens, The Orioles, anybody who was anybody--Buck and Bubbles, Little Miss Cornshucks.  All of the acts came through Howard Theatre. You know, it--they had back in those days what they called the Chitlin' Circuit and the blacks couldn't go into the white areas so they would come through the theaters like the Regal and the Howard Theatre and they--in most areas they had one.  Most of the areas that you'd go to they had a theater that only the blacks would go to and it was called the Chitlin' Circuit and once you make it up through there when you get up to Atlantic City [New Jersey] or someplace and you figure you had it made then.  You go up to Harlem [New York, New York], and at the Apollo Theater there, you big time, you know, so.
Speaker 1: So we're talking '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: Forties [1940s].  Those were the days that I remember, the late '40s [1940s], you know.
Story_ID: 500329
Speaker 1: When I was with my quartet, you know, it was--we were very young, but we were able to get in on some of the happenings that was going on.  We never worked at the Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.], but we worked at some of the other little clubs and things in that area, because like I said my manager was a policeman and he would like ease us into these places, you know.  And as long as we just ease in and sing and ease out and as we look back at it, say, "We never got paid for that," (laughter) but maybe at least he was getting us the exposure (laughter) whether he got paid or what.  You know, he always took us out to eat. There was, you know, things like that, so.
Speaker 2: So you were underage.
Speaker 1: I was underage, underage, but--and that happened, you know, up until the time I went into the [U.S.] military.  So I crammed a lot of things within those, in those years along with working all of the time trying to find a way to make, to make an extra dollar because you know with ten kids, you know, most of us tried to help out.  You know, so the things that we wanted I knew my mom [Lillian Lewis Greene] and dad [Lawrence Greene] couldn't buy me all of the things that I wanted.  See back in my day you wanted to be dressed up going to school.  It was no baggy pants and things like that.  You wanted to look good, you know, so in order to do that you had to get a job somewhere along the line.
Speaker 2: Speaking of your quartet, who were the members of your quartet?
Speaker 1: My brother was the lead singer, Arthur Greene, and we had Mike Patterson and a Donald Palmer [ph.].  And when Donald Palmer went into the military we got Icky Tillman to fill his spot and myself and if I do say so myself we had a pretty decent quartet going on at the time, you know.
Speaker 2: What years were you active with the quartet?
Speaker 1: Oh god, from--oh god, '45 [1945], '46 [1946], '47 [1947]--I guess about '47 [1947] on up to--when I went into--I went into the [U.S.] Marine Corps in 1950--1952 and they were together for I guess--I know a good six years before then.  And when I was in the military they still stayed together, and although they didn't have the bass that I had they still stayed together and hung out.  I used to--when I came back from the military, I came--I went to Indiana to spend a weekend and after I decided to stay I would still drive home every weekend, you know, to get a chance to hang out with the guys and go sing with them every once in a while, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, this was a, a high school era group then.  As you recount those years, those were high school years [at Francis L. Cardozo Senior High School; Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.] that you were singing.
Speaker 1: Well yes they were.  It was through the junior high and high school years that we formed the quartet.  And, you know, when you get into the high school, everybody wanted to sing.  That was the thing, that was the--you had all of the bird groups that were out performing The Orioles and The Ravens and everybody wanted to show their stuff.  So, you know, unfortunately or fortunately however you want to put it in high school there were four recesses and only the best got an opportunity to be in the top group at the--for that period.  So you had to be there to work your way up to be say, "Come on sing bass with us."  So--but it was a, it was some wonderful singers and some wonderful times.  Unfortunately, there was a time that it kept you from doing your school work and some of us didn't get dedicated enough to really stay your one period and go back to your classes, you know.  So that--it may have formed my singing career or maybe prepared me for it but still not really thinking that's what I wanted to do the rest of my life.  I had no idea that was what I really wanted to do or was going to do--
Speaker 2: What--
Speaker 1: --but it got us ready for whatever.
Story_ID: 500330
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you were in school, grade school [James G. Birney Elementary School; Thurgood Marshall Academy, Washington, D.C.], junior high what kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: I was a good student.  I was a good student.  When I got to high school [Francis L. Cardozo Senior High School; Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.]--.  I was in one of the upper echelons of elementary and junior high, and when I got into high school, I started to fall.  And my teachers who--I had a couple of teachers who were very, very interested in me and after my first year, you know, you know, high school so you're all excited and you're doing the things that everybody else wanted to do, and one particular teacher Mrs. George [ph.], I'll never forget her.  She took me under her wing and said, you know, "I'm looking at your record from junior high and elementary and you come into high school and this is what happens to you."  You know, so she was making sure that I would get a chance to go to all of my classes and do what I needed to do.  That's one of the things that I regret today that I didn't follow up on my education the way I should've.  You know, I work now with an organization called Young Audiences and we go to the school systems.  My program is called Using Your Voice for Fun and Profit, and we talk to the youngsters about school and one of the main things although I tell them about me and not going to school to learn my trade, I try to convince them that they really need to stay in school to learn all they can.  You know, because what has taken me fifty years to perfect, they can learn about it, you know, in eight/ten years then they'll have the whole forty years to really smooth it out--work it out and make it work for them, you know, whereas I'm learning by trial and error as we speak, you know, what I can do with my voice.
Story_ID: 500331
Speaker 1: Starting out at Birney School [James G. Birney Elementary School; Thurgood Marshall Academy, Washington, D.C.] as an elementary student--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --you're a good student then--
Speaker 2: Good student.
Speaker 1: --interested in your school work.
Speaker 2: History books in the third grade and, you know, it was--knew history very well and could read anything.  You know, and we would have competition when I was in school.  We had a little group that--and we would like--we all wanted to be on the honor roll so that's what we did.  We all pushed each other to stay there.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of your elementary school teachers?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I know Ms. Cornish [ph.], Ms. Norvell [ph.], Ms. Black [ph.], and they were about the only three--oh Ms. I want to say Ms. French [ph.] but that wasn't her name.  Yeah, she lived right across the street; I think her name was Ms. French.  But these were teachers who were instrumental.  I know Ms. Cornish was the one that was instrumental in me being in the glee club in the first grade, you know.
Speaker 1: In the first grade?
Speaker 2: Yes, Ms. McClendon [ph.]--these are the ones that would give us the encouragement to just keep doing what we were doing, you know, and staying in the fight to keep good grades, you know.  So I got into a little problem when I got into high school [Francis L. Cardozo Senior High School; Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.] with one of the teachers, and it kind of dampened my spirits.  I think, you know, I think some teachers weren't meant to be teachers, because they can really destroy a youngster, you know, can destroy their confidence.  I was a horrific stutterer when I was in elementary and junior high and high school, and because I couldn't respond quickly enough for one of my teachers, you know, she really gave me down the road, you know and I--you get discouraged.  So you don't go to the class and that was--I'm not going to blame it all on her, but that was one of the reasons that I kind of pushed away from doing as good as I could have.  And it was one of my favorite subjects history.  That was something that I was good at, I knew it, I read many, many history books and I still enjoy history.  I enjoy history today.  I read history books, I look at The History Channel [History], you know, as well as The HistoryMakers but this is one of the things I enjoy, learning about history.
Story_ID: 500332
Speaker 1: So how did that stuttering play out in your family context and in your, in your neighborhood block context?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, we got teased a lot.  You know, I was a stutterer, my sister was a stutterer, and I mean really, really stutterers, you know and you start to say something and you push and pop your heels until you finally push the word out, you know.  This went on all through school and the [U.S.] military as well.  You know, I, I tried to do some theater, you know, like little neighborhood theater in--when I was, you know, a youngster there and thought maybe that would kind of help, you know, to conquer some of the stuttering, but you know you get to a point whereas you're reading a particular line and you may come upon a word that you can't get out like a -ss S sound or a -mm sound and you may have to do a whole paragraph to come back around to that word, you know, to, to make it.  And it--I had the same problems as I grew older, I had the same things and every once and a while I have a little trouble with a word, but not as much anymore--nowhere near as much anymore.  When I was in the [U.S.] Marine Corps I was Korea and back and I think I may have been the only stutterer in my outfit for a while and the guys would tease me, you know, but they would tolerate.  And I think one time a draft came in, and there were several stutterers in that particular draft and I had asked one of the guys one day what he thought about something and he stuttered and I said, "Oh wow," you know, "we have another one."  But what we did we decided we were going to try to really work with each other.  You know, give each other confidence instead of laughing at each other just give them time to really get the words out.  So you think a little slower, you know, and you get your words out without anybody laughing at you and you don't get that nervous feeling, you know, to get--to say what you want to say, so.
Speaker 1: How did your parents [Lillian Lewis Greene and Lawrence Greene] address or deal with your stuttering?
Speaker 2: They would just be patient.  They would be patient because there were three of us in my family that stuttered and everybody had worked out of it--everybody worked out of it over the years.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: But they would just be patient.  At times--there were times when my mom would say, "Just shut up and go on about your business."  But most of the time it was patience and that's what it takes, that's what it took to let a person just relax and say what they want to say, you know.  You know, you don't stutter when you sing so sometimes you get to the point where all you want to do is sing whatever you want to say.
Speaker 1: You mentioned (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mel Tillis was one of the people--I, I related to him.  He was a country western singer that was--to see him on television trying to get words out, and you know, that was me.  That was me popping on the heels trying to get words out, but when you sing there is absolutely no stuttering whatsoever.
Story_ID: 500333
Speaker 1: You mentioned your junior high.  What school was that?
Speaker 2: I went to two junior high schools.  We went to Randall Junior High [Randall Junior High School, Washington, D.C.] and then they built a new school in--closer to my area called Turner Junior High [Turner Junior High School, Washington, D.C.] and that was in walking distance.  Although we had the five cent bus passes sometimes we'd keep the nickel and just walk to school, you know, so (laughter).
Speaker 1: So Randall and Turner.
Speaker 2: Turner Junior High and Randall--I, I if I--I don't know for sure but I'm thinking the building where Randall was it still may be standing because I--when I go through that area I see a building that although it is very close to the interstate now, you know I'm--I keep saying I'm going to go over one day just to check and see if that is still the school but I haven't been that bold yet or I haven't had enough time or haven't taken enough time to go and do that yet.
Speaker 1: What years were you in these two schools?
Speaker 2: Well I got into Birney [James G. Birney Elementary School; Thurgood Marshall Academy, Washington, D.C.] about (makes sound) '40 [1940]--what was it? Thirty--'39 [1939] I started school, '44 [1944].  Yeah I guess maybe '44 [1944], '45 [1945], '46 [1946], '47 [1947].  Yeah I guess up to about '47 [1947], '48 [1948].  I mean, I was--I went to high school in '48 [1948]--went to Cardozo High School [Francis L. Cardozo Senior High School; Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Randall first and then Turner?
Speaker 2: I went to Randall for a year and then Turner for--when Turner was completed, we went to Turner for three years.  I guess from the sixth to the ninth grade.  You go to high school in tenth grade, yeah.
Speaker 1: I see. Now junior high is a time in which students typically begin to get rambunctious. They get a little beyond the boundaries.  Were you in that crowd?
Speaker 2: No I really wasn't, because at that time I was still with the same bunch from elementary school and we had the competition going on.  You know, we all wanted to do good.  We all wanted to have the A's and A pluses you know and be outstanding so all of us were still together through all of those schools.  So those were the years whereas you excel, you know, you're always doing the best that you can.  You never worried about doing homework, because you did everything so quickly, you did your homework before school was out.
Story_ID: 500334
Speaker 1: Now, the answer may be obvious given the--what you had to say up to this point, but let me ask anyway.  As you think back to those years, what were you projecting your life course to be?  What was your vocation that you're looking ahead to (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know to be truthful I wasn't thinking.  As I look back at it I was just trying to get out to do what I had to do.  I knew that I had to go to school but I hadn't made any decisions about what--not even singing.  I knew that I enjoyed singing but I never thought that I would be good enough to do--to be a si- be a professional singer.  That didn't come until after I was out of the [U.S.] military, but I just thought I'd get a job and raise a family eventually, you know, and just go through life nine to five [o'clock], you know.  Coming to Indiana and running into some of the wonderful musicians there while working nine to five or seven to four or whatever it was, you know, and getting a chance to sing and perform with some of the great musicians and realizing, I said, "Well gee," you know, "maybe I can do this," you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I entered a contest--their statewide contest, and it was like eliminations every week and all--I think all through maybe a two month period, I was always in the next group that moved on.  And we had ten finalists, and I was courted by one of the record companies to sign a contract.
Story_ID: 500335
Speaker 1: As we work up toward the, the Indiana years, and the beginning of your music career, I want to step back for just a moment to get a little more background on that.  You were born in '34 [1934], coming into your kind of early maturity in the '40s [1940s].  That's the time period of World War II [WWII], President Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] and you were living in Washington, D.C. right at the heart of things (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did that location in Washington and those events interface with your family?  Your father [Lawrence Greene] is working in the naval yard and so forth.  How did that play out for your family?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I really don't think it had any bearing.  I can remember a time when there was a parade when President Roosevelt came right down our street.  And, you know, so we get a chance to get really close to him in his little convertible car, you know.  And I thought that was an exciting time to see him sitting there with his long cigarette holder, and in fact I had some neighbors who were triplets and their names were Franklin, Eleanor and Delano (laughter).  So that was how everybody revered President Roosevelt at the time, you know.  But As far as the political scene it was the furthest thing from our minds, you know.  I, I just do remember one incident when my friend served the daily newspaper and I occasionally helped him on his route and when the war had ended they were like big headlines and so forth.  He was delivering his newspapers (laughter).  We had some extras left over and were yelling extra, extra Russia declares war on American people and people yelling bring me a paper (laughter).  So you take the person the paper and they realize that you lied to them, so--I mean, the paper was three cents; they may give you a whole nickel for the paper, but after they find out that the paper had nothing to do at all with Russia they would say, "Hey, hey come back here," (laughter).  But that was as close to political as I got back in those days.  That was something that you live carefree.  All you worried about was getting up, doing what you do, do your job, go to school and coming home to a warm bed.  It may be crowded but a nice comfortable home, and--with no confusion.  That was one of the things that I, you know, as we get older we look back on there was no confusion in my household at--you know.  Things probably didn't always go smooth but there was no confusion that none of us kids knew about.
Story_ID: 500336
Speaker 1: The fact that your father [Lawrence Greene] worked in the naval yards which would have put him in con- direct, or at least indirect contact with the war effort that didn't filter back into the household in any, in any way (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No not at all.  My father was so busy because he went to the naval yard then most of the time he was playing--back in those days musicians had a lot of jobs they played a lot, you know.  So he would rush home and go to his little job playing his drums, you know.  So I mean you rush home, you rush to sleep, you rush back to the job.  So we didn't have a lot of interaction with my dad in those years, because he was, he was busy.  He was working, you know.  So that's why I say my mom [Lillian Lewis Greene] was a taskmaster. She took care of all the punishments and the chores and things like that, you know, so by being ten people we had to learn quickly how to do things on our own, yeah.  So those type things we didn't let bother us because at the time I guess you would say it didn't concern us, because you don't realize, you know, at that age, you know just what the story is.
Speaker 1: Did the rationing and the kind of product substitutions of the war impact your family life and neighborhood life [in Barry Farm, Washington, D.C.] at all?
Speaker 2: You know, we had rationing; we had, I'll never forget, the little tokens that you would, you know, you had to get for rationing sugar.  I would take the little stamps to the store and you get your little five pound bag of sugar or your butter or we used the little margarine where you push the button and you mix the color.  So now they say, "Oh my god, don't eat margarine," 'cause the rats won't eat it.  But yeah, we had--we never had to worry about gasoline rationing, because we never had a car but all the other things that were rationed, yeah, we were--did that.  There were times that my family got relief help.  I know now that in my later year, you know, my later early years, but in my very early years that I remember so well bringing home sacks, big sacks of potatoes and big bags of flour and powdered milk and things like that, so you, so--to supplement 'cause you're too young to really know what's going on but you still remember these instances, you know, so.  But, but I do remember during the Second World War [World War II, WWII] the rationing of sugar and a lot of other things that you needed to have, your little coupons and your little red tokens, blue tokens and things like that for, you know (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 500337
Speaker 1: You finished junior high [Turner Junior High School, Washington, D.C.] and went on to Cardozo [Francis L. Cardozo Senior High School; Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 2: Cardozo High.
Speaker 1: High School, yes. What was the environment of high school for you in those days?
Speaker 2: It was exciting.  I thought it was very, very exciting to--you're big time now, you know, you're up amongst the big time, you know, you--and like I said we always wanted to be dressed up, you know, going to school and meeting so many different friends.  You know, you've got people now from all over Washington [D.C.], because we only had the four high schools, you know, Armstrong [Samuel Chapman Armstrong Technical High School; Armstrong Manual Training School, Washington, D.C.], Cardozo, Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] and Phelps [Phelps Trade School; Phelps Architecture, Construction and Engineering High School, Washington, D.C.].  Phelps was an all-boys school and they did have one, Martha Washington girls industrial school [Martha Washington School for Girls, Washington, D.C.].  But Armstrong, Cardozo and Dunbar were the main schools where kids from all over Washington came.  Now, we pass a dozen schools to get to Cardozo High School, you know.  So you got to meet people from all over; very, very crowded but that's, that's all we had.
Speaker 1: Were you involved in a lot of extracurricular activities in school?
Speaker 2: Yes, I got involved in the theater company, you know, whereas we got a chance to do some singing and acting, you know.  I didn't get involved too much in that, because I was working, you know. I wanted to--I had to rush home to get to my job, you know.  I, I didn't get a chance to play organized sports because of the job situation, you know, and that was important to me because I had done it for so long and I'd done it through element- or junior high school, and it was my way of helping out the family, you know.
Story_ID: 500338
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You worked through junior high and on into high school [Francis L. Cardozo Senior High School; Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You were number four in the line of siblings.  Were other siblings also working to support the family, help support the family?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't--yeah one of my brothers worked at one of the drugstore chains and my older brother was in--he went into the [U.S.] Navy he was like maybe six years older than I.  He was in the Second World War [World War II, WWII] and after he came back he was like--he was just about gone, you know, so I don't remember too much of him being there working at home at the time.  He was there very few years--very little time actually after he went into the [U.S.] military.
Speaker 1: Which brother was that?
Speaker 2: My oldest brother Lawrence [Lawrence Greene], you know, he--like I said he would come there with his quartet when they were-they recorded as The Heartbreakers.  They had some very good recordings back in those days, in the late '40s [1940s] early '50s [1950s].  In fact, you know, there are organizations overseas now that are bringing all of these old groups and things back into prominence, and someone sent him some of the recordings from back in those days, you know, so.  Yeah, but he--I, I worked and my other brother worked, but it wasn't a thing that somebody said go out and get a job.  It was something that I wanted to do, you know, and because I was working and I was able to buy things for myself, I still was able to give my mom [Lillian Lewis Greene], you know, a little, it wasn't a lot but it was something when I did need a pair of shoes, you know (laughter).  But thank goodness they didn't have those $150 tennis shoes when I was coming up.
Story_ID: 500339
Speaker 1: So you mentioned earlier that you liked to dress. I mean, high school [Francis L. Cardozo Senior High School; Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.], you wanted to have the latest clothes if you could afford them.  Were you a party animal?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You were not.
Speaker 2: No, the only partying we did was when we had to go somewhere and sing.  You know, when, when, when my group was going somewhere to sing and we'd get invited to different parties, some of the older adult parties as well because like I said my manager being a policeman, you know, I guess he was considered the manager he would keep us together since he liked what he heard he would take us around the different places--to sing different places and for different people.  You know, so it was a thing that we liked to look good, you know.  We weren't dressed alike, but everybody had on a suit and tie.  You know, I'll never forget my first pair of green suede shoes (laughter).  You couldn't tell me that I wasn't clean, you know, so.  But those were--and then, too, because we were mostly the same size, my brothers and I, we could kind of switch up every so often so it was, it was kind of convenient.
Speaker 1: Now did you attend the high school dances?  Did they have the high school dances in your school?
Speaker 2: They had some functions and a lot of them were after school things.  It wasn't a lot of weekend things like they did later on, but--and because my school was so small.  You know, we didn't--in fact our track team practiced in the hallways, because there was no, you know, there was no field, we were right on the street.  So until we finally moved up and that was like maybe the latter year or so in school, but there weren't a lot of things that I--because of the fact that I was working, I didn't get a chance to do a lot of participating in some of the activities, although I did some of them.  You know, I would go--I think I was in a couple of the performances.  You know, we would go to ballgames occasionally; you'd take off to go to a game that you wanted to see, you know, some affair that was going on.  If you wanted to impress your little girl you would take off and go there but it wasn't every time something came up you were there.
Speaker 1: Were you a dancer?
Speaker 2: I was a dancer--I danced at (laughter).  You know, I (cough)--pardon me--I created my own little dances.  You know, they were doing the dances called the Hucklebuck and, you know, all the cha chas and I made my own version of it, which over the years became very popular, you know (laughter).  I mean, for, you know, when people see me doing my style of dancing they say, "Wow, what kind of dance is that?"  And I'd say, "They are all mixed--you know they are all in one."  But I wasn't much of a dancer but I used to like to dance, you know.
Story_ID: 500340
Speaker 1: You said earlier that there were some teachers, at least one you mentioned, who had a particular impact on you in high school--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --and her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Mrs. George [ph.].
Speaker 1: Mrs. George.
Speaker 2: I can't remember her first name right now, but because she took so much interest in me because of my earlier records and what I had dropped to when I first got into high school, she, you know, I enjoyed her because she did take that interest in me and especially when I compare it to the one particular teacher who was just the opposite, you know, and--so, you know, these are the kind of people that I enjoy seeing in school systems.  I guess it's just like being a nurse.  You know, you have people who should be in the profession and some who are just there, you know, so.
Speaker 1: Did Ms. George contribute toward your ultimate career pathway or was this just a generalized kind of encouragement to--?
Speaker 2: No it was just encouragement to--that I need to go to classes, that I need to continue what I had started earlier on, you know, in the, my earlier years in elementary [James G. Birney Elementary School; Thurgood Marshall Academy, Washington, D.C.] and junior high school.  You know, it wasn't about music at all.  She was just about academics.  I don't even know if she knew if I was into--if I sang or not, you know, but it was just about the fact that I had come there with--my level was a little higher than my record showed at the time.
Speaker 1: You had been on the honor roll in your earlier years.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Were there persons who achieved prominence and notability out of your high school in addition to yourself?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) In addition to myself.  I, I, I--Maury Wills was in high school with me, Maury Wills the baseball player.  Yeah, he was a star quarterback and pitcher in baseball in school, you know, and, hm, who else?  There was another guy that went on to play big time football, can't remember his name right now.  But Maury Wills I guess would be the main one that really went on to great prominence and big names.
Speaker 1: Someone said that Marvin Gaye had been affiliated with Cardozo [Francis L. Cardozo Senior High School; Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.].  Do you recall--?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know that was after my time there.  I don't know if he--now I know he and one of my cousins, Frankie Gaye, and Marvin they all came up together, you know, so.  So they were a little younger than I was, you know, so I didn't, didn't know him at that time.  There were a lot of singers in my--at the time.  Well, actually The Clovers--some of the guys in The Clovers--they used to be the hall walkers with us, you know. They would--before they became The Clovers itself, they were at Cardozo, you know, singing at the lunch period drawing all of the attention from the young ladies, you know.  So when I was in the [U.S.] military--(clears throat) excuse me--when I went into the military, I was in San Diego [California] preparing to go to Korea and I was out on the town and I saw some of the guys.  You know, these are the guys from The Clovers.  I said wow these are some of the guys that we sang on the corner with and here they are big time, I'm getting ready to go to war (laughter).
Speaker 1: Singing on the corner.
Speaker 2: Singing on the corners.
Speaker 1: That was one of the things they did in those days.
Speaker 2: That was it.  And, you know, I, I, I imagine if I ever was going to do any singing it was going to be quartet singing until I got to Indiana.  Like I said because I was a bass singer in a quartet when I finally got to Indiana my range was so low, you know, I really had to work to raise the octaves so that I could sing solo, you know, so.
Speaker 1: Quartet singing was quite popular in those days.
Speaker 2: In those, in those days that was the thing and like I said I look at it today.  I look at all the groups that are back out there on the road now again, because it's coming back, you know.  That music is coming back, and people think they have something brand new you know (laughter).
Story_ID: 500341
Speaker 1: You finished high school [Francis L. Cardozo Senior High School; Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.] with the encouragement of Ms. George [ph.] and others and coming out in, what '52 [1952]?
Speaker 2: Fifty-two [1952], yes.
Speaker 1: What happened next?
Speaker 2: Well I decided I wanted to join the [U.S.] Marine Corps during the Korean War.  I decided I wanted to go in the Marine Corps, and I volunteered for the Marine Corps and--well I guess I scored pretty decently on one of the tests, and I was put into one of the communications companies and went to radio school and learned some of the intricate radios that they were communicating with, some of the air to ground radios, and I was in the company called ANGLICO, Air Naval Gunfire Liaison [Air Naval Gunfire Liaison Companies].  So we would fire the ships and the airplanes call in strikes on the planes and so forth, so.
Speaker 1: Now was it in response to the war effort that you decided to join the Marines?
Speaker 2: You know, I think it was.  It was a little gung ho and because some of the guys in the neighborhood were in the [U.S.] military and in the Marines.  (Clears throat) Pardon me.  One of the, I think, guys had gotten shot or killed I can't remember for sure if he had gotten killed or not, but he'd gotten shot, so everybody was a little gung ho, like, you know so I (unclear).  Let me join the Marines and go conquer this war [Korean War], you know, so.
Speaker 1: What was that fellow's name do you recall?
Speaker 2: Oozy, Oozy Gardiner [ph.] I think his name was, Oozy Gardiner.  I don't know what his name--what his real first name was, but Oozy, Oozy Gardiner.  We had several guys that were in a career who may have been wounded or killed over there.  But that was one of the inspirations that I wanted to become a Marine, I wanted to become a paramarine--the paratrooper but by the time I got--I was scared to death of flying, you know, but I wanted to be a paramarine.  So you get there and they had disbanded them so I said goody goody.  I wasn't too particular about flying anyway, so.  But I enjoyed the field that I was in.  You know, it was interesting to say the least, for sure.
Speaker 1: In those days fellows would join the [U.S.] Army but you wanted to join the Marines.
Speaker 2: Yeah I wanted to be in the Marine Corps, yeah.  You know, you hear so much hype about the Marine Corps and so forth and that's what I wanted to do, you know, so.
Story_ID: 500342
Speaker 1: Now there was some discrimination in the various armed services.  Some were more accepting of African Americans than others.  Did you experience any of that in your efforts to join the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps]?
Speaker 2: Well, no, not really.  You knew it was there, but at that time it was banned.  So they were--it was, it was there, you know, with the drill instructors whereas I knew that I only had one chance to do something.  You know, if I did it wrong the first time, I was demoted whereas the others, you know, they would get time after time chances, you know.  So it was something like even growing up with the same problem you know you knew what to do and you knew what not to do.  So you just tried to do what you could--what you had to do and that said you didn't get into too many extracurricular things, because most of them, you weren't wanted in, you know.   But most of the guys that I worked with were--most of the guys I was in the [U.S.] military with especially when you're on the line with people, they don't care about color, you know, because you may have to save their life or vice versa.  You know, so it was sort of a thing whereas you had friends, you know, and you had one job to do and you took care of it.
Speaker 1: What year did you go into the military?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: What year did you en- ?
Speaker 2: In '52 [1952].
Speaker 1: In '52 [1952] straight out of high school [Francis L. Cardozo Senior High School; Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you're in what years?
Speaker 2: From '52 [1952] to '55 [1955].  Yeah, I was in Kor- I got to Korea just before the truce.  I was there may be about six or eight months, six, seven months before the truce ended, and I was there for thirteen months altogether.
Speaker 1: In the combat zone.
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.  So I was fortunate.  Like I said being in the company that I was in, we didn't see a lot of close combat, because we fired ships and naval gunfire, you know, in aircrafts.  You call a strike in on a particular spot, you know, so you get a few scares buy hey that's what it was all about, so.
Speaker 1: Any lasting impact on your life, your thought, that, that military experience?
Speaker 2: Well my military experience made me feel like I wouldn't mind it at all if any of my sons were in the military because I learned so much being in the military.  It made me grow up; it made me learn caution, how to think for myself, you know, and how to do things on my own, and not really--I mean, really do things on my own and not rely on someone else.  I can make my own decisions of what's right or what's wrong, you know, and it was just an overall good experience for me.  I met a lot of good people; I met a lot of good friends of all races, you know, in the military.  Some that we stayed in touch for a little while, but after a while once you get out, you get separated you don't--you lose touch.  I have gone to a couple of the Marine Corps' celebrations maybe in hopes of running into one of the guys or so, but it has never happened.  I have only talked to a couple of people who have run into, you know, friends like that.  But I guess it's possible that it could happen somewhere.
Speaker 1: So the military was a positive experience for you in that sense?
Speaker 2: Yes it was I wasn't disillusioned at all by it.  You know, some things happen but you let it go, but I--it was something that I wouldn't have minded if any of my kids had gone through that experience.
Speaker 1: Did any of them go into the military (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Story_ID: 500343
Speaker 1: Although all of my brothers were--I got--it was seven boys in my family.  All of us spent time in the [U.S.] military--
Speaker 2: During--over the course of what (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Second World War [World War II, WWII] to Vietnam [Vietnam War].
Speaker 2: To Vietnam?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I see.  Any casualties or injuries sustained?
Speaker 1: No casualties--one brother was in Vietnam five times.  You know, he was just one of those gung ho [U.S.] Marines.  He wanted to keep going back in every phase or every organization that he could, you know, so he just--and after he had gone in what mortars and artillery and infantry, he came out and he went to embassy school and was like tops in his class.  So they asked him to go to one embassy to get it straightened out.  Then once he did that he could go anywhere he wanted to go and chose Vietnam (laughter).  I, I, I--his reasoning was that when you go to all the other embassies around the world and you're worried to death that somebody's going to come there and bomb it.  You know, whereas in Vietnam, I know we've got lots of support and guards and things around the area, so I'm more safe here than anywhere else, you know.  So I could understand that.
Speaker 2: Did all seven boys go into the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps]?
Speaker 1: No, three Marines, one [U.S.] Navy, two [U.S.] Army and two [U.S.] Air Force. Was that, was that three--or five, six, seven, yeah.
Speaker 2: So a military family.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Your--was your father [Lawrence Greene] ever in the military?
Speaker 1: No, with ten kids (laughter) they would have to give him the whole supply to pay him, you know, so no, no.
Speaker 2: Would your brothers share your same perspective on the military?
Speaker 1: You know I, I--it was something that we really never talked about.  Well just the one, I think the one who made a career out of it.  He was the one that was in Vietnam five times.  He may share that same feeling, but whether, the rest of them would--I've never heard them say anything bad about their experiences.  In fact, I had one opportunity when I was in Korea to visit one of my brothers [Arthur Greene] who was in the Army there and it was so strange how it came about.  I had told my officer that I had a brother in another area on the same east coast where I was, so he arranged me to have one of the flights to fly over to the mountains where he was, and we stopped at this one camp for lunch and as I was going to the lunchroom--
Story_ID: 500344
Speaker 1: When the plane landed you know a little two seater, we went to stop this area to gas up and get, have lunch and we were going to take a jeep over the mountain pass, and I got to the--walking around the area, and I was seeing this artwork that kind of looked familiar to me, you know.  My brother was an artist and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Which one was that?
Speaker 1: Arthur [Arthur Greene] and he was in the [U.S.] Army and I'm looking at this artwork and you know I just pass it off then I go to the lunchroom who should I run into but my brother?  You know, so I say that was a really, really strange and exciting to not have to go any further 'cause he was up on the lines but they were back in the rear at the time.  So to get there and hang out with him for a day and spend the, spend the night, you know, in his base was kind of fun, you know, so.
Story_ID: 500345
Speaker 1: So you were discharged from the [U.S.] military in '55 [1955]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-five [1955], I came to Indiana to spend a weekend you know with my mom [Lillian Lewis Greene] and get back to business in Washington [D.C.], so I thought.  And, you know, she said, you know, you may as well spend another day or week, you know, because you aren't going to do anything so you might as well stay here.  You've been gone all this time so okay cool.  I stayed another week and started getting bored, and--so I talked to one of the guys on the corner, I just walked, I walk everywhere and I talked to a guy on the corner at a grocery store and I used to talk to the owner, and I would tell him about some of the methods that I used to use when I was a youngster working at the grocery.  He used some of my methods and he said, "Hey, would you like to work for me?"  You know, I said, "Okay.  It's something to do."  So I was only going to be there for another week or two anyway, so I thought and I started working at that little grocery on the corner, changed that man's whole system (laughter) of storing his stock and so forth.  And then, someone--I started meeting people, meeting friends and someone told me about a job that I could get if I didn't mind getting dirty whereas you could make some really good money, which I had never seen dirt that you couldn't wash off, you know, so I thought.  And they directed me to a foundry, which I didn't know what a foundry was, I just--the name foundry.  Well you know okay I'll go and I'll put an application in and I did.  I got hired and I found out what a foundry was, and I found some dirt that you couldn't wash off (laughter).  So I had only planned on staying there for a little while, you know, because I said wow the money is good.  So I'll stayed a little while and then I'll go back to Washington.  So I bought an automobile with the little money that I was making, and I would drive back and forth to Washington every Friday.  I'd get off from work at 12:15 at night and get right on the highway.  You know, when you're young, you can do that and I'd drive all night on highway 40 [U.S. Route 40].  There was no interstates at that time through the mountains and you get to Washington and you hang out all day, and then you'd get in the car, like, early, early Monday morning and drive right back and get out and go right to work, you know.  So being young and foolish you can do that.  So--but going back singing with the guys I thought it was worth it, you know, so.
Speaker 1: You were working at the foundry what foundry was that?
Speaker 2: International Harvester [International Harvester Company] which is now called Navistar [Navistar International Corporation].
Speaker 1: Navistar.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And that was still in '55 [1955] when you started.
Speaker 2: Fifty-five [1955], yes when I started there.  So, you know, after a while that really got old you know especially in the winter you know I couldn't make that drive.
Story_ID: 500346
Speaker 1: In the m- in, and the--somewhere in that time you know joining the church that my mom [Lillian Lewis Greene] was belonging to and joining the church choir and by being a bass singer I always sang an octave lower than the other bass so I started working with the director, you know, to really work on bringing my range up somewhat.  So we would rehearse everyday just about.  I worked at night, so I would go to her house in the morning.  Her husband was a drummer so he didn't mind.  I'd go there--we'd sing songs all day pretty soon my repertoire begin to grow and I would start singing, you know, at some of the fashion shows and teas and things that people would have, you know.
Speaker 2: What was the name of the church?
Speaker 1: The church that I joined was 25th Street Baptist Church [Indianapolis, Indiana] which I'm still a member of right now, you know.  So, you know, but I got a chance to do that and increase my repertoire so I started going out, hanging out into some of the clubs occasionally, you know, 'cause there was such good music in Indiana at that time.  I guess the same way as Chicago [Illinois] there were so many wonderful musicians and Wes Montgomery happened to be my next door neighbor who went on to be one of the greatest jazz guitarist in the world, and I would go to a place where he was working.  You know, we'd go over there and sit and I'd get a chance to sit in and sing a couple of songs.  So that got to be my little mainstay; we'd go around to different clubs sitting in and singing.  The Hub Bub [Indianapolis, Indiana] was the name of the club; they would have what they called amateur night and the winner of amateur night would get a chance to work for a week at the club.  So that's how I did my first professional solo gig at a club with Wes Montgomery (laughter).  I relay that story, I did a tribute to Wes Montgomery at the Cape May Jazz Festival [Exit Zero International Jazz Festival] earlier this year, and when they invited me to perform, they didn't know my relationship with Wes.  And they were telling me that this is a tribute to Wes Montgomery.  And I said, "Well, you know Wes was my next door neighbor, and I did my first--."  They said, "Oh well, gee you can be a part of the tribute then."  I said, "Okay cool."  When I got there one of the ladies looked at me and said, "Why are you giving a tribute to Wes?  You're a vocalist.  You're not a guitar player."  I said, "I'm probably the only one here that really knew Wes Montgomery," (laughter).  So when I told them my story then she was okay with my being there, giving a tribute.  But yeah I knew Wes very well.  In fact I sang at his funeral as well and his kids and my kids grew up together.  But I--that started my singing career.  So, you know, I went on and during that time I--the VFWs [Veterans of Foreign Wars] was having a talent hunt in the--throughout the State of Indiana, and so I got into that and I was going on, you know, through week after week after week we were winning.  So one of the record company subsidiaries had--took an interest in me and they gave me a contract to peruse.  And I looked at it with one of my friends who was a disc jockey and a lawyer.  So we looked at this contract and so it was a decent contract, but we decided we would just wait until after the competition to see, you know, what would happen.  So I was being one of the ten finalists, I win a record contract with the same man who had been courting me for over a month, you know.  So without going through the contract again, I sign it.   It was altogether different.  So there it was, I said, "Oh no. I am not going to get involved in that."  I got very disillusioned because the way that contract read that if I were to go out and sweep the streets and make a dollar they got fifty-five cents.  So needless to say I stayed out of their way, I didn't--I didn't go in a club for ten years after that.  I started singing with a little gospel group, and we traveled on weekends to different places, and continued with my day job which I didn't intend to keep, you know, in the process I got married and had a family.  I said, well, you know, kids like to eat and musicians weren't making that much money, you know.  So I said I'm going to stick and stay with this job.
Story_ID: 500347
Speaker 1: You were working at the steel mill, International Harvester [International Harvester Company] now Navistar [Navistar International Corporation] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Working in the steel mill.
Speaker 1: What was your position there?
Speaker 2: I--when I first went there I was a laborer that working in the heat and hard work.  So they came to me I think the second day and took me over to a guy, to a unit where they were molding.  You know, they were making manifolds and small parts and they told the guy, "Okay, if he can't do this then send him back to me."  Well I was determined I was going to get out of that heat, so I started my career molding, you know, I guess the second day I was there.  I went on to mold for many years and graduated to the big molder blocks.  Then my last I guess ten, twelve years that I was in the melting department where they poured the iron and I would melt the iron and send it to the units, so.
Speaker 1: What years were you at--
Speaker 2: I left there--I was there from '55 [1955] to '82 [1982], '82 [1982]. Yes, I spent twenty-seven years there.  And, you know, in the time that UAW [United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America; United Automobile Workers] had signed a contract whereas you could--they would give you one year for every five years you worked so I--consequently I was able to retire with a full retirement at a very early age and then get involved in what I really wanted to become involved in, you know.
Speaker 1: Was that a good job for you and for African Americans in general, the foundry work?
Speaker 2: That's mostly what you found in the foundry the time I was there.  You didn't find very many other than African Americans working in the foundry, because it was such a dirty, hot job, you know.  I've seen some of the other races come in.  They'd work a day and say, "No, no I'm getting out of here."  But it was a very hot and very dirty job.  I used to wear a kerchief over my nose and mouth, and all the guys would tease me about being the Lone Ranger, you know, but it was method to my madness.  I wasn't thinking about--I just didn't want all the dust and so forth but through the years it was my filter because the filters that they'd give you was so hot and so heavy that I would just put a sponge under my kerchief and used it that way, as a--before I left there were like half of the foundry doing the same thing, you know, so (laughter).  I've had guys tell me, "Oh, now I see why you were using that kerchief; you were trying to save your voice."  You could come out of the foundry and you would have all that dirt and phlegm in your throat for the whole weekend, you know, trying to get rid of it.
Speaker 1: In some other cities such as Detroit [Michigan] and Flint [Michigan] the motor industry enabled the African Americans to achieve economic stability and to flourish.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Was that the same in Indianapolis [Indiana] with the foundry?
Speaker 2: Yes it was. It was.
Speaker 1: That was a stepping stone into middle class stability for African Americans.
Speaker 2: So right, so right, so right, and I guess I must have--I did step out before it really escalated, pay wise.  You know, I only had maybe about three of the good years when they had the big pay raises and things, you know, but I didn't care I was doing what I wanted to do.
Story_ID: 500348
Speaker 1: I got out and I came to Chicago [Illinois] and worked in a theater company, Kuumba Theater Company, with Val Ward [HistoryMaker Val Gray Ward] and Julieanna Richardson was one of her assistants and we were doing a show called 'Bessie Smith the Little Dreamer' [sic. 'The Little Dreamer: A Night in the Life of Bessie Smith,' Ed Shockley] with Odetta [HistoryMaker Odetta Gordon] the folk singer.  It was an experience working with Odetta, because she and I were the ones interacting together.  I was her brother in the show, you know, and so it was an experience and we had fun doing it.
Speaker 2: What kind of person was she?  Obviously a star on stage, but what kind of person was she?
Speaker 1: Well Odetta had--I guess like most of us, had a problem, she couldn't retain a lot.  So when she came to the show and she didn't know any lines and we had all prepared ourselves for Odetta coming in so we had to be ready.  So because she and I were the only ones that were interacting we got a bond and I was taking her across town one day and she was telling me how much she really wanted to do this show, and I fell in love with her.  You know, I enjoyed her and I really wanted to help her to achieve what she--where she wanted to be, because they were doing, they were ho--they were doing a show on Broadway and waiting for her to finish this show so she could get into that particular show.  So she really wanted to do good here in order to make a step to get to Broadway.  And so from that day on I tried to help her as much as I could.  You know, I'd tell her some of the lines that she would forget and so forth and so on, and it was good.  We were able to make it through preview until we got body mics on the opening night, you know, and then I couldn't tell her anything and consequently she got canned that first night, because she couldn't remember all the lines and things, you know.  But I enjoyed Odetta, she could--we were doing Bessie Smith like I said.  She sang Bessie Smith like nobody else could, not even Bessie.  She got rave notices in the reviews that night, you know, and the rest of us in the group were called buffoons (laughter).  Odetta would slow the show down so much when she would say something wrong, I had to try to correct what she was saying and pass it along.  You know, so, but I really hated to see them get rid of her but I could understand the promoters, though.  They couldn't have her doing the show that way, so.  But we finally went through about four Bessie Smiths before we (laughter) finally got the show going good.
Story_ID: 500349
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year was that that you started with Kuumba?
Speaker 2: Fifty-five [1955].  No, no I'm sorry '82 [1982], '82 [1982].  When I first retired I just came right to Chicago [Illinois] and--oh '83 [1983] it was early '83 [1983] when I came up and I retired in December and I came up in February, and--
Speaker 1: And who was directing the company at that time?
Speaker 2: Val, [HistoryMaker] Val Gray Ward she was one of the founders of Kuumba Theater Company and Soft Sheen [Soft Sheen Products, Inc.] was one of the sponsors of the show ['The Little Dreamer: A Night in the Life of Bessie Smith,' Ed Shockley] that we were doing.  We ran the show at the Ivanhoe Theater [Chicago, Illinois] for many months, yeah.  I think it was [HistoryMaker] Bettiann Gardner's, Ms. Gardner's pet so we were able to withstand all of the downfalls and pits and things that we had to come through, so.
Speaker 1: Ms. Gardner was affiliated with Soft Sheen.
Speaker 2: Yes.  So many of the--several of the actors who were in the productions went on with the taping of their parts of the tape and went to Broadway and did Broadway productions, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was your role in the production?
Speaker 2: I was Clarence; I was Bessie Smith's brother.  I was, I was there to give Bessie Smith some inspiration so that she could go on to Atlantic City [New Jersey] to, again that Chitlin' Circuit.  You know, she was--'cause once she reached Atlantic City then she had arrived.  That was before she had gotten to all the other big things, you know.  So I learned a lot about Bessie Smith, she was a character and Odetta [HistoryMaker Odetta Gordon] was just trying to live up to Bessie Smith, you know, so.
Speaker 1: Did you get to sing in that production?
Speaker 2: Yes, they created some music for me.  I, I wasn't supposed to sing originally but they created a couple of songs for me to sing and then one duet with Odetta--with Bessie Smith actually.
Speaker 1: So you're in Chicago now how long did that show run?
Speaker 2: It ran for nine months.
Speaker 1: Nine months.
Speaker 2: Nine months, we--I was here working and for a while driving home [to Indianapolis, Indiana] every night until it got old.  Well you know three hours on the highway you come after this--after rehearsal is over.  You go to the theater and you spend a couple of hours doing the show then you've got the whole day.  I said, "Well, I might as well go home and sleep in my own bed," you know.  So--but that got old too after a while so I stayed here and enjoyed Chicago, learned Chicago.  I got a chance to work with a lot of the musicians here because there were some of the world class musicians in the show, and after interacting with a lot of those guys, that's how got a chance to do a lot of festivals and things like that by working with a lot of these guys.  So this job here was another escalation for me to go on with my career in the music world.
Story_ID: 500350
Speaker 1: Who were some of those people that you worked with?
Speaker 2: Little Brother Montgomery. You know, he was one of the original piano players of Bessie Smith and those people back in those days.  Kansas Fields, a world renowned drummer, Robert Irving III, Nate, Nate, Nate Griffin, Sonny Seals [Steele "Sonny" Seals].  So many of those guys had come through that theater who were world renowned musicians.  Most times when a singer goes to a new area, it will be a while before he can step into the light with the locals, you know, because nobody knows him, when--but because I was working with these guys I got a chance to hang out with them even a lot of the blues people as well because we were doing a blues show as well.  And you had all of these people who were in the blues world and the jazz world that I was able to hook up with, you know.  So it made it really nice and convenient to come in and be a part of that.  So I worked--just worked a job last week--I just came back from a cruise working with one of those world renowned players that I'd met back in those days, Willie Pickens, you know.  So it still goes on.
Speaker 1: The work that you did in Chicago [Illinois], you were--for a while you're travelling back and forth to home [in Indianapolis, Indiana] but then you decide to stay here.  How long did you reside here?
Speaker 2: Well actually I was just here until my days off then I would go home.
Speaker 1: I see, I see.
Speaker 2: I'd come back here and work 'til my day off and then I'd go home.  I had a family back here but they knew what I--this was my business so it was absolutely no problem with it at all, but this is what I had chosen to do.  I retired at a very early age so I could do my music, you know.
Story_ID: 500351
Speaker 1: So you had a family still back home.  Now, I know you mentioned a mother [Lillian Lewis Greene] back there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: You had more family than just a mother.
Speaker 2: Yes, I had--I got married in '50-what?  My fiftieth wedding anniversary is two weeks away so I have three sons from that union and after twenty-seven years of working and trying to keep them together and after they're grown now like I said, okay let me do what I enjoy doing.  One of my sons was a professional football player, and one son [Everett Greene, Jr.] is a general manager for Duke Energy [Duke Energy Corporation], you know, and one--
Speaker 1: The football player's name.
Speaker 2: The football players name is Marcellus Greene.  He played for the Minnesota Vikings for a few years.  He played for the Canadian Football League first then he came back and played for the Minnesota Vikings a couple of years--three years actually.
Speaker 1: Okay, what--is he still involved?
Speaker 2: No, no, no he's way beyond that now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He lives in Canada still, he went back to play in the Canadian league when he finished playing here.  He got hurt and couldn't play any further but I saw him earlier in the year and he looks like he did the day he was playing, you know, like he still was playing at fifty years old, you know, so.
Speaker 1: So you're married in '57 [1957], and that was two years after you came to Indianapolis [Indiana].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What is your wife's name?
Speaker 2: My wife's name is Elmira.
Speaker 1: Her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Lawson.
Speaker 1: Elmira Lawson [Elmira Lawson Greene].
Speaker 2: Elmira Lawson.  She's originally from a little town called Enid, Mississippi, you know, so.
Speaker 1: How did she get to Indianapolis?
Speaker 2: Well she came at a very, very, very early age.  I think she was maybe one or two years old when her family moved to Indianapolis you know, so.
Speaker 1: And how did you meet her?
Speaker 2: At church [25th Street Baptist Church, Indianapolis, Indiana], at that--see everything happened at the church and that union there.  We were in the same church and we would go to different functions and so forth and before you know one thing lead to another and before you know it, wow you're walking down the aisle, you know, so (laughter).
Story_ID: 500352
Speaker 1: And the name of that church?
Speaker 2: 25th Street Baptist Church, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The 25th Street Baptist Church there in Indianapolis [Indiana].  Who was the pastor at that time when you joined?
Speaker 2: Reverend Carter [J.B. Carter].  What's his first name?  He was the founder of the church.  I lost his first name but Reverend Carter was the pastor there at that time.
Speaker 1: And your mother [Lillian Lewis Greene] had joined how long had she been a member there?  I know she had come--
Speaker 2: She had been there--she came in '53 [1953] and she joined right away.  You know, she's always going to look for a church home, and she joined there in '53 [1953] when I came up in '55 [1955], I eventually joined the church, you know, so.
Speaker 1: Through those years starting from your early years when you became active, you said you didn't have the conversion experience and so forth, but, but you were involved in the church and that was constant.  What was the meaning of church for you at this time?  Why did you seek out a church affiliation?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, I enjoyed going to church, I enjoyed--well mostly I enjoyed the singing, I enjoyed the choirs.  And then you would have some speakers who were really--could really relay a message to you who were teachers so to speak, and that, I was very fortunate to have some of those preachers who were teachers that made everything in the Bible so clear.  Whereas you can pick up a Bible and start reading it and sometime it would look like Greek to you, because you don't understand what they were saying.  Well, these, some of these ministers would take everything and dissect it whereas anybody could understand it.  So it was good when you could go in and enjoy a word that someone is giving you and also enjoy the music, you know, so.
Speaker 1: So it continued to hold an attraction for you because of the music but also because of the message, and the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The message and as well as the camaraderie.  You know had people who--beautiful people and the church functions and you would just have fun together.  We would go out after rehearsals and we would go to the restaurant and we would just enjoy each other and those were fun times that made you want to hurry and get to the rehearsal, because you had fun together, you know.  It's not like we were just going just to be going so we could show how good we are. We're going to go, we're going to have--this is our time to really get out and enjoy each other.  And that choir up until just recently we would still have reunions and functions.
Story_ID: 500353
Speaker 1: Was your wife [Elmira Lawson Greene] a member of 25th Street [25th Street Baptist Church, Indianapolis, Indiana]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Was she active there?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She was there for many years.  I guess when the pastor--when one of the pastors was associate pastor went, formed another church she went there, she was his church clerk and has been for all these years.  I, I too left the church and went--when they had the transition in ministers, but I went to another church and my wife went to Puritan Baptist Church [Puritan Missionary Baptist Church, Indianapolis, Indiana], and  were she's still the church clerk there after all these years.
Speaker 1: I see.  And where did you go to?
Speaker 2: I went to Eastside Baptist Church [Indianapolis, Indiana] for a short while.  A friend of mine was preaching over there.  I went to church with him and he was one of the young preachers so I stayed there a while.  Then I guess I may have become a nomad for a while.  You know, I would visit churches, you know, trying to find the church that I could be happy and comfortable with, and eventually you know, like, the prodigal son comes home right back to 25th Street again.
Speaker 1: But you--
Speaker 2: My sister became the choir director there.
Speaker 1: Which one was that?
Speaker 2: Phyllis [Phyllis Greene Wyatt].  Yeah, so she's been doing that for thirty-five years now.  So I said, "Well okay. I'll come back and I'll join the choir and enjoy the services," so.
Story_ID: 500354
Speaker 1: When did she [Greene's sister, Phyllis Greene Wyatt] come to Indianapolis [Indiana]?
Speaker 2: She came with my mom [Lillian Lewis Greene].
Speaker 1: In '53 [1953].
Speaker 2: She--yes because you know they came--and they were youngsters at the time in school still you know so.
Speaker 1: You made reference a little while ago to her husband.  Is that your mom's husband that you're referring to?  You said that your mom came to Indianapolis, but you didn't mention your father [Lawrence Greene].
Speaker 2: No my father was--my mom had come here with a job; my father stayed in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: He didn't come, my father stayed in Washington and worked in his job there and she just came with her job here, you know.  So they made their separation for a few years, quite a few years actually, you know.
Speaker 1: Did they come back--?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  They stayed apart but still always had a good relationship.  I never could understand that, but it was good, you know, it was good.  Their relationship was always good.  There were times when you'd wonder why it happened because I was like I said in the [U.S.] military when, when it happened so you don't really know.  You don't ask a lot of questions.  You just take what hand you're given and just deal with it.  But it was always good to have the congregations when we would come back together, you know, so.
Speaker 1: So they would reconnect from time to time.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, would go back to Washington and most times it was maybe for some sad occasion, but often it was just a gathering, you know, a gathering of family.
Story_ID: 500355
Speaker 1: Now one thing that I'm curious about is you joined the church, because you enjoyed the music.  You'd always been a part of a church and enjoyed the singing both listening and also offering yourself, participating in the choir.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You joined the choir at 25th Street [25th Street Baptist Church, Indianapolis, Indiana] and so forth but you also sang jazz and blues and oftentimes in our past there, that has been a conflict.  How did, how did, how did you reconcile these two genres of music?
Speaker 2: Well you know, I--my thought is the way you carry yourself.  My piano player is a minister.  He is a retired pastor; he was secretary of the World Council of Churches.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: Marvin Chandler--Reverend Marvin Chandler.  He was Howard Thurman's right hand man, you know, and he had the same dilemma with other people denouncing him because he played jazz.  But here's a man that I would follow anywhere more so than I would a lot of preachers that I've met.  But I, I've--and we've had this discussion many times.  In fact, he's writing a book about this same subject.  You know, it's--if you carry yourself in a manner whereas a person would know where you stand then you can do what you do.  You know, and I have seen the changes in so many musicians that we work with, because of him and his beliefs and because they see that he's not just one of these fly by night preachers or musician or somebody who is pretending.  I have met so many musicians who have been out there on the road for many years with a lot of the big names who have found themselves in the religion, and some of the stories that they tell and how glad they, they are, because they were able to make it through those times when they were doing any and everything they could to now be able to go to a church and know what everything is all about.  Whenever we do festivals and concerts we always have jazz--have gospel sessions.  I just did a gospel session last week on a cruise, I do it every year on the festival the next week and we always end our, all of our--and sometimes open with a gospel song, you know, and people love it, you know.  So it's just the feel that we have for--from whence we come to know that it's not all about going out having a good time.  But you can have a good time enjoying the gospel, so.
Speaker 1: So you don't see these as contradictory forms of music (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I really don't.  I really don't, because there are so many people in the church that are doing so many other things, I mean I see it with my own eyes.  So I feel like I would much rather not be on the side whereas I'm saying one thing and doing another, you know, I'm not trying to hide.  Most, most--a lot of churches today are doing jazz services.  I do a lot of services in the churches, you know, where we're doing--and it's happening all over the country now, really becoming popular whereas we may take a jazz song and see where it relates to the gospel, to the Bible and just go right into a gospel song.  We, we have a song that we recorded 'Looking for Someplace to Be' for instance, "I have been in every city, I've been from shore to shore trying to find who I am, where I am, trying to find peace, love or joy.  Then you look around you said he was there all the time, I'm searching and searching all over the land looking for something and all that peace, love and joy was right there carrying me when I was going through times that I thought I was going through alone.  But I was being carried through all those times," you know, so.
Speaker 1: So one can find a message that flows through both genres of music.
Speaker 2: So right, so right, so right, so right.
Story_ID: 500356
Speaker 1: Now, I ask this because your mom [Lillian Lewis Greene] has been involved in the church a long time, and senior citizen one would think that mom would say, "Boy don't be going out there singing that secular music."  Did you ever get that from home?
Speaker 2: No, no.  In fact, in fact when I first came to Indiana my mom was the one that took me to some of the places in Indiana, you know,  Although--and I knew that there was never that I knew of in her life that she was anything but the straight laced, God fearing woman, you know.  But--and then again I think too that she may have been saying okay now I'm grown, I had just come back from the war [Korean War] so she's going to show me that there are some things out here, there's some nice music and things.  She knows that I'm a music lover so I'll go hang out with you.  My mom was young at heart, you know.  That's why I say I like to see parents grow up with children.
Speaker 1: But you know it is kind of well-known or at least the impression that one gets is that behind the scenes of the secular music world there is a lot of stuff, a lot of negativity, a lot of lives that go off track and behind the scenes is not always pretty and yet you have functioned in that world.  How do you negotiate those two worlds?
Speaker 2: Because you have your own beliefs, you don't want to misuse anybody, you don't want to mislead anybody.  You try to make your word your bond and if you say you're going to do something you do it.  And if you--you don't have to go off and do all the things that all these other people are doing in order to be in the in crowd.  I have friends who--a lot of the people that I talk to today, they would do a lot of things that they did why because someone else was encouraging them.  You know, my good friend is David "Fathead" Newman who played with Ray Charles.  They got involved in all those drugs and things.  David, as you see in the movie ['Ray'], he was so against giving Ray Charles drugs whereas the other guys didn't care you know.  Hey let him have it.  But although you are involved in it, you don't want to see Ray Charles get involved in it.  Well, these people look now how blessed they are that they were able to come through that part in their life, and now, you know, they're just thankful to God that they--that he was able to bring them through this.  Like I said I have so many stories that I hear from guys.  To sit around with musicians start talking, you know, to hear their tales that they tell about the things they used to do, and how glad that they had someone to bring them through those times.  And so they're still doing their music.  When we do the gospel sessions, we may have a gospel that may start at nine o'clock in the morning, and you have guys who are playing until two.  Those musicians are the first ones there in the morning for the nine o'clock--'cause they want to be a part of what they believe in.  So I don't think anybody can deter my beliefs by something that they do.  You know, I don't try to convince anyone that they shouldn't do this or shouldn't do that, because I've had people tell me--talk to me like that but until it comes that you want to do it or you don't want to do it, then you just have to wait your turn, you know.  So when we go out to perform now, we go, we perform, we interact with other people and musicians and patrons alike, but we don't have to get involved in all those things.  You know, it's not necessary.
Story_ID: 500357
Speaker 1: I'm seventy-three years old, I'm a vocalist, and I ha- I can't afford to go out and do everything in the world if I'm going to be expected to sing.  When I was here [Chicago, Illinois] doing some theater--when I was doing the theater that I was doing here we had youngsters when I say youngsters I was like only in my forties these guys were twenties, in their twenties and they wanted to like party and get out and do things when the show was over, and then they'd come to the theater the next day with no voice.  So it's something that--you know you can't go to the corner and buy another voice.  So you have to preserve it.  If this is what you're going to do you have to take care of it.  So I had brought some product that I had--that my brother used to work for Redd Foxx had found called Buckley's Mixture [Buckley's Cough Mixture] and I would keep a bottle of it.  When I came to the theater I introduced some of the kids to it, and I mean like they took to the Buckley's Mixture like ducks to water, you know, because they, they wanted something that was going to help them make it through the night, you know, and it was the worst tasting cough medicine in the world, you know.
Story_ID: 500358
Speaker 1: You mentioned some of the people that you've known, and earlier on you mentioned Wes Montgomery, clearly a legend on the stage.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Who was Wes Montgomery off the stage?  What kind of person was he?
Speaker 2: Wes was the same person on the stage as off the stage.  He was a hardworking man.  You know, when he was--before he became into prominence he worked at a milk company and we would go over here to work at the little Hub Bub [Indianapolis, Indiana] or the other clubs that he may be working.  Then you go out and hang out at an afterhours club whereas all the musicians would congregate once they've finished their various jobs all around town.  And that's when you were really hearing good music.  You know, they would all come and they would congregate there until the sun comes up, and then everybody--those who had jobs would rush home and get ready for work, you know, and Wes would do the same thing, you know, until they finally convinced him that he need to get out there in the world, let the folk see what he had to offer.
Story_ID: 500359
Speaker 1: What year was that the Hub Bub [Indianapolis, Indiana] that he [Wes Montgomery] introduced you, your first--
Speaker 2: God it was--had to be '58 [1958], '57 [1957], '58 [1958]--'58 [1958] I guess it was yeah about '58 [1958] is when I had that opportunity.  'Cause the other years I was like learning music and getting my range out of the basement.  I guess because you sing bass, you have to think higher.  I've had an opportunity maybe in the last fifteen years I'd say to work with a gospel group here in Chicago [Illinois].  Then we've travelled overseas several times, and I sang strictly bass then.  Well I had to really relearn to sing the bass and it took me a couple of weeks to really get back down to sing bass.  When the tour was over I had to learn all over again to come back out.  So now I've gotten smarter, I work on the lowest end that I can; I go up to the highest end and anything else in between it makes it a little easier, so.
Speaker 1: What, what year was that that you were going through this process of learning and relearning?
Speaker 2: Oh god we were--I think the last time we were in '88 [1988], oh, was it--when did we go overseas. It may have been ninety--'96 [1996].  We started theater in '83 [1983].  I guess anywhere between '88 [1988] and '96 [1996], we were going back and forth overseas, and every year the group would go over.  We'd go over and spend maybe two or three weeks or a week or whatever and you work hard trying to get down to your low range and then you have to come back out.  But like I said after a while, I started just working from the top to bottom range and it was a little easier, you know.  I didn't have to make the transition anymore because I'm steady working it which is what I suggest to folk now.  You know, work as low as you can and work as high as you can and that way that will increase your octaves.  You know you may be able to sing two or three octaves before, before it's over.
Story_ID: 500360
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You mentioned that Wes Montgomery was your next door neighbor at one point (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Where was that?
Speaker 2: In, on 1211 Cornell Avenue in Indianapolis, Indiana.
Speaker 1: That was his address or yours?
Speaker 2: My address was 1211 and I think his must have been 1213 or 1215 either one, you know.
Speaker 1: What part of town is that in?
Speaker 2: It's on the eastside of Indianapolis and when the interstate system started coming through it took those houses out.  That was on the Indianapolis Eastside.
Speaker 1: Was that where African American typically took residence or--?
Speaker 2: In that particular area you had a scattered mix of people.  You had the mixes all down through there, you know, so.  But majority in that particular--in that direct area was black, but a block away, two blocks away lots of mixed families.
Speaker 1: Indianapolis has gone through some periods of development and flourishing and then some, some pull backs, some entrenchment with suburbanization and so forth.  How has your experience here kind of flowed with those changes?
Speaker 2: Well I've watched Indianapolis grow tremendously.  You know, when I first came to this city, you know, it was always a beautiful city.  Very clean and I know that the one morning very early I decided just to go downtown in Indianapolis, and looking at the beauty of it, you know, I said wow this is really nice.  But you look now at what they have done with all the developments that they've done in the downtown area.  They have made Indianapolis downtown one of the best downtowns that I've been to.  You know, and when I say that it's not as--like a sharp area like Chicago [Illinois] is but you can go down to some of the museums and so many sights to see.  You know, I think of my years in Washington [D.C.] when we would go to the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.] or places like that and you would spend three of four days trying to get through one building.  Well, we have a couple of museums in Indianapolis the same way.  You go through there and you cannot--there is no way you can go through it in one day, you know.  So those things are popping up in all around the downtown, we call the White River Park [White River State Park, Indianapolis, Indiana] area.  A beautiful little zoo and all of the museums and history centers they try to offer something--you know they try to offer something to the public.  They have music all through the summers, you know, and they have all kinds of events going on.  We have one of the best Indian [Native American] museums in the world there, yes.  This gentleman [Harrison Eiteljorg] had some of his artwork at the Indianapolis Museum of Art [Indianapolis, Indiana], and didn't think he was getting enough show space so he built his own museum, gorgeous, humongous museum right downtown in Indianapolis [Eiteljorg Museum of American Indians and Western Art, Indianapolis, Indiana].  So we have a beautiful canal; we have beautiful sporting facilities there in our downtown.  Whereas the mall--you know people come to the city and they say, "Wow, what is it about this city?"  And after a day or so, they're falling in love with it to see that maybe there is something to this.  But yeah we have segregation still like we have in most places where people try to keep it out of the limelight, but you're still going to have it.  I don't care where you go.  It's going to be a long time before segregation ends, you know. It's gonna be a long time--completely.  There are a lot of people, a lot of people who are really on one accord, I've met so many of them, and who are genuinely good friends, good people, you know.  But there are just some things in Indianapolis that just is not ready yet.  Some of the workforces, you know, you have people--I see right now there is a big suit going on with Eli Lilly whom was one of the biggest workforces at all for blacks, and you hear so many people now yelling discrimination which is something that I never would have thought because of all that Eli Lilly Company [Eli Lilly and Company] does for everybody, all organizations.  The Lilly foundation [Lilly Endowment, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana] is a wonderful thing.  In fact my doctor is Ruth Lilly's doctor and he occasionally will bring her to some of my performances, you know.  So people say, "Well how did you get Ruth Lilly to your performance?"  And I say, "Well she is a personal friend," you know, so (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 500361
Speaker 1: You came to Indianapolis [Indiana] really at the onset of the Civil Rights Movement, 1955.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was just starting down in Montgomery [Alabama] and so forth and so in that sense your history there kind of parallels of the development of civil rights.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Were you ever involved with--was Indianapolis ever a center of any such activities?
Speaker 2: Not any of the big activities.  There were--a lot of the leaders would come, hold rallies and things like that there.  You know, Martin Luther King, Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and Abernathy [Ralph Abernathy], they would all come in 'cause we had one of the ministers there that was--excuse me--Reverend Andrew Brown [Andrew J. Brown] was very, very significant in that movement.  And, you know, so they would always come there for meetings and rallies and so forth but not on the big scale like they were doing in Atlanta [Georgia] and places like that, you know, so.  But it was keeping people involved and informed of things that were going on and what they could do, you know.
Speaker 1: That's something that you had sympathy for?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, for sure because we want to see equal rights.  We want to see things work, and if we can give our kids the opportunity to be able to go places and not put up with things that we put up with or things that we had to ignore or to pass up, it would be all good, you know.  I have a granddaughter who didn't want to go to one of the museums downtown that I wanted to take her to because she didn't want to hear anything about the Ku Klux Klan [KKK].  I said, "Well dear, this is why you need to go.  You need to learn that this was there, you know, and we can't run from it; it was there."  So the more you know--knowledge is power you know about it and you know how to deal with it, so.
Speaker 1: So you have found the--while the reality still pertain that there are the other sides that counterbalances that in Indianapolis so that one can find a way to live fruitfully and in harmony (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In harmony yeah I think for the most part people are finding that.  There are some isolated cases whereas you may have someone who may experience something that they don't like and so very often today I find people who think the world should come to them on a platter.  They don't realize what some of our parents and forefathers have gone through to bring them to the point they are now.  You know, I look at unions--I belong to five different unions and how people talk about, "Oh unions are doing nothing at all for me."  Whereas you've got to read history to see where so many of our people died to get you the right to do different things that you have.  You know, if it wasn't for the unions back in those days you would absolutely nothing, no rights now, you know.  So but they--so many of them don't see that, you know, I mean what have you done for me today, you know, yesterday is dead and gone.
Story_ID: 500362
Speaker 1: You mentioned that you were a member of five unions.  What are those unions?
Speaker 2: Okay UAW [United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America; United Automobile Workers] from when I was working in the foundry [in Indianapolis, Indiana], Screen Actors Guild - American Federation of Radio and Television Artists [Screen Actors Guild - American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)], Equity [Actors' Equity Association] and the musicians' union [American Federation of Musicians].
Speaker 1: And you've been a member of those throughout the time that you'd been in Indianapolis [Indiana]?
Speaker 2: No, I was in the UAW from the time I started working at the foundry, and I joined the musicians' union, god, what, thirty-five years ago.  When I came to Chicago [Illinois] to do the Bessie Smith show 'The Little Dreamer: A Night in the Life of Bessie Smith,' Ed Shockley], it was an Equity house so we had to become Equity and after doing some voiceovers and commercial things I had to join AFTRA and I wanted to be in--I said, wow, I wanted to become a SAG member as well.  You know, so I had an opportunity to do a little part in a movie and the--it wasn't paying very much money.  I mean, it was paying the biggest portion of the SAG dues.  I said, "Well, okay.  I'll do this part so I can join SAG," and very fortunate for me the movie went--okay they paid me extra to shave and the movie went into overtime so I made more than I needed to join SAG, you know, so.
Speaker 1: What, what movie was that and what year?
Speaker 2: The movie was, god, 'Going All the Way,' and here I'm thinking--I was a Pullman car porter--waiter in the Pullman car and I'm thinking that 'Going all the Way' was like going all the way from one end of the line to the other.  This was about some youngsters coming home from the [U.S.] military--from the Second World War [sic. Korean War], you know, meeting some young ladies.  I didn't know this until after I had seen, I had seen the movie (laughter) 'cause you know you go in and you do your part and that's it, you know.  We spent like sixteen hours filming my part which was good.  Like I said the overtime looked really good (laughter). And so Ben Affleck was in that movie actually, so I just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you get to work with him?
Speaker 2: Well I served him beer on the train.  He and his little partner and he was not the star, he was the co-star in that movie, you know, so.
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: It was oh god it was the year before he won an Academy Award [Oscar] for--was it 'Good Time Hunting' [sic.]?  What year was that?  Ninety, I guess, what, '7 [1997]? I guess it was--I don't know for sure but it was the year before he won for 'Good Will Hunting.'  I said, wow this cat was just in this movie.   He won Academy Award already (laughter)?
Story_ID: 500363
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was that your only movie?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  I had auditioned for a couple of movies and one that just knew I was going to have 'Uptown Harlem'--was it 'Uptown'?
Speaker 1: 'Uptown Saturday Night'?
Speaker 2: 'Uptown Saturday Night,' yeah.  I had auditioned for the movie well they had really wanted me from what they said to do the part of an undertaker.  I was a slow, slow moving, slow talking undertaker.  So I get to the casting call and they say, "Oh no, no I want you to be my preacher."  I said--then I had to change--shift gears and be this high spirited preacher coming right in the height of a sermon, and after I had worked so hard on being this little slow moving, slow talking undertaker.  Whereas, I said--the lady kept saying well you sing in the sermon and I said well hey I just can't do any better, you have to get somebody else so.
Speaker 1: So you--
Speaker 2: Story of my theater career, you know.
Speaker 1: So you--by the way how close in time was that audition to the one that you actually appeared in the 'Uptown Saturday Night' what year was that?
Speaker 2: Oh, boy. I really don't know, I've auditioned for so many, many--well not movies but so many things, and--I, well, let me see.  It was before the 'Going all the Way' movie.  Yeah it was before then, I remember that for sure.  They were doing a lot of productions over in Cincinnati [Ohio] at the time and that's where I--could have been in another movie.  My son [Marcellus Greene] after he left football was in a production company, up in Canada at the time when they were producing so many movies up there. So he was getting people to be in the different movies and I just happened to be there when they were getting ready to shoot one of their movies, I think a movie with--ah man.  One of my favorite singers, she was in a courtroom--I'll think of her name.  But anyway, when, when I was just standing there and the producers of the cast was coming around, coming around to separate his detectives and his policemen and he said, "Well, okay.  I want you over there with my detectives."  And I said, "Well, I'm just watching," and he said, "No, no.  I want you over there."  I said, "No I'm just here watching the movie."  He wanted me to be in the movie, but he wasn't paying enough money for me to stay there for two weeks (laughter).  Barbra Streisand, they were doing a Barbra Streisand movie there.
Speaker 1: What year was, what year was that?
Speaker 2: Ah, man I--god I can't be for sure.  It was, it was in the later '90s [1990s].  It was maybe earlier than that, maybe early '90s [1990s] 'cause he played ball until '87 [1987].  Yeah it was in the early '90s [1990s] I'd say '90 [1990], '91 [1991] something like that, yeah.
Story_ID: 500364
Speaker 1: You came to Indianapolis [Indiana], worked in the foundry, retired from that and decided that you were going to pursue this musical career, and you began singing.  There is a reference to a--the Indiana Avenue clubs.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Erroll Grandy and Dr. Willis Kirk.  What was that scene (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Well Indiana Avenue was really one of the hot jazz scenes.  It was maybe a three block area, you had, god maybe fifteen clubs and you had so many good musicians there, all the clubs were full of good musicians.  And you had people who went on to become big time, big name musicians who weren't from Indiana who came to hang out because they had heard of the musicians in Indiana, people like Jack McDuff and Roland Kirk [Rahsaan Roland Kirk].  These folk would come and just hang out because they wanted to work with the Freddie Hubbards and the Wes Montgomerys and people like that who were there.  But Willis Kirk, Dr. Willis Kirk he was the drummer that played with Wes Montgomery when I worked at the club [Hub Bub, Indianapolis, Indiana].  He went on to be a counselor of San Francisco City College [sic. City College of San Francisco, San Francisco, California], you know, as well as playing drums with some of the world renowned musicians, Lionel Hampton, Little Jimmy Scott and things, people like that.  So many of those musicians went on to become great, great leaders. David Baker who is head of the music of jazz at Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana].  I worked with him when he played trombone, you know, and I worked with--the band leader would call me and say, "Okay, we've got a gig at such and such a time, and David is on it."  And I'd say, "Well, gee. What's David playing tonight?"  Today he may be playing piano then he may be playing cello.  You know so, it was just a great scene whereas music was just, just everywhere, you know.  I, I, I heard one guy say probably in one of the productions that we did here in Chicago [Illinois].  I think it was the TV production that we did here forty--'Strolling 47th Street' ['Precious Memories: Strolling 47th Street'], he said well what happened to those days and his answer was segregation [sic. integration].  You know, when segregation came along the guys would go do all--the white clubs were hiring the black musicians, paying them more money much more than they were making in the little black clubs, you know and all of that started to diminish.
Speaker 1: Integra--
Speaker 2: So it kind of made sense in a way that it was happening that way.
Speaker 1: Integration of the entertainment scene caused the diminishment of the--
Speaker 2: Of the black neighborhoods that had all the wonderful musicians, because now although the white patrons would come to the black clubs, the owners of the white clubs would bring those musicians to their clubs so that they wouldn't lose their people, you know.
Speaker 1: What would be the timeframe for this Indiana Avenue scene, the glory days (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well when I got there in '55 [1955] it was like really, really hot and it had been even hotter before then but it was really hot then.  And, oh man, I'd say when I got out of the music in '62 [1962].  When I had signed those bad contracts I wouldn't even go not even near a club for nearly ten years.  But it was just beginning to slow down at that time.  They started closing down some of the places, and I guess, yeah, I guess until about '62 [1962], '63 [1963] when things started to diminish in the, in Indiana Avenue and some of the places would move out to the little outlying areas.  Although there was music in all those areas already but Indiana Avenue started closing down because they started changing that scene down there you know new developments and things like that.
Story_ID: 500365
Speaker 1: Now when you were working in, in these clubs there were names like Erroll Grandy and Dr. Willis Kirk.  Are they still active on the scene?
Speaker 2: Errol Grandy is not; he, he's dead.  Dr. Willis Kirk is retired, he, like I said, he retired from San Francisco City College [sic. City College of San Francisco, San Francisco, California] and a few years ago he had started writing a jazz cantata, and it took him quite a few years to write it.  So about, maybe about five years ago we recorded it and it was called 'Rejoice Rejoice,' a beautiful piece that he had written, he spent his life-I didn't know he was writing it but he spent his life putting it together, wrote all of the music but one song and just a lot of the past just from the Bible the resurrection and the crucifixion and things like that, you know, and made the story and it was a wonderful story.  And--but he also is retired now.  You know a lot of the guys that were on Indiana Avenue when I came through there, I was a youngster at twenty-one, twenty-two and a lot of these guys were already established, but a lot of these guys are gone on now.  Some of the, I mean, some of the youngsters who were coming in the back door, I look at some things when they do their tributes and things now, and I look at a lot of the youngsters who are much younger than I am who claim to have been you know, "I was there when they were doing this and doing that."  I say well okay just let it be, so.  But they were there during the times that I had dropped out which could have very easily--Babyface, for one.  He had a wonderful group during that time; you know Babyface the big time entertainer.  His granddad had one of the nicest little restaurants in Indianapolis [Indiana] for a while The Chicken Shack you know everybody had a chicken shack in that town.
Speaker 1: What years was he there in Indianapolis?
Speaker 2: Well he grew up there but like I said when I dropped out of the music in the early '60s [1960s], their bands, these bands started coming into prominence.  Well I didn't know about them, because I didn't go into the clubs.  I was doing strictly gospel, and, you know, we were travelling different places.  I was doing gospel and working in my foundry, you know.  But I didn't go into them, because I didn't want the people that I'd sign these contracts with to see me there, you know.  So it was my sole purpose for not going into them, like I said just being completely disillusioned with the music world, you know.
Story_ID: 500366
Speaker 1: You began singing and being in the music environment from your early years, but you started off on a kind of a musical track after you retired from the foundry [in Indianapolis, Indiana].  Now the great musicians always testify that they are singing out of something coming from the inside.  It's not just notes but they're really giving a life voice.  What, what was the inspiration for your music in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, early on I didn't have the inspiration or the feeling about the music that I have gained over the last I'll say twenty, twenty-five years, because at that time you are singing.  You try to learn the song but you're just singing.  Whereas now when I learn a song I want to learn what that song is saying, what that song means, what the writer was trying to convey to whoever he was writing about 'cause most of the songs that were written were written about somebody, you know.  So I want to try to just relay that message, and I like to think that I'm trying to relay that message as, as if it was happening to me and make a person believe that, "Gee, you went through some times with that song, didn't you?"  So that is my goal now to try to make a song believable, to learn it completely and know what it's saying, know what the words mean.  And I do that by, at times, I'll take a lyric and turn it around different ways, put different words in it to try to make it mean pretty close to the same thing.
Story_ID: 500367
Speaker 1: In 1994, at age sixty, you record your first album 'At Last.'
Speaker 2: 'At Last.'
Speaker 1: Yes.  How did that come about?
Speaker 2: Well I was working around Chicago [Illinois] with a lot of the musicians, like I s- some of the guys who were in the theater, but I got a chance to meet so many of them and because I was doing a lot of work with a lot of the guys I decided that I wanted to do a recording.  Since so many people thought I was too old to get involved in this, including the record company owner where I recorded.  He told the engineer, "What is that old man doing trying to do this?"   So anyway I just pulled some of the guys together, not knowing anything about the recording business per se, because the recordings that I'd done, I had done other people's recordings.  You know, I had gone in the studio with other people and not knowing all the leg work that they had done before.  So I just go into the studio with these guys and hear the songs I wanted to do.  So luckily for me I had top notch musicians who knew the business well, and because of the fact that we had sang together many times, we didn't have to have all of the technical stuff together.  We were able to go in the studio and record and, and get it over with in a short period of time, you know.  And because I was footing the bill for that particular recording, I, when I got out the guys told me, "Don't listen to it for at least a month."  Gee, yeah okay.  As soon as I got in the car I popped it in and I wanted to cry.  I said oh man I wasted my money (laughter).  So I thought everything about it was wrong that I was doing that's what I was thinking.  So I had a few people to--who were really in the know to listen to it Houston Person, Etta Jones and a couple of other people, and they loved it, you know.  So after a while when I decided I would listen past my vocals and I said okay well it's not too bad, I guess maybe I'll get this published and make something out of it.
Speaker 1: And how did you do?
Speaker 2: It went well. It went well.  We did about three pressings on it and so I think it was like the new kid on the block type thing.  Because I didn't have a distributor, we did most of our own distributing with--through Amazon [Amazon.com, Inc.] and when we'd do festivals and concerts and things.  So (unclear), in fact, I get lots of calls for it still so I have to go back and get another pressing.  In fact, I talked to the people about that already so maybe we can get it finished before--after they get their Christmas rush done.
Story_ID: 500368
Speaker 1: And in '98 [1998] you do 'My Foolish Heart.'
Speaker 2: 'My Foolish Heart' I was, like I say, was very good friends with Houston Person and Etta Jones and we were always talking about--well I had sent my CD to the record company that he was working with, and the guy didn't--he never responded so one of the guys that's in his stable wanted me to record on his album.  So then the guy said, "Well, who is this guy you want?"  So he let him hear the CD and he said, "Oh gee, I think I'll do him myself," and I said, "Okay."  I said, "I sent you some stuff five, six years ago (unclear)."  So anyway that's how we hooked up and it was done very quickly.  We decided that one of the meeting that I was going to go up to the IAJE conference--the International Association for Jazz Education and we talked over the phone about some music and when we got there we got together one day and got some beginnings and endings and the next day--we talked over it the first day and the next day we went through beginnings and endings and the third day we recorded.  Again another six hours so all those things as I listen to it I said, "Wow, I really wish I had some time to really work on them," but, you know, then again, I'm my own worst critic.
Speaker 1: Since 2002, in 2002 you were featured with Buselli-Wallarab Orchestra [Buselli-Wallarab Jazz Orchestra].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was that another significant step in your musical trajectory?
Speaker 2: Well, not necessarily.  I had--sang with big bands before and these guys when they came to me about singing with them, you know, I was kind of leery at first but they were good, good musicians they played very, very well.  Most of them were music educators and it was I thought just something for a particular occasion, you know.  So this guy was such a prolific writer, you know, his music is just dreamy, you know, and they wanted me to do a recording and a concert whereas I couldn't do because I had an obligation at a festival in Denver [Colorado].  So they called in another one of the world's singers and they told me that he was coming in, this guy was coming in a very popular singer at the time was coming in to do the recording.  I said, "Well, good.  You're in good hands."  So when I came back from Denver that guy had like a lot of emergency calls from these guys, you know.  They said, "We need you to go in and re-record this stuff 'cause this guy--we had to fire this guy," and only because this guy was such an intricate writer, if you don't prepare for what he's writing you can't hear it, because you very seldom would hear the melody because he writes in between the melody.  You know, most singers when they're getting ready to sing a song, they hear the melody and they know where they are, but if you don't hear the melody you don't know where you are.  So this is how this guy came in and I lost a friend because of that.  A big time singer comes in and he thought I told the people he got fired but it wasn't me (laughter).  The group is good; I enjoyed singing with them.  Like I said I enjoyed the guys and we just did--last year we did a Christmas album and they were the old traditional Christmas songs, but with his arranging.  You know, his arranging is just--makes the songs just brand new you know and I play, I play the album all year, you know (laughter).
Story_ID: 500369
Speaker 1: You've mentioned several times cruises that you--wherein you sing.  What is that situation?
Speaker 2: Well, the jazz cruise I've been doing it for quite some time.  There used to be, years ago when I got involved in it, it was a lady that invited me because I reminded her of one of her favorite singers.  So that's how I was able to get in that door.  So I would go in and I'd perform for her organization on the Norway [SS Norway].  And the Norway I think went into dry dock.  There were two people providing the music for the Norway, Joe Segal of The Jazz Showcase was one and this lady from St. Louis [Missouri] was the other.  Well Joe Segal hired me to do his cruise on the Norwegian Sun.  So I've been doing his cruises every year since then, you know, so.
Speaker 1: What year was that you began with him?
Speaker 2: Two thousand [2000].  And what he does is he brings in a group of musicians.  Some groups but a lot of individual musicians and we group together and just make a group and perform, just have fun just like a jam session so to speak, controlled jam session I would say.  We've been doing it well, like I said this was the seventh year doing it with Joe.
Speaker 1: Is there a name for--you mentioned the name of the ship but you--?
Speaker 2: Jazz Party at Sea is the name of the cruise and his party is on the Norwegian Cruise Line.  It's been on the Norwegian Sun for the past seven years.  Next year it will be on I think the Norwegian Dawn, and Anita Berry has her cruises on the Holland American Line.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: So you know how they get a little competition whereas they don't want you to work on one if you work on the other so that makes it kind of crazy but hey what can you say?
Speaker 1: Is that something you find fulfillment in, satisfaction in (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I enjoy it to no end because for one thing it really keeps you up and when you get an opportunity to go and work with some of the world renowned musicians that you've been hearing about all your life.  You get a chance to go on the stage and work with these guys and they accept you.  That was the main thing that I enjoyed; you know, that's what makes it good.  You know, and a--vocalist has a hard time because a lot of musicians don't like vocalists, because so many vocalists like to take control.  Which I can understand why they don't like them because some I don't like myself.  You know, to--I like to be a part of a group.  We go in and we're all in this together, no big I's, no little you's so we go in and we have fun, and when I can get accolades from the musicians then I, I feel like okay.  Whether my name is a household name or not you know my peers enjoy what I, I do so it makes it good (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right, very good.
Story_ID: 500370
Speaker 1: You've mentioned doing voiceovers, and I know you've done narrations, industrial presentations, museum exhibits and so forth.  How did these auxiliary kinds of things come about for you?
Speaker 2: Okay, years ago I got involved in an agency, Helen Wells Agency [Helen Wells Agency, LLC, Indianapolis, Indiana], you know, and just for the heck of it, you know.  Because I'd done a little theater I said let me get involved in this and see what happens.  So I'd get called for auditions to come and audition for a particular thing and more often than not you wouldn't get it.  But after--later on over years, you started putting your voice on the tape, and she would have it on the computer and a person, a client would come up and they would hear your voice or see your face and they want that voice or they want that sound so that way you get, you know, a few more jobs.  But some of them you do have to audition where they want to see you in person.  You know, so going to lots and lots of auditions, and you may get to a point where a client likes what you did at the time or liked your sense of humor or your look or whatever and you get a chance to do the job, you know.  I did a job for the one at the museum whereas, the Children's Museum [Children's Museum of Indianapolis, Indianapolis, Indiana].  We have one of the biggest and best children's museums in the country in Indianapolis [Indiana] and there's an area--the African area whereas it's a story about the griots, Creoles--griots and I am in the theater as you come in, "I'm Reverend Greene," and I say, "Good afternoon.  I'm Reverend Greene and welcome," and blah blah blah.  I've had so many of my friends who knew me all my life: "I didn't know you were a minister," (laughter).  So, but it's been, it's been fun doing that, things change with time.  Today all the organizations, they're going--all the companies are going with nonunion people cutting down on the costs, but I've had some fun jobs.  I've had some really nice jobs.  I haven't had one narration or voiceover that I didn't like.  You know, I thought that I wouldn't like a couple of them.  I did Kipling's [Rudyard Kipling] 'The Elephant's Child' for Hal Leonard Productions actually and when I was reading the script I said, "Wow, this is so silly," because everything is double, the wallow wallow, and, the yellow yellow, and so forth.  So when we got to the studio and I was listening to the music that was going to be in it, I said, "Oh, the music really makes it a little better," you know.  So it was fun creating the voice of the elephant who was looking for the trunk on that particular series, you know.
Speaker 1: What year did you do that?
Speaker 2: Oh god.  That has to be at least ten years ago, yeah, had to be at least ten years ago.  And I did 'Tree in Tappen Wood' ['A Tree in Tappen Wood: A Musical Tale of Growing and Gratitude, Adventure and Peace,' Emily Crocker and John Jacobson] maybe about four years ago.  No it wasn't ten years it may have been--I'd say more like six because about two years later when I did the 'Tree in Tappen Wood' by the same--well Emily Crocker wrote that particular one.  It's about a tree that lived a thousand years in the woods and is telling its story to somebody who is passing by, very interesting.  You know, you get wound up in these things you know once you hear them, you know.
Story_ID: 500371
Speaker 1: Speaking of storytelling, someone has remarked that your singing has a kind of storytelling character to it, and you've done children's stories at the Children's Museum [Children's Museum of Indianapolis, Indianapolis, Indiana] and so forth.  Is storytelling a part of your professional persona?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I like, like I said before, to relay a story that the writer has written in a song and I think the theater has helped me in that sense and the narrations and storytelling as well.  Because it lets you look at the words and learn the words and see just what that writer is trying to say.  And what we try to do is try to do it so many different ways--the same way but make it different.  Like in the theater when you work and you're doing the same show for weeks and weeks at a time you singing the same song.  I sang "Ol' Man River" in 'Show Boat' [Oscar Hammerstein II] like nine times a week, you know, and so you wanted to do the same song, but you wanted to do it--you wanted to do the same song, but you want to do it differently.  So you maybe just change a phrase or something in it but you know just to satisfy yourself but you still made it understandable that what was being said, what was being relayed in the song itself.
Speaker 1: When did you do 'Show Boat'?
Speaker 2: I did 'Show Boat' in Indianapolis [Indiana] at the Beef and Boards Dinner Theatre [Indianapolis, Indiana], oh god, in eighty--'89 [1989], '89 [1989], '90 [1990], yeah, yeah, something like that, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sixteen weeks of it, so (laughter).
Story_ID: 500372
Speaker 1: This year, 2007, at age seventy-three you performed at the Marquis de Lafayette's Victorian Gardens [Marquis de Lafayette Hotel, Victorian Garden Restaurant] in New Jersey, Cape May, New Jersey and the reviewers had this to say about you, "Greene's [HistoryMaker Everett Greene] rich bass baritone voice has been compared to Billy Eckstine and Paul Robeson.  A natural born swinger, Greene's ebullient renditions of pop chestnuts like 'Let There be Love' and Rodgers and Hart's 'Where or When' have the audience clapping and having a ball.  Then he testified with bluesy authority on 'Willow Weep for Me' and melted the audience with a moving rendition of 'My Funny Valentine'," ['Jacky Terrasson at the Earshot Jazz Festival,' Bill Milkowski].  How do you feel when you hear reviews?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't read that review (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But you know I read some reviews, and I know that the critic has listened.  I have seen reviews whereas I think some of the writers just write words, you know, but when you read a review whereas the man knows music or knows theater then you can appreciate it.  That makes you feel like oh gee I think I'll save this one.  When the reviewer or the critic catches you on a good night which it was a good night we were in Cape May 'cause I don't get an opportunity often to take my own group different places.  So I convinced my guys to go with me to Cape May.  So we had a groove, a good pocket going on, and everybody felt good about what we were doing.  You know, sometimes when you get started you seem like you can't do any wrong.  You can take anything.  Like I--that's another thing that dwell on--I don't make mistakes when I'm singing; that's just my own rendition.  If you think it's wrong that's your problem, but this is the way I wanted to do it, you know, so.  But we have so much fun when I work with my guys.  He's [Marvin Chandler] the minister, like I was telling you earlier, who is really a swinger, you know, and one of the best preachers in the world, you know.  So he says he preaches the hell right out of you (laughter).
Speaker 1: Does he pastor a church?
Speaker 2: Oh he's retired.
Speaker 1: He's retired.
Speaker 2: Retired from pastoring; he's pastored three huge churches.  He took over--what'd I say, Norman--the man I mentioned earlier--see how time has just warped my brain--
Speaker 1: Down in Indiana--
Speaker 2: Howard Thurman.
Speaker 1: Howard Thurman.
Speaker 2: Yeah he took over Howard Thurman's church.  When Howard Thurman retired, he was Howard Thurman's pastor.
Speaker 1: Out in San Francisco [California]?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. So--but we just had fun together.  We had fun.  We worked Saturday night and you can do no wrong when you're working with people--and I guess it's the same thing in anything you do.  When you've got people around you and you all know each other and you all are on one accord if you do something differently they are right behind you, they are right with you they just fall right into it, so.  But that was a decent review, so.
Story_ID: 500373
Speaker 1: How do you feel when you step out onto the stage to perform and the keyboards and other instruments strike up, and you usher forth what comes out of your spirit, out of your heart and it connects with the audience, it happens.  How do you feel in that moment?
Speaker 2: Well after the first note and the nerves come together and you feel like you hit the right note and people aren't throwing things at you, you feel good like, you know, like okay I got this started right.  My thing is to try to get to the audience quickly.  You know, I like to arrange my program according to who I'm singing and--who I'm singing to and where I'm singing.  The types of songs that I want to do and what I want to start off singing and I would like to just try to put them in my hands early and if you do that--when I can do that then you can kind of half way make all kinds of variations in between and they more than likely go right along with you because they feel like okay you started out with something I like so maybe you'll end up with something I like as well.  But it makes you feel, I'm in control as long as a button don't pop off.  If a button pops off they can't concentrate on you because they're watching that button, I've had happen too, so (laughter).
Speaker 1: Who have been some of your images toward which you have striven, or have there been such images in the musical world that have kind of drawn you forward?  I want to be like them or they're, they're the models of patterns for what I'm trying to do.
Speaker 2: I actually haven't reached out to anybody to mimic, you know.  As far as sound, I get so many comments about sounding like so many singers, Eckstine [Billy Eckstine], Prysock [Arthur Prysock], Hartman [Johnny Hartman], you know Lou Rawls--
Speaker 1: Joe Williams.
Speaker 2: Joe Williams. But the thing is--what I enjoy about that--I appreciate people putting me in that category but what they are hearing is the same range, the same maybe tone quality but if you put everybody together side by side, you will see there's just no comparison.  You know, but I appreciate a person when they compare me to them, because most time a person will compare you to somebody they like.  So if you do that, then fine.  Like I was telling you before, I got the job because the lady liked Johnny Hartman, you know, so I did that job for eight years because she liked Johnny Hartman and he was gone on.
Speaker 1: What is the Story Avenue House of Worship ['Story Avenue: African American Voices That Teach Us All']?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry what is it?
Speaker 1: The Story Avenue House of Worship.  Are you familiar with that location?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 500374
Speaker 1: Someone has also said that [HistoryMaker] Everett Greene has a voice and a style that epitomizes smooth.  Can you give us a sampling of that smooth Everett Greene, sing us a few bars?
Speaker 2: After talking for three hours, I don't know if that's possible or not.  But, you know, I think, I think smooth comes from being comfortable.  You know, if you are sure of what you're going to sing, and being comfortable with it then these are just some of the things that I have learned over the years, you know, as far as trying to breathe correctly and let a word flow out. Right now, my voice is not in any shape to try to sing a capella (laughter) for some reason.  But when smooth--I guess I would say, I would--sometimes when you hear singers start out a song they're just jumping right into it.  I'm trying to think of a song that I could just--a song was on my mind that I was trying to (singing), ah, "Hello young lovers--."  You know when you just jump into it but when you start (singing), "Hello young lovers--," you're just as smooth into a song whether it be a fast or slow song.  Whereas and you can get most of the emotions from the very nice ballads.  You know, when you--I did a song 'When Did You Leave Heaven' and to start out (singing) I used to dream about angels.  And people hear this sort of half talking half singing about a song, they can, can't wait for the next line.  Whereas if you were just to sing (singing) I used to dream--you're out high right away then you say, "Wow, slow down a little bit."  So that's one of my relations with that thing--like I say right now my voice is like shot as far as trying to sing. I'm glad I don't have to sing tonight but (laughter)
Speaker 1: Well tell me this--
Speaker 2: But that is one of the things that I enjoy about learning my trade and that's breathing and letting the words come out, and it makes you last so much longer.  You know, I can sing for two, three hours when I can do that, and when your music is right you can do that.  If you go somewhere to sing and your music is not right you can't do that because you're going to try and compensate for what's missing.  I've gone to a job and the piano player will be in Spain somewhere and you have your bass and your drum and your saxophone.  So you're overcompensating, trying to make up for that missing piano.  Well within an hour, I mean, you--your voice is shot, whereas if you can sit down with all your instruments and everybody is in place and you can just ease into your songs, you can sing forever.  I mean, I've sat at a piano bar and sang for four hours, you know, just the piano and vocal.
Story_ID: 500375
Speaker 1: As one who easily migrates between blues, jazz, gospel, what is, from the performance standpoint, what is the differentiation in those genres (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. Oh, there's difference, it's a different feel.  I like to tell people there was a time when I couldn't sing blues because I didn't know blues.  I didn't know what they were talking about when they were talking about (singing), "Oh I feel so down and lonely. I don't know what to do."  I never felt that way but you can feel that way about anything not necessarily love or something like that but so many other things.  But once you've lived a life, you know blues.  If you have any spirituality, you know gospel, you know what it's saying.  You get into altogether different vein, and when you do your love songs you can just relive it, relive again what that man is writing and it'll all come out as the folks say smooth, you know, so.
Speaker 1: Your first recorded album was 'At Last' that many not only would have said but did say you know he's kind of late.
Speaker 2: But 'At Last.'  I had to learn the song "At Last" because of that title.  Everybody thought oh he's singing, "At Last." I said no it's not that kind of at last it's that, "At last you got this done," (laughter).
Speaker 1: You're seventy-three now.
Speaker 2: Seventy-three.
Speaker 1: Where is this career going?
Speaker 2: Until it is no more, I am not counting the years, I'm just going to keep going and keep going like the Energizer bunny, you know.  And like I said, just trying to keep taking care of my voice and doing what I do to keep from getting burnt out, and when I'm singing, you know, I don't hurt anywhere so I want to keep singing all the time (laughter).
Story_ID: 500376
Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you would want to say for the record that I haven't asked you this afternoon (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wow I don't think you've left anything out at all (laughter).  I'd just like to say that I have really enjoyed my life and I would encourage anybody who has a desire to do something, regardless of what it is.  Be it music, theater or being a doctor or lawyer do it, go out and give it a try.  Don't ever say, "Well, I don't think I can do this."  You know, I have worked behind top world renowned singers or musicians.  People say wow how can you go up behind that person, doesn't bother me, because you do your thing and I do my thing.  So I may learn something from you who knows you may learn something from me, you know.  So we just do what we do.
Story_ID: 500377
Speaker 1: There anything that you haven't done yet that you still want to get accomplished or do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I haven't made that million dollars yet (laughter).  I have done a lot of things but there are still a lot of things I haven't done and if ended today, I would be satisfied because I guess I can't think of anything that I would say oh gee I wish I had have done that or I wish I could have done that.  I've travelled overseas many times which is something that I know I could have never done had I stayed working, you know, music has done that for me.  I have met many people, you know, big and small and I like to think that I am the same amongst all of them.  You know, I try to be me; I don't try to be anything else 'cause I may forget who I am or where I am and do the wrong thing with the wrong person so the song, saying is what you see is what you get.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you have done that you in retrospect would go back and do differently, that you regret?
Speaker 2: Well, the only thing that I would go back and do differently is I would learn all the music instruments that I could learn.  I would learn--start with the piano.  I would learn every note on the piano; I would learn the bass.  I'd learn all the instruments; I had opportunities to do all those things, but because I was so wound up in the quartets, you know, I didn't think I needed it.  It was always a piano in my house, always a set of drums in my house and always some sort of an instrument somewhere around.  Had a--but at the time I didn't think it was necessary.  When it came the time I thought I--gee I think I'll try to play piano, and I bought a piano and started trying to take some lessons, but, you know, I wanted to learn right away, you know, and I was too impatient.  So I said well I'll leave that to the piano player.  I'll concentrate on what I do and try to be the best that I can be.
Speaker 1: As you look back over your life and you've been a lot of places, seen a lot of things, done a lot of things, a lot of experiences, what stands out most to you?
Speaker 2: Stands out most--I did a, a session with 106 Medal of Honor winners.  They built a big memorial in Indianapolis [Indiana] for Medal of Honor winners.  To be amongst those guys, to hold conversations with them, for a couple of them to come to me and praise me for what I'm doing.  You know, one man said I haven't--I don't know when I cried, but the songs just really put me in an altogether different mode, you know.  I mean to be amongst those guys, and when you think of what it takes for a man to win the Medal of Honor, to be amongst 106 of them, there is something very, very special.  So that is just one thing that I can think of on the top of my head that I think is like a very special thing.
Story_ID: 500378
Speaker 1: You clearly are a very thoughtful person, and you've been very intentional about your life, about the values that have shaped and molded your life and that have sustained you.  What, what values are most important to you?
Speaker 2: Respect for one thing; I want to respect a person and I would like for a person to respect me.  You know, and I want you to be--I want to be the person that I can be and if you do the same we can bring this world together hopefully one day before my kids are gone on.  I hope that they can see peace and harmony.  I know it will be a long time but I really hope that something--somebody made a statement on the cruise.  They talked about all the different nationalities and so forth that work on the cruise ship.  They said, "Why can't we bring all the world leaders together so they can see what harmony is?  See what peace and harmony is and realize wow this is something that we can all enjoy and we can all get along with it," you know.  And music creates this thing as well, you know.  Music is so soothing, it has--it's just so universal that it makes everybody want to pat their feet, you know, and come together, so.  Hopefully who knows I intend to give Methuselah a run for his money 'cause I'll be around they say and who knows but if not I just would love to see--look down one day and see my kids, see them all in a circle we are the world.
Story_ID: 500379
Speaker 1: When that day comes and others look back on you, how do you want to be remembered?  What do you want people to say about [HistoryMaker] Everett Greene?
Speaker 2: I would like for a person to know that I say what I mean, and you can believe me when I tell you something that it's going to be the truth,  I'm going to try my best not to misuse you in any way.  That I want to do my best; if I can't help you than I'm not going to do anything at all to hurt you.  I'm not going to mislead you in any way to say that you're doing so good when you aren't, when you need some help or want some direction or another.  I want you to know that I'm honest and I'm going to be honest and frank with you.  And if we can't have the whole truth we just won't say anything at all about it.
Story_ID: 500380
Speaker 1: Similar question, final question: what is your legacy?  What do you want that legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well, (unclear) I want them to say that, what--that he did what he did well, whatever it was.  If I mop the floor I want to be able to say, "Oh gee, I did it."  You know, so to do something and do it completely and do it so that you won't have to shy back and say wow I don't know who did that.  You know, I want to be able to just let whatever I do just stand out.  You know, If it's go to the grocery, I want to be--my mom [Lillian Lewis Greene] used to tell me--I say, "Why out of ten kids you always called me to go to the grocery?"  "Because you go like you've got some sense."  That was all I needed; then I couldn't wait to go to the grocery.  So I want that to be said in every phase of my life that what I did, I did--I tried to do well, I tried to do to the best of my ability.  I get honored when people will call me or tell me, "Oh gee, well if you're around I want you to sing at my funeral," you know, and then they want to apologize and I say, "No it makes me feel good that you want me to be there because you think that I did something right."  You know, if I can emote a song to you and it makes you feel better, then that's my job.  If I can sing a song to you and you think that it's smooth as silk, that's my job.  If I go and cook you dinner and you think that wow Chef Boyardee couldn't have done it any better, that's my job for that day.  So I just want them to be able to say that he did good.
