Story_ID: 191335
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey; observing is Robert Hayden.  Ma'am could you please give us your name?
Speaker 2: Ma'am (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yea, well, that's our training, you know (laughter); could you please give us your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Yes, my name is Amy Robertson Goldson, R-O-B-E-R-T-S-O-N, Goldson, G-O-L-D-S-O-N, first name A-M-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: I know it, I knew it--the one thing I--
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Well, I use my maiden name Robertson, R-O-B-E-R-T-S-O-N, but my given middle name was Ellen.
Speaker 1: Okay, All right, do you have any nicknames?
Speaker 2: No, just Amy.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there, can you tell us the origin of Goldson?
Speaker 2: Someone might call me something else but (laughter).
Speaker 1: I hope not.  I hope it's something good (laughter).  But, do you; have any idea of the origin of Goldson, where that comes from?
Speaker 2: Well, Goldson is the name that I got from my husband [Alfred Goldson] and --(simultaneous)--but he tells me his family--his grandfather was born in Jamaica and someone made the gold key for the church in Jamaica, so that's where Goldson came from.
Speaker 1: Okay, All right, can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Boston [Massachusetts] on January 16th, 1953.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a lawyer.  I graduated from law school in 1976.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: August the 18th, I think, or 17th, August 17th of 19, of 2004.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're on Martha's Vineyard Island in Oak Bluffs [Massachusetts] and that's where I have spent my summers growing up--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --all my life.
Story_ID: 191336
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five People magazine-ish type questions that we always ask and they just require a short answer.  The first one is ma'am what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Haagen-Dazs Rum Raisin Ice Cream.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I don't know, green or black, or blue.  I like all of them really (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer!
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Oh, Boston, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, hard work works.
Story_ID: 191337
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family, but we'll start with your mother's side, and we'll begin by asking you to give your mother's full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: All right, my mother's name is Ellen Emily Lippman, L-I-P-P-M-A-N, that's her maiden name, Robertson, R-O-B-E-R-T-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in Boston, Massachusetts on November the 30th, gosh, 19, I'm not sure what year.  She's seventy-four years old, so probably around 1926, something like that.
Speaker 1: It would be '28 [1928], I think, yea, I think so.  Okay, well--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: In '53 [1953] she was twenty-six, so that would make her 40--in 1953 she was--when I was born she was twenty-six, so that would--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well we'll do the math later (laughter)--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Okay!
Speaker 1: Tell me, what do you know about her side of family?  How far back can you trace that side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, I know that my grandmother was born in Kingston, Jamaica and my great-grandmother was also born in Kingston, Jamaica.  And my grandmother, my mother's mother, came over here to the United States to Boston when my grandmother, Lucille Lippman was probably thirteen years old.  So I think that side of the family, the paternal great, the paternal grandmother and great-grandmother and paternal grandfather and great-grand were from Jamaica, or I should say great-grandfather was from Jamaica.  My grandfather, my mother's father, Romeyn Lippman, L-I-P-P-M-A-N, and his first name is R-O-M-E-Y-N, he was born in Sag Harbor, New York.  How he got there I'm not I'm not so sure.  His mother was born, I believe in Connecticut.  Her name was Sarah Daly, D-A-L-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your, your, mother's maternal ancestors were from Jamaica and your father's from Sag Harbor, New York?
Speaker 2: No, no, my mother's father was from Sag Harbor.  Now on my--on the other side, on my father's side, my father was born in Boston.  My father's name is Irving [Robertson], but everyone knew him as Buddy Robertson.  He was born in Boston and his mother was born in Boston, Massachusetts.  His grandmother was born in Ireland, in County Cork Ireland.  And his--my father's father, my grandfather was born in Maine.  I'm told that there is some relation to Grandma Moses, that she was a cousin of my grandfather--
Speaker 1: The painter?
Speaker 2: --yes, I think her name was Anna Robertson--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --who was also from Maine.  Actually I don't know as much as I'd like to know.
Story_ID: 191338
Speaker 1: Let me go back a minute (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --About my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --to your mother's [Ellen Lippman Robertson] side of the family, are there any stories or traditions that are passed down through your mother's side, from the Jamaican side?
Speaker 2: I guess the biggest tradition that was passed down is really through my grandmother [Lucille Lippman], who started coming to Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] in the early '40s [1940s].  And she bought a house--I don't know how she did it, manage to pull it all together but she bought a house here and I feel is responsible for bringing a lot of other people to Martha's Vineyard who stayed with her and came back from time to time to Oak Bluffs [Marth's Vineyard, Massachusetts].  So that's the biggest tradition which our family has followed throughout my whole life of coming to Martha's Vineyard in the summers.
Speaker 1: Were there any stories or anything about life in Jamaica or any, any of those kind of stories?
Speaker 2: Well I believe she had a good life in Jamaica.  She was a pretty little girl, with very long hair.  They came over though with a group of people on a boat just to try to make a better way in America.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they would have come over in the, I guess around the turn of the century or so?
Speaker 2: In the '20s [1920s] I guess--(simultaneous)--I don't know maybe turn of the century that's right--(simultaneous)--I can get you those dates though before we leave--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, there's no story as of why they came--I mean they just came over to make a better life in essence?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 191339
Speaker 1: Any stories from the other side of your mother's [Ellen Lippman Patterson] family, from Sag Harbor, New York?
Speaker 2: No, and that's the weird thing is that it's really not clear about how, how my grandfather [Romeyn Lippman] ended up being born in Sag Harbor.  His mother Sarah Daly, she never wanted anyone to call her--my mother never called her grandma, and in fact, we even called her--she's my great-grandmother, we called her Aunt Sarah.  She didn't want anyone (laughter) she know she was as old as she was and-- I know she was a seamstress, but how she ended up being in Bridgeport, Connecticut and Sag Harbor, New York, I really not sure about.
Speaker 1: Where was she from originally?  Was that where she--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Bridgeport, Connecticut.  So I have a feeling that there may have been someone right there that, that she was, that may be, that she was his girlfriend, wife, mistress and that kind of thing is kept quiet.  And because my mother really never got that much information from Aunt Sarah about what happened to--where her father was or what happened to my great-grandfather or how my grandfather came to be born in Sag Harbor.
Speaker 1: Okay, but as far as you know there's no other place that's associated with that side of the family?
Speaker 2: No, and then they moved to Boston [Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 191340
Speaker 1: My grandfather [Romeyn Lippman] went to--he went away to college at Tuskegee [Institute, later Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  He finished in the class of 1910.  His diploma was signed by Booker T. Washington.  George Washington Carver was one of his teachers.
Speaker 2: Now this the--which grandfather is that?
Speaker 1: This is Romeyn Lippman.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And my grandfather then after completing Tuskegee in 1910, I think he was about eighteen years old when he finished Tuskegee, he went on to Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] and studied architecture.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But he never derived the livelihood as an architect because of--I guess back then the sight of a black architect was unheard of, and he worked on the railroad his, his entire life.  In fact, I think that how he fed his family.  My mother told me how he would be away far periods of time because he was working on the railroad.
Speaker 2: Well what did he do on the railroad?
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay,--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Guess he was a Pullman Car Porter like everyone else was.
Speaker 2: Yea, a lot of people were and brakemen.  There were, there were several jobs, you know, different jobs that black folks had on the railroad but I just wondered 'cause there are tie-ins to all that. You know, if he was a porter and was he involved with a union, and that sort of thing.  Yea, but he was a painter too, right?
Speaker 1: Yes, he was really a very fine artist and his work is--has been included in traveling exhibitions of African American artists.  Some of his work is currently on display in the Clark A. U. exhibit [unable to verify].  He was part of the Harmon Foundation, which was a foundation dedicated to furthering African American Artist, when back then they called them the Negro Artist.  But, he was quite accomplished.  He exhibited along with such notables as [HM] Elizabeth Catlett, Romare Bearden, Lois [Mailou] Jones. And in various competitions he would win first prize.  Sometimes they would win first prize and I was very proud of my grandfather.  He was a source of, of my love for art and painting.  Although, I never felt that I could be as good as he.
Speaker 2: Okay, All right now, did he have any stories from--he went to Tuskegee went George Washington Carver was there and--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: Right, and Booker T. Washington.
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--and Booker T. Washington too.  Okay, so he was there prior to 1915 then.
Speaker 1: Right, he was a member of the class of 1910.
Speaker 2: 1910, Okay, and so did he have any stories to share with the family about Booker T. or George Washington Carver?
Speaker 1: Just that they were really just dedicated, inspirational teachers.  I remember him talking about George Washington Carver having a high voice as a result of some childhood illness.  That's all I can really recall, just how much he enjoyed though going to school at Tuskegee and he had a great appreciation for education.   And my grandfather would write me lengthy letters all the time and just talking about life in Boston and also the responsibilities that the Negro artist had to depicting life in America for Negroes.  He did landscapes, but he also did poignant scenes such as, one of his paintings called the Baptismal that is in the Clark A U collection, depicts the importance the baptism ritual to black people.  He depicted mother and child in Madonna scenes in his work.
Speaker 2: Okay, his, his, so his, his work is in, in various collections in black college community, in, in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Some, but I don't know where all of it is because if he displayed in--I have a couple of paintings here.  My uncle, my mother [Ellen Lippman Robertson], we all have some of his paintings.  But, what would happen is when you run with the Harmon Collection and other various competitions, they would, they would acquire your painting for a hundred dollars or something like that, which was a big deal back then.  And, so, some paintings I don't know where they are.  There's one painting called Mount of Dreams that really is a very powerful painting.  I only saw a photograph of it.  And that ended up somewhere in Cincinnati.  I heard it was in the Cincinnati Museum of Art but I'm really not sure.
Speaker 2: It's called, it's called Mound of Dreams?
Speaker 1: Mount--
Speaker 2: --Mount
Speaker 1: --of Dreams.
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--of Dreams.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 191341
Speaker 1: Tell us about your father's side.  You'd started but what, what is your father's full name?  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, Irving Robertson, but they called him, everyone called him Buddy.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 11th, two years before my mother [Ellen Lippman Patterson].  I think that's 1926.  I'm just not sure.  I believe it's '26 [1926].
Speaker 1: All right, and where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Boston, Massachusetts and he died in 1992.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you were saying that his family was from?
Speaker 2: From Boston as well.  His mother was born in Boston and his father was from Maine.  His grandmother, my great-grandmother, was from Cork, Ireland.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And his fa--his great-grandfather, I'm not sure where he was born.  I think he was from--his mother was an American Indian as I recall.
Speaker 1: Do, do you know which group she's from?
Speaker 2: I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think on my mother's side that my grandfather had some (unclear) some Shinnecock Indian heritage.
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--Okay
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--heritage but I not sure--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: How do you spell Shinnecock? (laughter) that's a, that's a (unclear) (laughter), if you know how.
Speaker 2: I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll we'll just write it, we'll just write it down as best, as best we can.  Shinnecock, okay.  And see so as far as you know your, your father's people were, were from New England.  There's no other--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--origin that they have.  No southern origin or --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--nothing like that
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--no.  I haven't heard of any southern origin on my side at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the grandmother from Cork, Ireland, now how did, is there a story about how she, she, she got in the family or how?
Speaker 2: I don't know, but I, I, I know she was white and I don't know how she ended what over here or how, why she ended marrying the black gentleman that she married.  But they settled in Boston and there's a lot of Irish in Boston.
Speaker 1: Sure, yea, and I ask because in those days, even in these days, there might be a cause for a lot of discussion and you know in the family and stuff you know, a person from Irish background in the family and that sort of thing.  But there wasn't any story attached to that?
Speaker 2: No there wasn't.
Story_ID: 191342
Speaker 1: Let me go back to your mother [Ellen Lippman Patterson] for a minute and what kind of personality does your mother have and what does she do for a living?
Speaker 2: My mother attended Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  She loved Howard.  She also went to Camp Atwater and she has made lifelong friends as a result of going to both of those institutions.  And those friends really have been part of my life growing up and their children have been part of my life as well.  So, my mother from Howard, went on to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] and obtained a degree in social work.  And she was an educator for a while--when my sister [Audrey Robertson] and I were growing up she was at home with us and she didn't work.  And then when we to high school, she went back to work and she directed what was one of the early head start kind of programs called Parent Child Center.
Speaker 1: Okay, what's her personality like?
Speaker 2: She was a nurturing, really kind, loving mother that put her family first before herself.  Though social, loves her friends, also likes to likes to play poker.  People should have known--no guy should think that they're gonna beat this little lady. (Laughter)  But she really instilled in my sister and I the importance of education. And we always were taught to work hard in school and that education was the key to, to a good life.  I mean that was just that was presumed as really not--there was never really any issue about going on to college and further study after that.  One of my mother's good friends in college that she always--who she always spoke about was Patricia Roberts Harris.  And in fact Pat Harris was one of mother's big sisters in college. And my mother would often refer to her--and as you know Pat was a lawyer and went on to become an ambassador of Luxembourg.  And my mother used to always cite Patricia Harris as an example of someone that I could model my life after.
Story_ID: 191343
Speaker 1: Tell us about your father [Irving Robertson], what, what's his personality like or what was it like and what did he do?
Speaker 2: Okay, well my father was probably the most handsome man I have ever met.  And I think if you talk to a lot of people (unclear) is really, really good looking, very smart accomplished man.  He was an entrepreneur and he--that he owned and operated a restaurant called Slades, which was a Boston [Massachusetts] landmark.  He was--Slades on Tremont Street in Boston is a very, very popular restaurant.  They serve barbecue chicken and steaks.  And at Slades--he sold it in the late '60s [1960s] to Boston Celtics Bill Russell.  And but he's really an enterprising kind of guy.  He always like to think that or say that I was a lot like him.  He, he just loved his daughters.  My sister [Audrey Robertson] and I we were really daddy's girls.  And he would buy and sell real estate.  He had quite a good business acumen.  I think if you're a young guy growing up today the sky would, would be the limit.  But he was able to accomplish a lot.  He was the first black person to have a liquor license.  He also owned a liquor store in Boston.  And he owned a private plane.  He would fly from Boston to Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] and he'd buzz over the beach and we would know to go and pick him up at the airport.  It, it wasn't a sense of extravagance for him to have a small plane.  It was just a two passenger plane.  They used it as a means to an end so that he could be in Boston operating his business, but then he could also be here with his family.
Story_ID: 191344
Speaker 1: Is there a story that's told about how your parents [Ellen Lippman Robertson and Irving Robertson] met?
Speaker 2: Oh, they were childhood sweethearts.  They met in Boston, Massachusetts and they were together probably since they were twelve or thirteen years old, part of a big group of kids that hung out together and those friends or their offspring, they're all still friends.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right, now you have a sister?
Speaker 2: I have a sister who, who's deceased now.  But we were twenty months apart.  And her name is Audrey [Robertson].
Speaker 1: Are you the oldest?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest and we're twenty months apart but we were very, very close.
Speaker 1: So it was just the two of you growing up --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And now I have two daughters.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your household when you were growing up consisted of your--you and your sister, your mother and father, anybody else, did any of your grandparents live, live with you?
Speaker 2: No, just the dogs and cats and all the other animals that we convinced our parents should come to live with us too. (Laughter)
Speaker 1: A lot of animals huh?
Speaker 2: I always liked, liked animals, dogs and cats and my--our parents let us go--let us get whatever we want. (Laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 191345
Speaker 1: What's your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I guess coming to the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts], riding over on the ferryboat, riding my bicycle for the first time, taking a flying lesson.  My father [Irving Robertson] thought it would be fun for me to do.
Speaker 1: What are your earliest memory? (Laughter) The earliest one would not be--I don't think it would be flying, that, that, what are--well, let me just ask you this, we, we always ask this question and what are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: I guess the ocean and being on the sailboat, and the sounds of the seagulls, and the sounds of the foghorns and my days on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] from even when I--before I was born, have really shaped by life.
Speaker 1: Okay, you grew up in Boston [Massachusetts] but you spent your summers here?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, but this place has more impact on you than Boston?
Speaker 2: Yes, most definitely so.  Boston was going to school every day and coming home and doing homework.  But the vineyard was really where I was just able to develop and grow and become a person.  There were people coming in and out of our house all the time, friends of my parents that shaped my life that let me know that I could become whatever I wanted to be in life, judges, Senator Brooke [HM the Honorable Edward Brooke], all sorts of people that I just grew up with, and was able to become a self-assured individual who knew that there really weren't any limits to achievement.  And I think by being able to be around adults like that on an informal basis really helped to shape me to become the person that I am today.  And I see that same kind of thing with my own children, people that they are able to interact with who are my friends or my parent's friends, that are just in and out on a very casual basis that they're able to sit down and talk to and then all of sudden they'll look up and see that individual on the news.  And so oh there's Aunt Silvia, for example.  And it, it has an indirect way of letting the young person know that they can be whatever the wanna be, and that the color of our skin does not really--I never--I didn't think of myself as someone limited by the fact that I was back then Negro, then black, now African American, because the people that I came in contact with were achievers and I didn't see that they were limited by their heritage.
Story_ID: 191346
Speaker 1: Now, what kind of little girl were you, what was your personality like or what did you like to do?
Speaker 2: Okay, well I was a very competitive little girl.  I liked--but academic.  I liked to paint.  I'd always enter every kind of contest.  I'd enter art contests.  I'd enter writing contests.  I entered a contest at the local department store.  I was Miss Black Teen.  I was an honor roll student.  I like my friends.  I like to study.  I like to read.  I sound like a real nerd, don't I? (Laughter)  But anyway that's what I like to do.  And I was fortunate, I was really, really a fortunate little girl because everything I tried to do I was fortunate enough to succeed and so that gave me a good sense of self, and a good sense of self-esteem.  And of course all of that was driven by my parents, but had--they always had such high expectations of me that I developed the same high expectations for myself.  And I would drive myself to achieve excellence.
Speaker 1: Were you in inspired by your grandfather [Romeyn Lippman] to paint?
Speaker 2: Oh my grandfather always encouraged me to paint and I think he took particular delight in the fact that I enjoyed painting and that I would--my work--even when I was in third grade would be submitted to the whole Boston Art Archdiocese and all the other students would enter--each school would submit paintings from some of the other students and mine would always be selected to be included.  And I know my grandfather took special pride in the fact that I enjoyed painting.  He was just so good I really never thought that I could follow in those footsteps, but he was a great inspiration and I have his paint brushes here.  I love to look at them and one day when I get more time I'll really put those paint brushes to good use.
Story_ID: 191347
Speaker 1: Now tell us about school, you went to school in Boston [Massachusetts] right?  You were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now what was your schedule like, how many months of the year were you in Boston and how many months here [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] on an average of every year, I mean.
Speaker 2: Well I was here in the summer, so from the middle of June till the day after Labor Day, I spent on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].  And the other times I was in Boston (unclear) that was during the regular school year.  And I loved school.  First and second grade I attended public school, the David A. Ellis School.  And actually my second grade school teacher also came to Martha's Vineyard.  And--Miss Smith, in fact she just passed away a couple of years ago. But I remember when I had my daughter's christening up here, Miss Smith was there.  She really seemed old when I was in second grade (laughter) so I could only imagine how old she was seventeen years ago when she attend my daughter's christening.  But even in the summers up here Miss Smith use to have art classes and I would go and take art lessons at Miss Smith's house on Martha's Vineyard.
Speaker 1: Okay, now where did you go next?
Speaker 2: So after second grade I went to an all girl's private Catholic school, Notre Dame Academy, that was located in Roxbury, Massachusetts.  And then eventually Notre Dame sold the school and all the land and moved out to the suburbs to Hingham, Massachusetts when I was in seventh grade.  It was thirty, forty miles away from where we lived.  But I loved the school so much and my friends there.  I continued going to Notre Dame Academy and I graduated from Notre Dame in 1970.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were only--I think myself, my cousin--initially we were the only Negro kids there.
Speaker 1: Did, did the school population change drastically when they moved--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--to Hingham?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--yea, Roxbury is a black neighborhood in (unclear)
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--yea but there were only, there were only a couple of black kids there and they were Negro then at Notre Dame and then when we moved out to Hingham, I think there were four other black kids in my class total.  And not very many in the whole school, maybe eight, that was it.  So that was--though because I had a good sense of self that was--it wasn't, it wasn't hard but I knew I was different.  And I think it really hit home in fourth grade they ask me to be--I remember it was the Glee Club Concert and I look back this, one of the songs that they were doing in the Glee Club Concert in fourth grade was 'Swing Low Sweet Chariot,' so I guess they--not that I was a good singer but they decided to ask the little Negro colored child to sing a solo of the refrain and I didn't think anything of it and I said sure.
Speaker 1: But I remember in, in seventh grade the teacher ask me why I hadn't joined drama.  And so I thought to myself, but I didn't articulate it to the teacher, I just didn't think I'd get any good roles so that's why I didn't join the drama club.  And she said well you should join drama, and so I said, Okay, and they were putting on the Miracle Worker and she gave me my part and my part was Viney in the Miracle Worker, the maid.  And it just--at that point now I'm in seventh grade and a little bit smarter, so I just went home to my mother [Ellen Lippman Robertson] and I said this is the part that they wanted me to play in the Miracle Worker, to be Viney the maid and talk in the dialect and say yea Miss Helen and da,da,da.  And so my mother was outraged and so she came up and, and spoke to the teacher.  They didn't give me the part of Helen Keller though (laughter).  And I didn't play Viney either.
Speaker 2: Did they find another Negro child to play Viney?
Speaker 1: No, they didn't.
Speaker 2: Okay, how did they, how did they do it? Do you remember?
Speaker 1: I don't even, I don't even remember, one of the, one of kids at school, so it was an all white production as usual (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now where did, where did you all live in Boston?  Did you live in Roxbury?
Speaker 1: Yes, we lived in Dorchester --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--Dorchester.
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--which is--and then  much later then, my parents moved to Chestnut Hill.
Story_ID: 191348
Speaker 1: What did you like most about school when you were in school?
Speaker 2: I liked my friends.  I really didn't feel like I was different.  I think everyone treated me well.  Just may be that teacher--may not have been mean spirited to ask me to play Viney but, but I didn't feel any sense of discrimination because academically I performed well.  I had a lot of friends.  I believe I was well liked, so it was, it was a great experience.  I loved, I loved school.  And from there I went to another all girls--most of the colleges that I looked I was--I was recruited by a lot of colleges.
Speaker 1: Now did you finish high school at Notre Dame Academy [Hingham, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: I finished high school at Notre Dame Academy in 1970.
Speaker 1: Okay, was, was--what was high school like socially being one of the few black students (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I really didn't do a lot of socializing at high school because I had a long trip every day.  I'd leave home about 7:15 and I wouldn't get back home from school till about 4:00 because of the distance.  And I had to take a couple of buses.  Parents who had--who lived in town in Boston [Massachusetts] chartered a bus, and there were about forty--there weren't black, just black people it was--I was really one of the few.  But anyway, even white people that lived in Boston that wanted their daughters to attend Notre Dame Academy--we all chartered a bus and rode out to Hingham [Massachuestts] every day.  So by the time I got home I really did not homework--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--that's all I had time to do to have dinner and then study.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 191349
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher or any favorite teachers?
Speaker 2: I did.  My favorite teacher taught me in fifth, sixth, and seventh grade, I believe, and her name was Sister Regina Saint Edwards [ph.].  And she was in a wheelchair.  And she used an overhead projection system instead of a blackboard.  And she was so encouraging, and so nurturing, and such an inspiration.  And I use to keep in contact with her as I got older.  I know even when I got married I would write to her and I was--I just remember the day thorough when someone wrote me back and told me she died.  So--but she was, she was a favorite teacher.  But also Miss Smith [ph.], my seventh grade school teacher who taught me how write--good penmanship (laughter) came up here she was also a very important person in my life.
Story_ID: 191350
Speaker 1: When you were in high school [Notre Dame Academy, Hingham, Massachusetts] did you, did you have any sense of what you wanted to do as a career when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: I often thought about being a lawyer.  And my mother [Ellen Lippman Robertson]--'cause my mother would always talk about Patricia Roberts Harris.  And then they would tell me I always had an answer for everything, and that I should be a lawyer and so I think that's always what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, did, did you, did you get a chance to--well you said there were a lot your parents friends that come in, into your home on the Vineyard, and you would visit a lot, and did, did you remember discussions--I mean being privy to adult discussions and about politics and, and I don't know all kinds of things?
Speaker 2: Yes, well as for as law is concerned, my father's [Irving Robertson] best friend was judge.  And the judge would always come by the house, and so I would just hear courtroom kind of stories.  And I know when I was in--after my, I think it was my first year of college I had an opportunity to work at Roxbury District Court.  I remember one time when I was working at the courthouse and they sent someone--but I was working downstairs in men's probation and all I could remember was a body coming down.  This guy had been sentenced and he jumped out the window.  He didn't die.  It was just the second floor.  He was just trying to escape (laughter), but I do remember that.
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--So you actually saw this body--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--Right, 'cause I'm downstairs working and this figure comes down, but that was quite an experience working at Roxbury District Court.  But also people such as Senator Brooke [HM Edward Brooke] would--who was Attorney General and then became U.S. Senator.  He was a very close family friend and his parents also were good friends with my grandparents and I would see him growing up and he would be by our house a lot.  I would just be aware of political discussions and my parents helping out in his campaign.
Speaker 1: Were you aware of the, the significance of, of his senatorial?
Speaker 2: No I wasn't.  Even when he became elected Attorney General, I wasn't aware of that significance.  I just thought, "Gee."
Story_ID: 191351
Speaker 1: Did your parents [Ellen Lippman Robertson and Irving Robertson] talk about the Civil Rights Movement at all and I guess you'd been about, what about, in '63 [1963] you would have been what ten years old?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--Ten years old.
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--Ten years old yeah.
Speaker 2: I remember watching it on television with my mother and just seeing the hoses, and the dogs going after the demonstrators.  Because I wasn't subjected to segregation as people were growing up in the south that I could go into a restaurant and use the bathroom but I recall seeing that on television and also doing posters in school.  I remember one that I did, you know, just hoping for segregation to be ended.  I do remember though after [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was, was killed, when the riots occurred in Boston [Massachusetts] up and down Blue Hill Avenue and the burning occurred.  And that wasn't far from where we lived.  And I even--we walked down there and I could see them--see other black people rioting at that time, so I don't know I might have been--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: This is--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--what it was '65 [1965], so I was--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--'68 [1968]when he was killed, yeah.
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--'68 [1968] I was what, fifteen years old then.
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--fifteen right, yeah.
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--so I do remember that very vividly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And how all of Blue Hill Avenue in Boston was burned.
Speaker 1: Yeah, did--was there much--I know Boston is also like the home of Malcolm X's sister and I think [HM Minister] Louis Farrakhan was a minister at the, at the mosques there in Boston and
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--And see I wasn't aware of that growing up--of, of the Muslims and of Louis Farrakhan who I come to know very well in my adult life.  But, but no--I know my, my uncles, they grew up in that neighborhood on the hill around Humboldt Avenue in the area where Malcolm X grew up.  It was only later, later in life that they would talk about him with his red hair but I didn't know them personally.
Story_ID: 191352
Speaker 1: How did you choose a college when you, when you were ready to graduate from [Notre Dame Academy, Hingham, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: I was--in high school I was an honor student and I was a National Merit semifinalist and so I received lots and lots and lots of letters from colleges asking me to apply.  And I think that was probably also during the time that colleges were trying to increase the number of Negro students that attended their institutions.  So I narrowed my choices down to Smith [College, Northampton, Massachusetts], and Barnard [College, New York, New York], Jackson College [Jackson, Michigan], Tufts University [Medford, Massachusetts], Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island], Simmons [College, Boston, Massachusetts],--and I went to an all-girls school and I--so most of the schools I applied to were all women's schools because I wanted to be able to focus on academics.  So--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--So you were used to it and--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--I was--and, and, a lot of people that do go to all-girls schools don't want to go to all-girls schools anymore and I just prefer too.  So I ended up going to Smith College and, and I loved it.  I--however I graduated from Smith in three years and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now you, you graduated from high school in '70 [1970]?
Speaker 2: In 1970. --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And I'm a member of Smith College Class of 1974, but I completed all of my requirements for graduation from Smith in 1973.  So in 1973 I left Smith and I started law school.  But while I was at Smith I noticed that, that Smith College students could go away on exchange to schools such as Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], and Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire], and Wesleyan [University, Middletown, Connecticut], and--or they could go aboard and so I went in and I said well I would like to go to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] for a year.  And it wasn't a customary program of--for those schools for students to go or for African Americans students to go to historical black schools [HBCUs].  But I went in and I ask if I could go to Howard and they said okay.  Smith is a pretty open institution that if you come up with a good plan, they're receptive to it and they are that way to this day.  So they allowed me to go to Howard University for a year.  And --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: What, what year was that?
Speaker 2: That was my second year.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 191353
Speaker 1: There were a couple of reasons why I wanted to go to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: What are those reasons?
Speaker 1: Well one reason was it was a preeminent African American institution and I thought it would be a good rounding out of my education to go to school with black folks.  And it certainly did achieve that objective.  I loved it.  My mother [Ellen Lippman Robertson] went to Howard, so I also wanted to have that experience.  And then finally the guy that I was going out with, Al[fred] Goldson, was a junior in medical school at Howard University College of Medicine [Washington, D.C.], so that was also a real important reason to get down to D.C.  I started going out with Al when I was seventeen years old.  I met him up here on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Okay, All right, that makes sense.
Speaker 1: So I had a really well-rounding experience at Howard.  It was wonderful.  I took courses that I wouldn't be able to get at Smith [College, Northampton, Massachusetts].  I remember I took a history of Jazz course with Donald Byrd.  I took an African art class.  I took an American history class just because I wanted to get a good understanding of American history from the black perspective.
Speaker 2: Who, who, who taught that?
Speaker 1: She was a Olive--she was a woman.  She was really, really a wonderful professor at Howard and it just escapes me her name.  I took some courses in the Department of Sociology.  I use to always go see G. Franklin Edwards who was a professor of my--when my mother was at Howard and so when I took courses there that year I got to know him quite well.  So it was really a very well-rounding education by going to Smith and then going to Howard--
Story_ID: 191354
Speaker 1: And at Smith [College, Northampton, Massachusetts] I was--at first I didn't want to go to Smith and I went up there for one of those weekends.  And I thought Smith was to isolated but then I decided--
Speaker 2: Where is it?
Speaker 1: It's in Northampton, Massachusetts.  And I decided however that I would rather go to school where I'm a little bit more isolated so that I could get my work done.  And so I was really able to study hard all week and then get away for weekends.
Speaker 2: What was your major?
Speaker 1: Education and also African American Studies.  I majored in education because my mother [Ellen Lippman Robertson] used to tell--even though I knew I wanted be a lawyer she felt that it was important to major in education because I would always have something to fall back on and could always teach.
Speaker 2: Now African American Studies were new I guess in those days--(simultaneous)--as such--
Speaker 1: That was right.  At Smith--established a Department of African American Studies or they called it Afro American Studies.   And since growing up I really didn't have any background in my heritage--they suddenly didn't teach it Notre Dame Academy [Hingham, Massachusetts] and since Smith established a department many of us who attended Smith--and they were the largest number of black students at Smith at the time that I went there.  A number of us thought we ought to take courses in that department to show that we support it and that we believe in it, and so that it would continue for other black students that subsequently would come to Smith College, so I had a double major.
Speaker 2: Who was the chair of that department or who taught in that department?
Speaker 1: His name was Raymond Giles and in the consortium because at Smith there were a lot--there were five colleges in the area so there were other teachers such as Ginetta Cole, Max Roach,--there were a lot of really good resources in that area as far as African American studies was concerned.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 191355
Speaker 1: All right, let's see, did you have a chance to go any, any of the major African American studies conferences like the Association for Study of Negro Life and History or African American Life and History or African Heritage Studies Association or any of those?
Speaker 2: No, but what I would do is I would attend some seminars or conferences relating to educating the black child.  So that really related also to my major in education and I was concerned with educating the urban child.  And I even remember back then I did a paper in college on--I called it on Black English and--which really comes full-circle to some of the issues that are being talked today.  So I did have that opportunity I remember going to a conference at the Martin Luther King [Jr. Memorial] Library [Washington, D.C.] when I was in college at Smith [College, Northampton, Massachusetts] and coming down to [Washington] D.C. for that and working in the D.C. Public Schools as a volunteer while I was in college.
Speaker 1: Okay, had, had NABSE been formed then, National Association of Black School Educators?
Speaker 2: I don't think so, or at least I wasn't aware of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, just wondered.  Okay, so, well, is there--do you have a favorite teacher from Smith or, or advisor or someone that really inspired you at Smith?
Speaker 2: No I really don't.  (unclear) my teachers are good there was just not anyone that I became--any teacher that I became that close with.  There was a Dean of black women there name Mrs. Doughty [ph.], (unclear) Doughty, and I really, really liked her.  There was a wonderful though Professor of Government at Smith by the name of Walter Morris-Hale, who actually still teaches there too.
Story_ID: 191356
Speaker 1: You finished Smith [College, Northampton, Massachusetts] in '73 [1973] actually and then you went on to law school --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I went on to law school and I was very much interested in, in poverty law school--in poverty law and the impact of the legal system on African Americans.  And Jean and Edgar Cahn were establishing or has just established a more innovative law school in Washington D.C., Antioch Law School.  And I decided that, that was where I wanted to go. --(simultaneous)--Now the fact that Al was also at Howard University Medical School and this romance was still continuing did enter into my choice to move to Washington [D.C.] to go to Antioch instead of going Harvard.  But I was really enthused about the innovative program that Antioch Law School had to offer.  And I began law school--I didn't ultimately graduate from Antioch but I started law school in 1973 at Antioch.
Speaker 1: Okay, now that's associated Antioch University in [Yellow Springs] Ohio right? --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: In Yellow Springs, Ohio and this was as avant-garde as that particular institution.  Again but the focus was on trying to help the underserved populations of African Americans, so that's why I was interested in Antioch.
Speaker 1: Okay, who were some of the teachers there at Antioch?
Speaker 2: Well one of the teachers that stood out for most in my mind was [HM] Sharon Pratt Dixon, as she was known then.  And I guess she has probably taken her maiden name back.  Sharon eventually became the Mayor of D.C.  And Sharon was my Civil Procedure teacher and as time went on we became friends and I also worked in her campaign to become Mayor of Washington D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: But I stayed at Antioch for a year and then I transferred Catholic University Law School [Columbus School of Law, Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Now why did you transfer to Catholic University?
Speaker 2: I wanted--I decided that I wanted a bigger concentration on--for my legal education in business and business-related courses.  And I felt that if that another way that I could make an impact on the lives of African Americans was having a greater understanding of tax and corporate law, so I decided to go to Catholic University.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And most of the schools in Washington, D.C. didn't want to accept transfer students in law school, especially if you were already in a school in the area.  But Catholic University said send over your information and we'll take a look at it, and I transferred.  And I really focused my, my law school studies on tax law.  And that's what I started my career in, as a tax lawyer.
Speaker 1: Okay, well at Antioch you focused--had focused mainly on, on --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: More grassroots, grassroots kinds of law and how the legal system adversely impacts African Americans who had to do things like go apply for food stamps and to see what people go through.  This was supposed to sensitize us to what people have to go through and anyway.  It's a good concept but I decided that I wanted another kind of education.
Story_ID: 191357
Speaker 1: So you're at Catholic University [of America, Columbus School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and--
Speaker 2: Right, so after my first year of law school at Antioch [School of Law, Washington, D.C.] in the summer of '74 [1974], then I got married.  I had started going out with Al[fred Goldson] in--right before I began   college in 1970.  So in '74 [1974] after my first year of law school Al and I got married.
Speaker 1: Okay!
Speaker 2: Oh and by the way I went back to Smith [College, Northampton, Massachusetts].  I wanted to get my college degree with my class, so I was in my first year--completed my first year of law school but I went back to Smith to receive my college degree.
Speaker 1: Okay, for graduation ceremonies?
Speaker 2: And for graduation ceremonies and--first I really didn't want to go back to get my college degree 'cause I didn't think it was a big deal, I was getting married, I had already been through a year of law school, but then my mother's [Ellen Lippman Robertson] good friend Patricia Roberts Harris was the commencement speaker.  And then I went back--and then I find out I was graduating magna cum laude.  I really had not, not focused on that I just tried to do my best in college, and I was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.  And then when I came back for graduation I looked on the program and I was--saw that I, I was graduating magna cum laude.
Speaker 1: That's great, I mean you know, I don't know, you can't do any better I don't believe.
Speaker 2: Naw, yes you can--(simultaneous)--you can do summa, but there were about five or six summas and a few--and then may be about ten magnas.
Speaker 1: Okay, All right.
Speaker 2: And so I graduated from Smith College and received my degree in '74 [1974] and I also got married that summer to Al Goldson.
Speaker 1: Big summer.
Speaker 2: Yes it was.  And we were married on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].  And all of our friends, our parent's friends, everyone came up to the vineyard.  It was really, really a wonderful wedding, great time.
Story_ID: 191358
Speaker 1: So once, once again, the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] is more of a focus than, than Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: It certainly is.
Speaker 1: Do you think it's that way for most people that have lived here, you know, you know?
Speaker 2: I think, I think it is.  I think for those who come here on a regular basis--the difference back then though is that they were more mothers that didn't work, and so there were a lot more kids that were able to be here all summer long.  And now just the way society is changed, with professional women they don't get up here for the whole summer.  But there are a lot of my friends, and friends of friends, that see how important this place is for the development of their children and they do get up here for a couple of weeks every year.  But back then the kids were here all summer long.  I mean all summer, July and August, and it was just wonderful.  And I have tried for my own children to replicate that.  I guess starting about five or six years ago I would make an effort to be here most of the summer.  I would work here, that meant reorienting some of my law practice so that I could work from the Vineyard and I do, do that.  And I go back to [Washington] D.C. as I need to.  There's one flight a day and I'll go back 'cause I have to for meetings.  And then there be times that I'll go back for a week and--up until this year Al would then come up here and be here with the girls for the times that I had to go back.  Last summer I had to be back for several weeks 'cause I was in trial that was scheduled, unfortunately during the summertime.  But I think for those who are regulars, their life-long friends that they have made, they made because of coming to Martha's Vineyard.  And I know that I've developed friendships with people all over the country because I met those people up here on the vineyard.  And that's the way it is for my children.  And the most important person I met on the vineyard was Al[fred Goldson], my husband.  And when I was growing up his sister and brother who were close in my age we all hung out together and then when I kind of grew up I met Al.  And I met Al another good friend of his by the name of Skip Miller and they were both out on the beach.  And I knew Al was Jeffrey's older brother and Skip had just come back from Vietnam and Skip went on to become president of Motown.  And other people that I grew up with, Skip Finley, who I knew as a, as a kid and he lived around the corner and his parents and my parents were good friends.  And Skip and I are still close friends to this day.  Skip now is the Senior Vice President with Inner City Broadcasting.  He previously owned WKYS.  He gave my husband a subscription to Broadcasting Magazine which my husband never read, I did.  I subsequently went on and know I represent TV and radio people.  So I guess all of that comes full circle and relates to my experiences here on Martha's Vineyard.  And I can go on and on about other good friends of mine that I knew from the vineyard.  Sylvia Rhone, who was chairman of Elektra Records, who's now going to take on a new challenge as President and CEO of Motown and Universal, but I can go on and on about other friends that I have known and continue to spend time with on Martha's Vineyard during the summers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there are quite a few media related people, people here.
Speaker 2: That's right, [HM] Charlayne Hunter-Gault is here--I can go on if I start dropping names then I'll leave someone out. (Laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 191359
Speaker 1: Okay, but--so Catholic University [of America, Columbus School of Law, Washington, D.C.] you were there--you graduated in '76 [1976]?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Where there any particular instructors there or professors there that, that stand out that made a big impression on you?
Speaker 2: Not necessarily, but I, I enjoyed the academic life I had at Catholic and I developed an interest in tax law.  And I had great teachers, tax instructor at Catholic and I felt that I was well prepared.
Speaker 1: Okay, and when you were in [Washington] D.C. did, did, did you have a chance to interact with Patricia Roberts Harris?
Speaker 2: I did, I would see her from time to time since she and my mother [Ellen Lippman Robertson] were friends.  And I would go by the law firm that she was a partner with which was Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver and (unclear) and she was always a big source of encouragement to me.  And one thing that she said that always struck me is that, that black people as a group or one of the few groups that always seem to have to--feel that they have to apologize for doing well.  And I always remember that she said that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what are, what are your thoughts about that, you know about, about what she said?
Speaker 2: Well I think--I, I agree that sometimes you know there could be guilty feeling from having, having achieved, but I think that what we need to do is not apologize for it and use that as an example for the generations to come.  And also remember to give back.
Story_ID: 191360
Speaker 1: What was your first job in? --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Out of law school [Columbus School of Law, the Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 1: Yes--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--because I always had jobs.  Even when I was in high school [at Notre Dame Academy, Hingham, Massachusetts]--I mean my parents [Ellen Lippman Robertson and Irving Robertson] didn't tell me to work but I just had a real hard work ethic.  I mean even as a child on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] I had a business.  I sold seashells that I made into ashtrays.  And back then smoking was a popular thing, so I had a really enterprising business then.  But--and throughout high school when I took driving lessons I got a job at the driving school.  I worked at a donut shop and--but after finishing law school I was one of 5,000 applicants for fifty positions in the Office of Chief Counsel for the Internal Revenue Service [IRS] in the Tax Court Litigation Division and I started there as Docket Attorney at IRS.  And that was a great experience because I felt that the tax laws were really very, very important.  I knew of stories of how African Americans and successful African Americans, entertainers specifically, really messed their lives up by not having a good understanding of the tax laws, and falling into tax trouble, and I just, I just considered that, that was
Speaker 1: Well for example I know one case that comes in mind is Joe Louis, you know and, and there are others I guess too but the early successful black entertainers or sports figures often fell into tax trouble right?
Speaker 2: Right and I remember Sammie Davis Jr.  I remember reading in Jet about how they seized a lot of his--and that was probably around that time when I was, when I was in law school and I thought that, that was--so unfortunate.  And after taking income tax and corporate tax I then realized that, that those courses are a greater lesson in how to run a business, and how to structure a situation.  So I decided I wanted to became a tax lawyer and also appreciating the difficulties that I saw other African Americans have with compliance with the tax laws that's what I decided that I wanted to become, that I wanted to become a tax lawyer.  And although I now don't tout myself as a tax specialist, I still do handle tax matters that are related to exempt organizations and also tax fraud or the civil penalties for non-compliance with the tax laws.
Story_ID: 191361
Speaker 1: So with that first job at IRS [Internal Revenue Service] what did you do?
Speaker 2: Oh I was in the tax court litigation division, so I represented the Internal Revenue Service commissioner on various tax matters.  So that when tax payers were, when tax payers were assessed a deficiency of not having paid taxes, they have a choice, they could either pay the deficiency and go into U.S. District Court or they could appeal to the tax court.  And I was the lawyer for the government in the United States Tax Court.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I remained with the IRS and then one day I received an offer to go to a law firm.  And that was out of blue and I hadn't really started looking for a job at that point to leave IRS.  But the job seemed pretty interesting, so I left IRS and joined the law firm Smothers, Douple, Gayton & Long.  One of the senior partners Curt Smothers was a professor at Georgetown Law School and wanted someone with a tax background to come join the firm, so I did.
Speaker 1: So --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And that was a great experience.
Speaker 1: Now what, what year is this?
Speaker 2: That was in '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: Okay, All right, IRS was '76 [1976] right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, All right, so how was that experience anyway (unclear)?
Speaker 2: So I'm--the law firm was a mixed firm.  Small, smaller firm black and white partners and Kurt Smothers who really was a big influence; he was a professor at Georgetown Law School [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.].  So he was not only a brilliant lawyer but a wonderful teacher.  And I wasn't afraid to question him and have him help hone my skills even further.  I had a wonderful experience with that law firm.  We had quite an array of clients, including the Congressional Black Caucus, General Chappie James, Max Robinson, who at the time was a local anchorman.  And as time went on while being at that firm--and I was with the firm for six years.  I developed good relationships with all of those clients and worked very, very closely with them.  And eventually Curt was spending more time out in California on more entrepreneurial--we also did government contract work, which I see as a very, very important area for African Americans, African American entrepreneurs.  Because there's a lot of business out there that the federal government has to offer.  So I also developed government contracts as a subspecialty while I was with the law firm.  And anyway from, from there I--after Curt was spending more and more time out in California in the entrepreneurial endeavors he was going on, I decided that I wanted a little bit more control over my own schedule.  I was working tremendous hours and I also felt that I could do this myself, so I went on my own.  And although--even though I went on my own my relationship with the firm was still very amicable.  Several clients of mine decided that they wanted to go with me.  Some corporations that I represented, many of whom did do business with the government, people such as Max Robinson, who I had started out handling tax matters for and then subsequently that segwayed into my being involved in his broadcasting career, in specifically with negotiations with ABC [American Broadcasting Company] when he became the first national network correspondent.  To--also at the firm handling matters for the Congressional Black Caucus and subsequently obtaining the--setting up the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation and obtaining the exempt status for the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation as well as handling legal work for individual members of Congressional Black Caucus as well as the legal work for that entity and for the nonprofit entity.  So that was a great experience that carried over into my own private practice.
Story_ID: 191362
Speaker 1: You have quite a few clients involved in media right?
Speaker 2: I have over the years, yes.  And it's, it's very interesting to see how things have changed from way back in the day when Max [Robinson] was one of the few African Americans on the air.  There's still a long way to go.  I have a client that's on 'Good Morning America' in the mornings, Tony Perkins, who--but there been several other African Americans who have been weathercasters--I've represented a number of African Americans also in radio and broadcasting has come a long way over the years.  Although I still feel that there's a lot more--we have a lot more progress to continue to make.  It's still not easy for African Americans in broadcasting because you're still looked at as one of the few--you know they can only have one or two on a particular broadcast. (Laughter)  But it's been a rewarding experience to try to see to it that African Americans on the air are treated equally and that equal in terms of responsibilities and assignments as well as the compensation they receive.
Story_ID: 191363
Speaker 1: Okay, I know Max Robinson being the first major anchor, you know for a network, he was often criticized of not being--some of his contract negotiations were in the paper and you could read them about them.  I remember reading every time his contract would come up they would criticize him for not being a trained reporter or, or--said he was more of a--he had a beautiful voice and all of that but he wasn't really a reporter.
Speaker 2: Yeah well back then and it was in 19', I think it was '78 [1978] that--or '79 [1979] that Max was--are sometimes around then was going over to ABC [American Broadcasting Company].  Yeah, true, he wasn't but there weren't really all of that many opportunities back then for African Americans to receive training.  And I think that the earliest broadcasters--because there were a lot more African American Broadcasters early '70s [1970s] and yes indeed, those were bright individuals that were only able to get there foot in the door because they started as secretaries, administrative assistants, production assistants and then when on to become anchorpeople.
Speaker 1: And Max Robinson also had issues I know--I don't know how this would affect you as his lawyer but issues with his political consciousness.  He would often change some of the verbiage on the air as someone be called a terrorist and he called them a freedom fighter. (Laughter) On the air.
Speaker 2: Yes and, and I recall that back then.  The brass at ABC weren't always very happy about it.  And I recall the time that Max gave a speech at Smith College and unbeknownst to Max there was--ABC had a tape recorder there and his remarks weren't very favorably received by, by the people at ABC.  And sometimes that, that still happens to us as a group of people that when we're very outspoken, outspoken, you know we're angry and confrontational.  And at sometimes I still feel that, that there is a sense in the higher echelons that you know we should happy that we've got these high positions or my clients should be happy that there're--that they have those high positions.  And go on and just do the job, so it is--there still are challenges the way African American broadcasters, the kinds of stories they get, and how they can report those stories and that when they don't receive the stories or the exposure that they want that may be they should just be happy that's what their superiors often think.  And that something I have to deal with as their lawyers.  And those kinds of things did come up from time to time with Max Robinson.
Story_ID: 191364
Speaker 1: Are there, are there any, any stories you can tell us about some of the cases that you've been involved with or things that you've helped people with?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, again as a lawyer I want to be careful with the attorney client privilege but I will tell you about another situation, not a legal matter per say that, that was really very, very difficult.  I represented Melvin Lindsey.  Melvin Lindsey was a very accomplished radio personality who pioneered the Quiet Storm format.  The idea of the Quiet Storm format came from [HM] Cathy Hughes but Melvin Lindsey is the one that programmed the music that really put his stamp on it that had been duplicated but never replicated across the country.  And the Quiet Storm formats--that's really a well-established format but I represented Melvin Lindsey for many years and I--you know always was very pleased to say that I think that he probably had one of highest paid night time contracts ever in radio.  NBC owned WKYS when he left WHUR, Howard University's [Washington, D.C.] station to go over to WKYS for his radio show.
Speaker 1: Did he start the Quiet Storm at Howard?
Speaker 2: He started the Quiet Storm at Howard University and that's where the Quiet Storm remained because he was an employee and so rightfully so the Quiet Storm was Howard University's intellectual property.  And, and so his program, that title remained at Howard but he has his own program when he went over to WKYS.  But in--during the course of Melvin's career at KYS, Melvin discovered that he had AIDS and back then--Melvin died in 1992 and at that time people still weren't coming out to admit that they had AIDS.  And he ended up coming and telling me and that was really, you know a very, very difficult situation.  His parents were older.  He didn't want to go public with it.  He was also doing television.  He was on BET [Black Entertainment Television] and he hosted a show called Screen Scene.  And as time went on (unclear) saw a (unclear) on his face, there were spots were becoming more and more apparent and he then needed to receive radiation treatment to the  (unclear) and his nose became dark, and--still he wasn't disclosing the fact that he had AIDS because it wasn't accepted.  You know this pre-Magic Johnson.  If you had AIDS you were a pariah and unfortunately my other client Max had previously died of AIDS which was actually a very much, much a surprise because I didn't know Max to have--you know to be a homosexual.  I still don't know.  Melvin's situation was a little bit different and later on Max, Melvin Lindsay did admit that he was gay.  But anyway, the fact of the matter is going through the experience as an attorney, with a client who had AIDS, who told me but I as his attorney was not free to just go ahead and disclose it to those that I dealt with, the executives at BET.  And then later on--I remember when he had these sores all on his face.  I said well Melvin just grow a beard then if you don't want to discuss it.  And he had a certain right of privacy; it wasn't up to me to disclose it.  And he went in to work that day at BET and they told him he had to shave and they wanted to send him to a barber.  And I remember how he sounded on the phone and when he said, "Amy that creates another problem" because he didn't want a barber to shave him with a straight edge razor, which is what they use in the barber shop.  Because if there was an accidental cutting and, and all of that and shortly after that he was taken off the air because the spots on his face were you know were so, so visible makeup couldn't cover it any more.  And I encouraged him that he really needed to come public with this and he had a discussion with his parents.  It was really to protect them that he didn't want out and discuss it.  But when he finally did I arranged for an interview with [HM] Jackie Trescott at the Washington Post.  And she wrote a very, very sensitive article and the outpouring of love and sympathy, I think even added to his life, because at this time now his AIDS--it wasn't just HIV, he was full blown AIDS with all of the symptoms, all of the problems, it was really a very, very difficult thing.  But now that he had gone public with it we were able to put together a big event in his honor that would also--to celebrate his achievements in radio, to also give some focus to AIDS and HIV.  But and Melvin was so excited about it.  And as I said he--I think it really did help prolong his life but he didn't live to, to see the celebration of him and the fund raiser for AIDS which we did.  I don't remember how much we raised but it was a significant amount of money.  And so he was you know one of the early people, one of early celebrities to come out and speak out about AIDS and to let people know that you could still be loved even if you have AIDS.
Story_ID: 191365
Speaker 1: This is where we ask about the Congressional Black Caucus.  How did you first get involved with the Congressional Black Caucus and what's that involvement been like?
Speaker 2: Well the Caucus was initially a client of a law firm [Smothers, Douple, Gayton & Long] that I was with before I started my own practice.  And I handled various things for the Congressional Black Caucus and members on an individual basis.  Back then there were nine members of the Congressional Black Caucus.  And it was a real honor to be able to work with them, subsequently.
Speaker 1: So it was formed in the '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: During the '70s [1970s], the collective grouping of the members of Caucus, of the Caucus, yes was formed.
Speaker 1: Like '70 [1970] to '71 [1971] I guess?
Speaker 2: I believe, I just don't remember now off the top of my head but it was around that time.
Speaker 1: I think it was a group of six that started it?
Speaker 2: Yes, back then Charlie Diggs, [HM Charles] Rangel, [HM John] Conyers [Jr.], [Ralph] Metcalfe, -- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: [HM Augustus F.] "Gus" Hawkins.
Speaker 2: Gus Hawkins, Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.], and--but when I first became involved with the Congressional Black Caucus there were nine members.  And then I was able to see the group grow to eighteen, to thirty-nine, it's just been a wonderful experience over the years to see how members of the Congressional Black Caucus have evolved, how the focus has changed from urban concerns to role concerns, to then becoming involved with advising them in terms of the nonprofit and charitable endeavors that the Caucus has been involved with.
Speaker 1: So you helped them incorporate the foundation and?
Speaker 2: Yes, and that was established as, as a 501(c)(3) through the organization.  And it continues to function in that manner.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any interesting experiences associated with working with the Congressional Black Caucus that you can tell us about?
Speaker 2: I would just say all the experiences have been interesting.  And to have had an opportunity to interact with people such as [HM] Louis Stokes, who was a fine lawyer and don't know if you're aware but he -- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right from Ohio right?
Speaker 2: Yes and he argued Terry v. Ohio [1968] before the Supreme--U.S. Supreme Court.  But by being able to interact with people like him, with Charlie Rangel, [HM Reverend] Walter Fauntroy, Bill Clay [HM William Clay, Sr.] who always can bring a smile to your face if anyone knows Bill Clay.  To the more--the newer members, when I newer, people like Bill Jefferson have been in [U.S.] Congress for quite some time, but I still remember when there was this large group of people that became--that entered the Congress and really swelled the numbers of the Congressional Black Caucus.  Remembering such as when Mickey Leland was killed in the plane crash in Africa, it's just been quite a wonderful experience being able to work with these gentlemen and the few ladies that were also part and are still currently serving in the Congressional Black Caucus.  It's been really an honor and a privilege.
Story_ID: 191366
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: That we don't become complacent.  Because it's still a lot more work that we as a people have to do.  I think my generation has really reaped the benefits of, of the hard work and the struggles that our forefathers have endured and we just have to make sure the next generation sees that it was a struggle and continues to build on the achievements that have been reaped thus for.  And sometime I worry whether or not this younger generation can really understands that there's a whole lot more that we have to do.  And while we have made some progress there's still a lot poverty out here, there are a lot of problems that are affecting the African American community.  There are a lot of success stories also.  But we have to continue to reach back and help pull the--those who still don't have the fortunate opportunities along.  I look at myself as someone who was very, very lucky.  And that's what it is, it's luck to have grown up in a family that nurtured me, that let me know that I could achieve.  I didn't have to worry about if my tuition was going to get paid or if I was going to have the books that I need.  And when for example when my daughter tells me about one of her good friends whose been accepted to Columbia [University, New York, New York] but that have other family challenges to how they're gonna pay for it.  You know, it lets you know that there's a lot more that does need to be done so that our young people have an equal chance to partake of educational opportunities that are available and not have to be worried about things like how you're gonna pay for it.
Story_ID: 191367
Speaker 1: I believe I remember reading that you've practiced before the Supreme Court and is this true?
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--What, that I've handled a case?
Speaker 1: Handle a case yeah.
Speaker 2: Actually it was it was the local Virginia Supreme Court [Supreme Court of Virginia] not the U.S. Supreme Court.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But I am admitted to practice before the Supreme Court.  But one day maybe I'll have a case that will rise up--I have one right now that could have that potential, which is a discrimination case, age discrimination case but not yet have I been before the nine Chief Justices [sic]--nine Justices of the Supreme Court but perhaps one day.
Speaker 1: Okay, well what are your future aspirations in terms of a career, I mean you're still young you know, so what?
Speaker 2: Yes I (unclear) I still, I still like to think I young.  I have been practicing law since 1976, I was twenty-three when I finished law school.  So you can do the math.  I love my work and I'm gonna continue to be the best lawyer I can possibly be, but also balance that with needs of my children, my two daughters.
Story_ID: 191368
Speaker 1: Do you have a philosophy of, I mean a career philosophy that you've developed around law?
Speaker 2: Well, my career philosophy could apply to anybody's career or just life that hard work works.  And I've always tried to really do my best, be thorough, as a lawyer not be reticent about reading the cases or think that I'm too knowledgeable to do that and go back to the books.  I mean I think that that's very, very important to do.  And I try to instill that in my children.  I also however, feel that it's very, very important to be involved in children's life and family, not lose sight of it.  And that's something that my husband [Alfred Goldson] and I always tried to put our family first.  Our careers--my husband was a physician. Our careers have always been important to us but our family and being able to spend time with family and friends has been equally important to both of us.  And I also always remembered that Jackie Kennedy [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis] said that no matter what kind of successes that you have in life, what good is it if you lose your children and so that's why I've always tried to spend time with my daughters and to give them what they need so that they can go on and have a full and happy life and productive life.
Speaker 1: Now they're?
Speaker 2: They're fifteen and seventeen years old.  My seventeen year old is going into her senior year of college [sic, high school] so we've been doing that college visit experience which has been really nice.  And my other daughter, Ava, is going into her sophomore year.  So they're both good students and, and I do think that it has been good for them to see mom working.  Actually I think that they'll be better lawyers than I've been (laughter) if they decide to pursue that. (Laughter) The way they question me I think they've got it in them.
Speaker 1: So your parents expected you to be successful I take it from what you?
Speaker 2: Yes and I have those high expectations for my daughters and I think that that's important for any young person's achievement, for there to be high expectations.
Story_ID: 191369
Speaker 1: What would you, in that regard, what would you--do you have, do you have any advice for young black people that are pursuing a career in law?
Speaker 2: I think take a lot of English courses, hone your reading and writing skills and just remember that hard work works.
Story_ID: 191370
Speaker 1: What would you see at this juncture as you're still--you're in the middle of your career, you know, --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I know, I feel like it's been a long time. (laughter)
Speaker 1: What would you say at this juncture would be your legacy?
Speaker 2: That I've just been a good person and a good lawyer and that I tried to represent my clients to the best of my ability.  I hope that my involvement with my broadcasting clients to negotiate salaries that will put them on parity with their white counterparts, that that's has helped to make a difference.  That my work with the Congressional Black Caucus and the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation has helped to afford opportunities, internships on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.], which is part of those the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation's programs that has helped to increase the numbers and presence of African Americans in the political process.
Story_ID: 191371
Speaker 1: As we speak in 2004 here, do you think that there's still--as you represent clients in the entertainment industry, do you think there's still a lot of, you know surface racism in the media when they deal with black people in the entertainment world or do you think it just a--see I've heard it said that there's no inter--there's no musician that isn't owed money by a record company now.  A lawyer, any lawyer that takes a case that looks for the money will find it, you know, just as a general--and that goes for black and white both, but is there, is there still like a surface racism that where the industry deals with black people differently than they do with white people?
Speaker 2: Oh certainly, I think that there is.  And it's hard to always put your finger on it.  And then first of all there always seems to be a limit on how of us there can be.  As far as musicians are concerned payment of royalties I think that problem isn't just a matter of racism I think that just goes across the board and it depends on how skilled the representation the artist has.  But record companies have seen that African Americans can generate a lot of money, so therefore, we are allowed to perform and play so long as we make money.  So from that prospective I think just as long as there's productivity African Americans will get the record deal.  In broadcasting I think that there's a ceiling on how many people there will be on a particular show.  You're not gonna have newscast with both anchors African Americans.  Just like you're not gonna have a newscast with all women.  You might have a newscast with all men however.
Speaker 1: That's a good point.  That's a point that most people don't think about.  You know but it's a--to imagine otherwise all women, all blacks, you know, no matter what their qualification is, it probably just wouldn't happen.
Story_ID: 191372
Speaker 1: Okay, is there anything else you want to talk about before we--that we haven't covered?
Speaker 2: I guess just maybe about my husband [Alfred Goldson].  Al and I--I had a storybook--I've had a storybook life, wonderful parents [Ellen Lippman Robertson and Irving Robertson], and then when I was seventeen I met the man of my dreams and I knew immediately I would wanna marry him.  Of course I was always taught to be cool and not be so forward, and be a lady and that's what I was.  And, but Al and I went out the entire time I was in college and we got married when I was twenty-one.  And we just had a really, really wonderful life.  We were married thirteen years.  Before we had children both of us were very, very much involved in our careers and didn't want anything to distract, distract us from our careers.  Me as a lawyer and Al was a physician.  His specialty was radiation oncology, which is cancer treatment with radiation.  He went on and became chairman of the Department of Radiation Oncology at Howard [University Hospital, Washington, D.C.], the youngest departmental chairman that Howard University Hospital and College of Medicine ever had.  So we were both really involved in our careers and working hard.  But after thirteen years of marriage we decided to have children.  And we were married twenty-nine and half years when Al had a heart attack, that came out of the blue.  He had had a full check-up three weeks before his heart attack, everything was fine, got a clean bill of health and out of the blue he had a heart attack.  So that's very recent that's only, it's only been six months since, since Al died.  And but I am able to go on because I know that we had a wonderful life together.  He was a great husband who never held me back in my career, he never felt insecure about my career, he encouraged me.  But we also spent a lot of time together with each other.  When he died I don't look and feel that anything was left unsaid.  You know that we told each other we loved, we loved one another, we took time to be together, we had in fact--had been away on vacation the whole family.  And I think though the fact that we take--we took time for one another, for family, and to be with friends has sustained me in the difficult times that have followed.  And then I have a whole lot of great memories.  So some people never get a chance to love like I did and to have that kind of relationship.  So for that I'll, you know, forever be grateful.  I'll never you know, have a man or husband like Al, he was just a, a tremendous human being and a wonderful, caring, compassionate physician, husband and father.
Speaker 1: Part of a great legacy at Howard with LaSalle [HM Dr. LaSalle D. Leffall, Jr.] (unclear), going back to Jack White, Burke Syphax and other great physicians at Howard.
Speaker 2: And my husband's father also is a product of Howard University College of Medicine.  And he was another great physician.  In fact, what was--what's interesting is about with my husband--when I grew up no one ever told me I wouldn't be able to make it.  I'd, I'd really never ran into a teacher that told me I would never be whatever it is I wanted to be.  But both my husband and my father-in-law, who I said is, is a physician, was a physician prior to his death, there was a teacher that they had at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] that told my father-in-law and my husband and this other outstanding physician by the name of Les Alexander, that they would never be become doctors.
Speaker 1: The same person?
Speaker 2: The same person told them that.  His biology teacher.
Speaker 1: Well they didn't listen.
Speaker 2: They didn't listen fortunately.  And, and then there, you know there are countless stories of those who were told they couldn't make it and, and at least didn't listen.  I guess that's another bit of advice.  Don't let anyone ever get in the way of your dreams.  And if you aspire to something go for it.
Story_ID: 191373
Speaker 1: Last question, is one we always ask, similar to legacy but not quite the same, ma'am how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Wow, I don't know.  There are a lot things that I'd like to be remember for.  You know, I would like to be remembered really just to be a good per--as a good person.  And as a person who loves life, who loved, loves spending time with her family and friends.  And as a person who was able to strike a good balance between the competing demands of career, motherhood, and family.  Because I think that's, I think it's so important and such a challenge for women to be able strike that balance with excellence in your career  but then still be able to maintain a good family relationship, to have had a successful, wonderful marriage.  So I guess that's how, you know just--I'd like to be remembered as a woman who had it all, 'cause I really had it all.  I mean I still do.  You know it's hard without--you know there's a hole in my heart and in my life without Al but you know I've had it all.  I have a great career.  I love the work that I do.  I love my children and I love my, you know, my family, my mother and my friends.  So I guess, I guess that's a legacy I could be proud of.
Speaker 1: Well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Okay.
