Story_ID: 295627
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey, observing is the great [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Robert Guillaume, G-U-I-L-L-A-U-M-E.
Speaker 1: All right now, is there a story behind that name?
Speaker 2: I suppose there might be for some people.  My name was originally Williams, Robert Williams, and when I was getting into show business I decided that the name Williams just didn't have enough bounce to the ounce, and besides every person that I knew or had heard of named Robert Williams was likely to be on death row somewhere.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So it was just a question of--I Frenchified the name.
Speaker 1: It's just a French version of the name.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Guillaume is French for William.
Speaker 1: Yes sir, all right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness gracious I've got to reveal that?  St. Louis, Missouri, 1927.
Speaker 1: Okay, what month and day?
Speaker 2: November 30th.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an actor still (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Is this a test?
Speaker 1: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 2: What is today's date for, April 30, no, April 29, 2005.
Speaker 1: All right, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: This is a test.  Where are we at the present time, we are in Los Angeles [California] in what they call the Valley [San Fernando Valley], we're somewhere over in Van Nuys [Los Angeles, California] or Burbank [California] if you will; we're at the Hilton hotel.
Story_ID: 295628
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask that only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: I don't compel you.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Management.
Speaker 2: Let it be said.
Speaker 1: The first question is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food?
Speaker 1: Food.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, my favorite cuisine is Chinese.  Would that suffice as an answer?
Speaker 1: That's good enough.
Speaker 2: Thank you very much.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Hawaii.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Shut the fuck up (laughter).
Speaker 1: Cut the camera (laughter).
Story_ID: 295629
Speaker 1: I'd like to ask you about your family history.  I want to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side and we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Zoe, Z-O-E, Bertha Edwards.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is Edwards her maiden name?
Speaker 2: It gets kind of murky in there so I've never been sure, I've never been quite sure of what her maiden name was.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is--I think it was December 15, 1908.
Speaker 1: And was she born in St. Louis [Missouri] as well?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace your ancestors on that side and what did they do?
Speaker 2: As far back as I can go is 1880, and that was my grandmother.  Who her husband was or whether she was part of a small or large family I don't know.  My mother apparently was an only child.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know your grandmother is very important.  Can you give her name--her full name for us?
Speaker 2: Jeannette Williams.
Speaker 1: And she was born in 1880?
Speaker 2: Eighty [1880], February 22.
Speaker 1: And was she born in St. Louis as well?
Speaker 2: No she wasn't, she was born--again I'm a little fuzzy on where she was born, but she always talked of several places, Fort Scott, Kansas, in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now are there any stories that your grandmother passed down about her relatives or ancestors?
Speaker 2: There probably are but they are lost in antiquity now, after all we're talking--she died in '51 [1951], and prior to that time there wasn't a lot of discussion with children about your origins, and where you came from, because at that time if you went back too far, you were likely to encounter an African, and nobody was proud of African heritage at the time even though it was acknowledged that we were, without having an assigned nomenclature like African American or something like that.  It was acknowledged that we were the ancestors of Africans.
Speaker 1: Descendants of Africans, right.
Speaker 2: Yes right, yeah I screwed that up didn't I?
Speaker 1: That's all right.
Speaker 2: You can make me look good though.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we'll switch 'em around when we (laughter)--but so did she ever talk about conditions during slavery or after the Civil War?
Speaker 2: Well she wasn't born during slavery.
Speaker 1: I know she wasn't but she might be able to talk about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well that's what I'm saying, but you never acknowledged any of that.  It was as though if we don't think about it or talk about it the impact won't be that heavy.  But that was what was going on in the time that I was growing up, which would have been, well 1927.
Speaker 1: And that was your general impression then, that black people just didn't talk about that because it was something that they didn't want to be associated--
Speaker 2: Well it was painful, and--my impression that I got from that era was that we were not proud of being black, and maybe in some families and households that wasn't so, but it's what I remember.
Speaker 1: In general that's the case.
Speaker 2: But when you talk about it you have people who bridle at the notion that they were never proud of themselves, which is part to me of the enduring miasma--the enduring problems emanating from slavery.
Story_ID: 295630
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your [maternal] grandmother [Jeannette Williams].  What kind of personality did your grandmother have or what did she do?
Speaker 2: She was a woman who had a very strong personality and took up what became her burden of four children that my mother [Zoe Edwards] had had.  But she took up the burden of caring for us and bringing us into her household and whatnot.  And she took that up, it was just sort of--it was considered her duty and that's what she did, and she was very strong with a kind of pioneer spirit that certainly stood us in good stead, my brother [James Edwards] and two sisters [Cleo Edwards Ruffin and Dolores Edwards Maclin].  She kept us together until we were strong enough to walk on our own so to speak.
Speaker 1: Now what happened with your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother faltered, it would seem to me.  I mean that's as nearly as I can talk about it without seeming to be above it.  She--my grandmother's aim was to raise a kind of middle class existence, or put together a kind of middle class existence, and she and my--my grandmother and my mother were always at odds about one thing or another and they could never get along as it were.  She had begun--my mother--by the time I was born was only nineteen and she had at least two other children prior to that.  She had been turned out as it were by whomever.
Speaker 1: She met the wrong man, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah well, at that time it was strange.  If you didn't have money, and if you didn't have background let us say, you were likely to fall by the wayside, which would have happened to me and my three siblings had my grandmother not stepped forward and said, "I'll take them here."  My mother fell under the influence of a not too nice guy, and so she was an alcoholic by the time she was twenty or so I believe.  And I suppose you could say that her inability to care for her children in what we would consider to be a proper way was like a--what's the term that is used for it now--I've forgotten the term that one uses to characterize mothers who don't relate to their children properly, but it's considered a sickness now, whereas at that time it was like you were just trifling and no good or whatever.
Speaker 1: Well, they called that postpartum depression or something like that?
Speaker 2: Precisely, postpartum depression.
Speaker 1: So basically did your mother have a chance to go to school in St. Louis [Missouri] or that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but as I said before in the family that I came from there wasn't a lot of talk about what was the past because I suppose to them it seemed rather ignoble.  Grandma probably didn't--wasn't happy that her daughter had not turned out in the way she had wanted and my mother probably wasn't proud of her own past and her own whatever she was doing.  She was a very pretty woman, could sing beautifully but one just didn't talk about what happened in the past.  There wasn't a lot of legacy passed down orally.
Story_ID: 295631
Speaker 1: From what I've read, your father's side of the family you really don't know anything about right?
Speaker 2: I have absolutely no idea, but that wasn't unusual again in that time.
Speaker 1: Well, these days either.
Speaker 2: In that economic condition, and there's nothing unusual about it.  One would always wish that it would have been different.  I used to fantasize that I had been left on someone's door and I was really the offspring of some wealthy person who had gotten lost somewhere.
Speaker 1: But you never heard any real information about your father.
Speaker 2: No, nothing that I could put my finger on, I mean there were rumors here and there, but like all rumors if you're a child you just don't know what to make of them, because you can't do the kind of detective work that might have ferreted out this, that or the other.  While I was going through it when it really mattered to me, I couldn't find out anything, but then there came a time when I let it rest.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you never really had anybody come forward to really give anything definitive or anything?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Your paternity did cause, from what I read in your book ['Guillaume: A Life,' Robert Guillaume and David Ritz], cause for you to be, or may have been a cause for the man who was with your mother [Zoe Edwards] to not like you very much 'cause he was not your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well that was a supposition on my part that I was a reminder of my mother's peccadillo, failing, somewhere, and I reminded the man she was with of one of my mother's lovers or something, and so I think it impacted me somewhere one time, because I wound up with a scar in the back of my head where I'd been struck with a poker.
Speaker 1: A poker, you mean an iron poker?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's pretty--that's kind of exaggerated punishment for whatever a kid might do, one would think.  This was while you were still (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You'd think wouldn't you, but again it was something that was quite common, and if my [maternal] grandmother [Jeannette Williams] had not come along, I could have expected a surfeit of that kind of treatment, which might have turned me one way or the other.  But she came along at a very opportune time so that I don't remember much of it, and I didn't--it didn't impact me--I can talk about it, I can write about it.  I wrote about it in the book, as it did not create in me a victim, that's all I'm trying to say.  Had I'd been subjected to that repeatedly, I'm sure that I would have turned into a victim and there would have been some consequence.
Speaker 1: How old were you when your grandmother took you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Rescued me.
Speaker 1: Yeah, rescued you.
Speaker 2: I think I was around at least four or five.
Speaker 1: I think you were rescued by yourself first, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, she took me first and I think a few years later or a couple of years--three, four or whatever my brother James [Edwards], my sister Cleo [Edwards Ruffin] and my sister Dolores [Edwards Maclin] came along.  But I had two or three years with my grandmother in which I felt a little bit like a prince, I felt a little bit privileged, 'cause she sort of doted on me.  She was very stern, strict, but she still doted on me.
Story_ID: 295632
Speaker 1: Tell me, we always ask this question, do you have an earliest childhood memory?  What's your first memory?
Speaker 2: One of my childhood memories was that I had won--she had put me in Catholic school, and I had won, through some endeavor instead of a star for my accomplishment of some sort I won a bust of Jesus, crown of thorns and sort of bloody visage, and so I gave that to my [maternal] grandmother [Jeannette Williams].  It was sort of like a--it was an icon of the suffering Jesus and I won that and I gave it to her.  That's one of my earliest memories.  Then I have another memory one time where I was playing with matches and I set the front room on fire and of course my grandmother put it out.
Speaker 1: That's a memory that would sear into the brain.
Speaker 2: Whoa.
Story_ID: 295633
Speaker 1: Can you describe where you lived when you were growing up?  Did you live in one place or several places?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we lived in several places.
Speaker 1: And how is St. Louis [Missouri] organized?  I mean, was there one black community or were there several little black communities?
Speaker 2: At that time they tended to be just--I would say there was a downtown section which was closer to the river and then there was another section which was further west from the river, which was the more affluent black neighborhood called the West End [St. Louis, Missouri], and The Ville [St. Louis, Missouri] and stuff like that tended to be the enclave of more affluent people.
Speaker 1: So where did you live mostly (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I lived mostly just a short distance from the river.  Everything from the river--the Mississippi [River] west, I lived in the 1900 block of a street at that time called Franklin [Avenue].  I think it's now called [Dr.] Martin Luther King Drive, something like that, and I tended to--we tended to have addresses in that era--area.
Story_ID: 295634
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I used to be a paperboy, which at that time simply meant that you sold papers--daily papers, and I remember selling them out in front of an office building called the International Shoe Company [St. Louis, Missouri].  I remember selling them at the [St. Louis] Union Station [St. Louis, Missouri], and that was during the time when a daily paper would cost three cents, and St. Louis [Missouri] could get very, very cold, and so I'd be out selling those papers and I'd be counting my pennies.  Somebody had taught me how to have a bunch of pennies and spread them out and then count five or so very fast.  And I remember having--after having sold those papers that maybe I would have fifty or seventy-five cents as my take, which of course I'd always spend before I even got home because there was a place that I'd go by, and they sold hot dogs, so I'd have to get one of those and a drink of some sort.  It's kind of sketchy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any other sights and sounds or smells of growing up?  What was the neighborhood like and what would be a typical place that you would live in?
Speaker 2: Well, it was sort of--let us say if you lived on the main drag, there would be a--let us say the main drag and then halfway between that street and a street let us say north or south of there, one this way, whatever, there would be an alley.  Now from the--how you would get from the main, there would be a house, let us say here--a two-story house, and there would be a let us say a commercial establishment like a laundry or a grocery store or something on the front, and in order to get to the back you'd go through what they called a gangway, and at the end of the gangway was a courtyard, and steps leading up to the people who lived in the front, and steps leading up to people who lived in the back in a similar formation.  My [maternal] grandmother [Jeannette Williams] used to--we lived in the back, and she would--on the second floor, and she would have flowers on her window sill, morning glories, jonquils, geraniums, stuff like that, and she really loved these things.
Story_ID: 295635
Speaker 1: Okay, I was asking you about the sights and sounds and smells of growing up and what the neighborhood was like.  You said you had streetcars, now what's the difference between a streetcar and a bus? I mean what's the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there were--A streetcar is usually powered by electricity, and in St. Louis [Missouri] it ran in the center of the street.  You had traffic one way on a set of two steel tracks, and on the other side the other way, a set of two railroad type tracks.
Speaker 1: So this was a train that ran down the street?
Speaker 2: Not a train, a streetcar.
Speaker 1: Yeah but it ran on tracks right?
Speaker 2: Yeah but they were embedded in the ground in a much more permanent way than a railroad tie.
Speaker 1: Was it dangerous to have something as heavy as a--I mean it's pretty heavy--
Speaker 2: Vehicle, yeah, well no because it was a part of a lot of major cities.  It was like San Francisco [California], Chicago [Illinois].  As a matter of fact it was a pretty efficient mode of transportation.
Speaker 1: Probably better on the environment than fumes from buses, I guess.
Speaker 2: Well there was no doubt, there's no doubt (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --it was electricity.
Story_ID: 295636
Speaker 1: Now when you were coming along, how was St. Louis [Missouri]--what would you think would be--how would it be different, you know, when you were coming along than it is now, I mean in terms of the black community?
Speaker 2: I don't know, you'd have to get a little bit more specific.
Speaker 1: Well I don't know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How was it different?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, I tend not to see much difference, because I think the systemic things that were at play in the neighborhood that I grew up with are still--it seems to me are still the same way.  The one thing I think if I could I would characterize it as, it was a little bit more insular community when I was growing up.  St. Louis was different from the South in that you didn't have--there was no segregation on public transportation when I grew up.
Speaker 1: So you didn't have to sit on the back of the bus or anything, or the back of the streetcar?
Speaker 2: No you didn't, I don't remember any of that, and you didn't have separate water fountains or stuff like that.  You did have segregation let us say in a private restaurant.  I mean, you were restricted from going anywhere you wanted to in the city.
Speaker 1: What about movies?
Speaker 2: Same thing, you were restricted.  You had your own neighborhood theaters, and outside of that I'm not sure you could really attend.  You weren't welcome at another theater--at another movie house let us say.  You knew not to go there, and the restrictions against that were only gradually relaxed.  As I said, eating establishments, you knew not to go in those places.  There was nothing overt that said you couldn't, but you knew not to.  That's the kind of information that was extant in the black neighborhood that somehow you knew not to do certain things, but when those restrictions relaxed, there was no big celebration or anything like that.  They just sort of came off, and one started to go into places in the city as opposed to your neighborhood.  One--there was no big fanfare about it that I remember.
Story_ID: 295637
Speaker 1: How would you describe, now you're in a household that you and your--you're there for--by yourself for a while, but then your brothers [James Edwards] and sisters [Cleo Edwards Ruffin and Dolores Edwards Maclin] join you, but how would you describe yourself growing up?  What kind of a little boy were you?  What did you like to do and what was your personality like?
Speaker 2: I was a, I think I was kind of--I was like a teacher's pet.  I think they were seeing--I grew up as a Catholic, and I was an altar boy and the nuns, and we would talk about the nuns and the priests, and the nuns kind of liked me.  I remember taking pictures with them at picnics and that sort of thing, and I was kind of smart-alecky and impish on the one hand, but on the other hand the fact that we weren't quite first class citizens, some of that I was aware of even at a very early age.  I would say around seven or eight I knew, and it gave me--I was in turmoil about that.  I could see no reason for it.  None of--I did not accept second classiness easily even at seven, and how not to become a victim of it became an obsession with me, because I could get no answers to questions that I might pose, however juvenile they may have been.  And I don't know at the time that I could articulate a good question about it, but I was always in rebellion about it.
Speaker 1: Did you pay attention to the newspapers you sold in terms of what the headlines were, or what was going on around you?
Speaker 2: Only in a superficial sense, but I do remember, 'cause I would have been fourteen let us say, when the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii] and I was--early on I was aware of a certain prejudice that transcended what that act was.  I was aware that if you called a person a Jap, it was derogatory in a sense.  I don't know how I was aware of that or how I came by that information, but I just knew there was a difference between calling a person a Jap as opposed to a Japanese.
Speaker 1: Now did people in your household discuss the political situation?
Speaker 2: No, this wasn't a discussion I had in the household at all.
Speaker 1: I'm saying, but did they ever--did your grandfather talk about what was going on in the black community?
Speaker 2: No, as I said before, there was no discussion in our house about the plight of black people, and of course we didn't like the term black.
Speaker 1: Then you called yourselves--
Speaker 2: Negroes or--I mean that was not derogatory at all, colored people, which in a sense was more descriptive let us say, but had no more currency than Negro.  But we had our own hanging out at the pool room; I mean we had our own glossary of terms that identified Negroes, splib.
Speaker 1: What is splib--it breaks down to something else, right?
Speaker 2: Yes I never knew.
Speaker 1: I think it was explained to me as, some like it black, or something, I don't know.
Speaker 2: I never knew that.
Speaker 1: Okay, but splib is certainly one.
Speaker 2: Splib, but they didn't mean a damn thing it was just terms that were spoken in the vernacular, and sort of tongue and cheek.  Of course there was always the ubiquitous term nigga that we used.
Speaker 1: Did you all use the term in school?
Speaker 2: No, oh no that was--that would not have been polite behavior.
Story_ID: 295638
Speaker 1: Was your [maternal] grandmother [Jeannette Williams] a Catholic?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Catholic was a step up then.  I got the impression from her that it was a hierarchical thing, that on the one hand you may have come from Baptist to Methodist to Presbyterian to Episcopalian to Catholic.  That hierarchy might have no meaning outside of my own existence, but it's something that I thought of at the time that I thought made some sense.  Of course no one was going to heaven but us, and I remember being in youthful arguments discussing it.  Who was going to heaven and who wasn't, long before I ever heard the idea that don't discuss politics or religion.
Speaker 1: Okay so was there any doubt that you were going to go to Catholic school?
Speaker 2: No, because my grandmother--I think at the time it was probably the better education--the best education you could get if you were black, because you had a range of subjects and ideas and curriculum that was not covered in the public schools.  The main thing you might get in a Catholic school that set you apart academically was, let us say, Latin which gave you an insight and an inroad into a lot of other languages.
Speaker 1: Did going to a Catholic school put a burden on your grandmother in terms of income (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did she get any help from the church in terms of sending you all, any scholarships or anything?
Speaker 2: Scholarships at that time as I remember was not a big idea, especially not where we were.  My grandmother worked at the church as a laundress, which meant that she was the laundress for the rectory, and the school was attached to the church, the St. Nicholas [Grade] School [St. Louis, Missouri] and St. Nicholas [Catholic] Church [St. Louis, Missouri], and she was a laundress, and she got help I suppose when she needed it, but we had, like tuition was two dollars which meant that for the whole two semesters--a semester was a half of a school year.  So it was two dollars for the school year I believe, two dollars, and whatever her salary was as a laundress, it was hardly enough to keep up.
Speaker 1: Yeah, were all four of you all in school at the same time?
Speaker 2: At one time yes.  So that meant eight dollars, but when you understand that two dollars at the time was a king's ransom for people like us, 'cause we had no money and no outside help.
Story_ID: 295639
Speaker 1: Now she [Guillaume's maternal grandmother, Jeannette Williams] worked as a maid in the homes of some white people in the St. Louis [Missouri] area (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She worked as a laundress and a housekeeper for people in the county [St. Louis County, Missouri] at the time who were--they weren't wealthy but they were solidly middle class and they could (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They could afford a maid--they could afford a housekeeper.
Speaker 2: They could afford to hire her, but she worked, let us say, for a lot of people who at the time were making themselves only fifteen thousand dollars a year as shoe designers and that sort of thing.  I remember she worked for one man who was a shoe designer at that very place where I sold papers, the International Shoe Company [St. Louis, Missouri].  He made fifteen thousand dollars a year and that seemed like, oh my God, you're talking about--he might as well have made three hundred thousand dollars.
Speaker 1: Now there's a story in the book ['Guillaume: A Life,' Robert Guillaume and David Ritz] about--you said that you would sometimes go over there with your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in and out of that house.  She would be working there, she would have gone to work let us say at seven or eight o'clock in the morning and I had to get myself to school and back, or come where she was later in the evening--later in the afternoon, yeah.  So you were going to ask me about that, what?
Speaker 1: Well I was going to ask you about--there was some information there about interaction with that family and I don't know if you want to talk about the Christmas story, and, for instance (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well that story was very poignant to me, because in later years I began to see it as representative of the station and condition that many black people were in.  I had become accustomed to the man of that house, who was very, very nice to me as I considered it as a child.  In a larger sense, however, he was simply being nice to me because he was a nice man.  I took that in my child's mind as, wouldn't be nice if I were to offer him the possibility of my company on Christmas Day or the Christmas season, I could come out to the house and have dinner with him, I didn't know.  But I mean I thought it would be a nice gesture (laughter) and when I suggested to him that I would come out and be with them on Christmas, wouldn't that be a nice thing, and of course he was caught a little off guard and he said, "Well Robbie [HistoryMaker Robert Guillaume], we won't be in town for Christmas, we're going to do this, that or the other," and I accepted that as a reasonable excuse, which it was.  I later found out that they had not been out of town at all.  They had every right to be wherever they wanted to be, and I sort of looked at that and I said, "That son of a bitch," I didn't say that, but I thought it, and the more I thought of it later on the more I realized that it was just one of those things.  But I considered it a small betrayal.
Story_ID: 295640
Speaker 1: You talked about the Fourth of July, too, in the book ['Guillaume: A Life,' Robert Guillaume and David Ritz], do you want to discuss that with us?
Speaker 2: Which?
Speaker 1: There was a, you discussed the Fourth of July and some kind of a parade where somebody wears a veil of the, what was it the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They had a--there was a parade in St. Louis [Missouri] at the time which was called the Veiled Prophet Parade, and I think it was prior to the winter season that they'd have this parade.  I think it was in late September or early October, and they'd have floats which they could easily transport on the rails through the City of St. Louis, and they'd come downtown, because we lived not far from some of the commercial houses, the big warehouses.  Places with a lot of big business was conducted, and they would go up and down the street and this would be late at night.  The Veiled Prophet Parade would be on a particular night that we had all been apprised of the date.  It would either be in the paper or whatnot, "The Veiled Prophet will be on October 13th this year at such and such and the route will be this, that or the other," and we would get up.  They had big billboards at the time and we could climb up the access to the billboard and behind the billboard and we would punch a hole somewhere and we'd have pea shooters.  The parade would pass some thirty, forty feet distance from us.
Speaker 1: Is that within range of a pea shooter?
Speaker 2: Yes, with our lungs man we could, but you know it would be like being in the jungle somewhere and somebody would shoot a dart at you, and so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you all were actually tempted to, when this pompous ceremony came by your neighborhood, you actually were tempted to somehow embarrass these people?
Speaker 2: Well we didn't know what we were doing, we were just kids--we were guys acting a fool you know, and if we'd ever have been caught up short--if we'd ever been arrested or anything, we didn't do any damage, but we could hit you.
Story_ID: 295641
Speaker 1: One more ugly story here I'm going to ask, in a row, since we're on these stories.  There is a story about your brother--you and your brother were shining shoes at one point.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There is a story in the book ['Guillaume: A Life,' Robert Guillaume and David Ritz] about a bad incident about shining shoes, can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were shining shoes and we went to this place every Saturday because we could pick up--if we shined shoes at the stand there, we could make all of two dollars, three dollars.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's tuition for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, in a whole day, and so this particular day we were there, and it was also a taxi stand, and we were shining the shoes of a couple of the drivers, and I was on, I think on the left and my brother James [Edwards] was on the right, and we were shining the shoes and what not and all of a sudden the customer, a male, decided he's just going to spit, and he spit down a big gob of spit on my brother's hand.  And in a sense we had to endure it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did he say something?
Speaker 2: Oh no, he didn't say anything, he didn't say sorry or anything, he just did it, and that was the kind of thing that you do that a person might do to an African American at the time with impunity.  I don't know why, and I've thought about that, I've said, well why did you guys not react in a more--in a way that was more appropriate to the situation, and the only thing I could come up with was that it just wasn't something that you do, because in a sense it was the door to hell, 'cause you had to be a little bit more raucous than my brother and I were.  We'd grown up Catholics, taught by the nuns not to fight and all of that.  So we were kind of squeamish, and so that incident passed, but we had to endure it, my brother and I, in the sense that--it was one of those things that happens to you that you're not proud of your reaction to it.  We had--there were like other parades in St. Louis [Missouri] in which let us say on Fourth of July or Memorial Day or something like that, a group of white guys would get into a fire truck and come through our neighborhoods, and their idea of fun was to throw garbage from those trucks at us--at the kids who might be following the truck.
Story_ID: 295642
Speaker 1: So St. Louis [Missouri] was not perfect by any means, we can find out.  I mean, this is the heart of the [Great] Depression, too (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it--there's the rub, St. Louis was a community that had a tremendous amount of southern white influence on the black population, but at the same time, there was a kind of progressive forward spirit in the city that did not give birth to southern attitudes, or did not sanction southern racial attitudes to a great extent.  It was a forward looking city, and it did not want to get involved in racial politics any more than it was.
Speaker 1: You know there's a description of St. Louis in a biography of Josephine Baker one of her sons wrote about her early days, gathering coal along the railroad tracks, as being a real rough place for black people like a lot of places in the United States were in those days.  They talk about like all this nightlife in St. Louis.  As a kid did you have any notion of all the art and nightlife that was going on there in terms of music (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I did.  St. Louis was a big metropolitan area at the time and part of its spirit was East St. Louis, Illinois, which was a totally different city and geographical area.  It was like St. Louis--you grew up in St. Louis, and you do your business in East St. Louis.  It was like the nightlife, there was a lot of nightlife in East St. Louis, but it was honky tonk.  They talk about Ike [Turner] and Tina Turner coming from that area, and it was real honky tonk, it was real depressed sort of.
Speaker 1: A lot of blues played around that area?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, a lot of the early blues players played in East St. Louis.  There were some clubs in St. Louis but then there was--they had several communities outside of East St. Louis.  One in particular called Brooklyn [Illinois], and one would--clubs in St. Louis would close at one o'clock, and they would go from St. Louis across the bridge to East St. Louis, and continue drinking and carousing until the wee hours of the morning, that's what East St. Louis was.  But it was part of the whole black social scene of St. Louis--East St. Louis.
Story_ID: 295643
Speaker 1: I know you write in your book ['Guillaume: A Life,' Robert Guillaume and David Ritz] that your [maternal] grandmother [Jeannette Williams] had a tremendous influence on you, and you said that she wasn't the kind of person that really--as you described in the spitting incident and some of the other incidents, she was the kind of person that doesn't take any stuff--really didn't take any stuff, but had sort of a dignified bearing around--she would talk back to white people around a certain thing if she thought she was right, but at the same time she told you all not to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She didn't want us to get in trouble, and every black mother at the time was accustomed to having--every black mother at the time was accustomed to disciplining male black children in such a way, because they were very frightened for them, 'cause they knew that you might get caught late at night and mouth off to the cop and he might shoot you, or you'd get in some kind of trouble that they couldn't--that the family couldn't handle.  And that was part of the way of disciplining black male children.  That was what they did at the time; that was what would happen.
Speaker 1: What would your grandmother tell you for instance?
Speaker 2: I think it's one of the reasons that she put us in Catholic school, because there was a--her ideas about how we should behave was reinforced by the nuns and the priests in a way that if we'd gone to public school would not have occurred.  So she would say, "Don't get into trouble now," 'cause they didn't know whether if you went out on Saturday night what the hell would happen, 'cause you might get out there with your smart mouth and mouthed to someone, and you'd be in a whole heap of trouble.  But I think that that had been in place for a long, long time in black communities, how to contain our young black males, and nobody knew or thought at the time it would impact our societies, but I think it did.  It impacted black communities in a negative way that when you needed people to stand up and take responsibility for something, or change something, you had no, for lack of a better word, you had no warriors.  You had only people who understandably were afraid to get out of line.
Story_ID: 295644
Speaker 1: I wasn't by any means a person who would overtly create problems, and yet there was a part of me that was stubborn and very pugnacious.  I saw no reason why I should in any way back down, and I'm glad in a sense that I was not born in the South because I don't think I would have--I don't think I would have lasted.  I think I would have been roused out of bed at four o'clock in the morning one morning and strung up on a tree simply because of an inner something that I couldn't control.  If you suggested to me that in some way I was inferior, I would fight you to the death on something like that.  I wasn't going to go marching anywhere but neither was I--after having grown up in St. Louis [Missouri].  Now if I had grown up in the Deep South, I'm not sure--I'm not really certain that I would have been--I probably would have been as compliant and able to figure out, what the hell can I do here and how should I do it?  I might not have had any notions of personal integrity.  I might not have had any--I'm trying to be as honest about something like that as I can (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But then again when you look at some of the things that you've actually did, well in the book ['Guillaume: A Life,' Robert Guillaume and David Ritz] there's a scene where you get in trouble for defending your brother [James Edwards].  Your brother is accused of talking and you defend him, and you get suspended from school, but you still did it anyway.  I'm sure you knew there must have been some kind of consequences for that.
Speaker 1: Well I'm saying--I guess what I'm saying is that if I had grown up in the South, I either would have been--I'm allowing for the possibility that what I consider to be my inner core, I'm allowing for the possibility that perhaps it would have been different.
Speaker 2: I hear that, but we don't know.  Yeah, we don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah we don't know.
Speaker 2: But what you did do as a youth, you did stand up when you could and seemed to speak up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well I was what other kids and people called someone who had a chip on their shoulder.  Later called arrogant.
Story_ID: 295645
Speaker 1: That's another--a thing when you were in school at St. Nicholas [Grade School, St. Louis, Missouri] and you're a singer in school, you have a beautiful voice.  One nun said that she thinks that you were called by God to sing, but there's a program that's coming up, and you refused to sing because you had a sore throat or something, right?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, I never knew what that was about.  I was always very stubborn.  I'd always, let us say, they'd ask me to sing and to this day I've been very shy about something that I wanted to do more than anything, but if you asked me to do it I would pretend--I don't know, I simply could not give over to it.  Now if you were to catch me singing somewhere and encouraged me, I'd do it, but there was some peculiar about me in this sense.  That I couldn't quite acquiesce to the idea that I was--that anyone wanted to hear me sing.  I couldn't quite get that in my head, and that I should just sing and shut up as it were.
Speaker 1: So were you a good student in school?
Speaker 2: If I liked the subject, yes, and if I didn't like it, I wouldn't study, I had terrible study habits.  But early on I decided that I was not going to be a lawyer or a teacher or any of those traditional professions, a doctor.  I think rather early on, because there had been no tradition of that in my family, and I found myself out on a limb because where else are you going to go, what else are you going to do (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now you des--
Story_ID: 295646
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You describe a situation, too, another stratifying situation in school [St. Nicholas Grade School, St. Louis, Missouri] where you said all the light-skinned kids sat in the front, and these presumably were the ones that had the most money and influence too, or was it just the color?
Speaker 2: Both, at that time it was thought even among black people that there was a higher hierarchical idea of race and pigmentation in use that obtained over any notion of equality.  I mean, you know, it was expressed in--what's that old pseudo poem kind of thing--if you're white, you're right, if you're yellow you're mellow, if you're brown you can hang around, if you're black get back or whatever.  That sort of thing was thought to be in play most of the time, and one was really--it was almost as if we had contests on who had the best hair, it was like best hair and that sort of thing, best meaning that it wasn't kinky.  It was also expressed in the idea that if you're gonna get married to someone make sure they are either--you're either lighter than they are or they are lighter than you so then you have lighter kids as opposed to having dark kids.  But not many black people are proud of the fact that was in place then, and to some extent I think it's residually in place in our society now.  And it's been a stumbling block, I think, for this society for a long time this sort of pigmentocracy [ph.].
Speaker 1: I've never heard it coined like that before but that's what it is, some kind of pigmentocracy.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So did you have any--who were your friends in school?
Speaker 2: Just a normal range of people.
Speaker 1: Did the friends like stratify across class?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but I was still aware that in other words a girl--a desirable girl at the time, would be a girl who is light skinned, which leads you to the silliness of a light skinned black, or terminology like that.  If a girl had long hair that was silky or whatever, however one would describe it, that was a pretty girl, whereas a dark girl, color trumped regularity of features if you will.  If you were dark, I don't give a damn what your features were like, you're just ugly, period, and since I was dark I grew up thinking I was ugly, and that's the way it was.
Story_ID: 295647
Speaker 1: In the midst of all this, still you were like a teacher's pet in school [St. Nicholas Grade School, St. Louis, Missouri], you're saying, nuns really liked you.  And they thought you were smart (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was my impression.
Speaker 1: Smart, talented young man.
Speaker 2: Many of them thought though that if I could keep my mouth shut I might do better.
Speaker 1: You were singing regularly at church, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Various groups at St. Nicholas [Catholic Church, St. Louis, Missouri].  Did you go to high school at St. Nicholas too, did they have a high school or did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I went to a high school called St. Joe [St. Joseph's School for the Colored, St. Louis, Missouri].  I got thrown out of St. Nicholas.
Speaker 1: How did that happen?
Speaker 2: For running my mouth--for shooting off my mouth.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you were thrown out?
Speaker 2: I think I was thrown out in the ninth grade, and I left St. Nicholas of course thinking that oh God, what have I done, and what's going to become of me.  Shortly thereafter I went to St. Joe, and I found out that they would take me in.  I was there until the tenth grade when I got in trouble with the principal of that school, a woman by the name of Sister [Anna] Adelaide, who was rather stern.
Speaker 1: Now what did you do there to get into trouble?
Speaker 2: Same thing, there was a part of me that was absolutely convinced that they were out to get me.  A paranoia had set in that was probably the result of this vague awareness that somehow we were all second class people and I didn't like that.  It was my way of fighting against the notion that color had anything to do with anything, but I tended to get in trouble at that time and I think perhaps it was also a result of not having let us say a father to lay down the law, and tell me to get up, shut up, get over here, do this that or the other.  Without I had only my [maternal] grandmother [Jeannette Williams], whose influence over me along about that time had begun to wane, because she was born in 1880, we're talking about 1940.  Her powers are beginning to fade, she would only live another eleven years and at that time sixty was old.
Speaker 1: It's a different time period that's right the life expectancy for someone (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And especially for--she had worked herself to death if you will.  She had worked all her life and--hard work, and there was no money to alleviate anything.  So her powers had begun to wane.
Story_ID: 295648
Speaker 1: Correct me if I'm wrong, but as I kind of read between the lines, I would guess that you were on your own a lot anyway, if she was working that much and you were working and trying to do things too, and it's the [Great] Depression, and she's [Guillaume's maternal grandmother, Jeannette Williams] the one authority figure in the house, and you were probably on your own a lot.
Speaker 2: No it wasn't, no, because she gave every bit of time that she could to us in the quality sense to us, she gave it to us, and my mother [Zoe Edwards] at the time was in and out of the house.  My mother would come and be with us, let us say three or four days of a given week.  She would wash the clothes and she would cook the meals, and she and my grandmother would make a truce for that time that she was there, and then all of a sudden she'd do it three or four days, and then all of a sudden she'd be gone.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there was like somebody around most of the time then.
Speaker 2: Well my grandmother was always there, but my mother, she was in and out, and when she would disappear we wouldn't see her for a month, month and a half which to a child at that time is an eternity.  Not knowing whether she was going to come back and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: What happened after you were kicked out of St. Joseph [St. Joseph's School for the Colored, St. Louis, Missouri] what did you do?
Speaker 2: After I was kicked out of St. Joe, I think I decided that I would join the [U.S.] Army; I decided that that made sense then.
Speaker 1: Now before we get to the army you were part of a little gang in St. Louis [Missouri] in the neighborhood, right?
Speaker 2: Well you could call it that but--yeah we had a little gang called the Nineteenth Street Aces (laughter).  And there were a number of gangs in the St. Louis in black neighborhoods.  One was called the Counts, which was on the West End [St. Louis, Missouri], the better part of town, and then there was one called the Rats or the Racks [sic.] I can't remember, and I've forgotten the other specific names.  But the little gang we were part of, we may have had a couple of really ferocious guys, but I certainly wasn't one of them.  I was sort of like a hanger on and someone who was glad to be taken in but our little gang was nothing.
Story_ID: 295649
Speaker 1: Before we leave high school, too, did you have a favorite subject in high school?
Speaker 2: I always liked at that time--I think--no, to answer the question I'm not sure that I had a favorite anything.
Speaker 1: What about teachers, is there a teacher that really stands out as somebody that was really interested in you?
Speaker 2: When I was in St. Joe [St. Joseph's School for the Colored, St. Louis, Missouri] there was a teacher by the name of Sister Claire Joseph.  She was a member of the Sacred Heart--Sisters of the Sacred Heart, and their headquarters was out here in Littleton, Colorado.  I don't know where they were at that time, but the last I heard of her she was out in Littleton, Colorado, and she was a very vivacious woman with tremendous energy.  She was extremely interested in music when she was a younger person and she brought that energy with her to St. Joe.
Story_ID: 295271
Speaker 1: Before we get you in the [U.S.] Army, you have to tell us about the jobs story.  Now how old were you when you and your friends decided to go out and get these heavy lifting jobs?
Speaker 2: Well we thought--I think we had all been privy to the idea of looking in the newspaper and determining in the want ad sections which jobs may most sense for us to apply for, and so I think we all got simultaneously the same notion about--well let's apply for a job with the Missouri Pacific [Railroad].  We had heard I think something of their pay scale which seemed to us quite lucrative.  So we all--so there were about four or five of us and we decided that we'd all apply for a job on the railroad with the Missouri Pacific.  So we went down and they signed us up and they sent us by train of course to this location just outside, I believe, of Kansas City [Missouri].  There were about four or five of us I believe, and so we went to this site which was outside of town at, I guess what you'd call the railroad sighting.  We got there around noon and it was hot as blazes.  We were sweating like pigs and so we got to the camp where the workers were and they were being fed.  It was lunchtime and they were eating and we had nothing, we were not privileged kids in any sense except that as soon as we saw what the conditions were going to be that we would work in, we all of sudden became these high class and middle class kids and none of us were accustomed to anything.  We had no privilege but we saw these guys eating, and they were eating things like pig snouts, and there was a cook and she was a big ugly woman, and it was as I said before, hot as blazes.  Sweat was everywhere, flies were everywhere, and we saw these guys, and they were big ugly looking guys, and we're looking at them.  To a man we all looked at this, and when we experienced it, we came out, we came away, and I think we got into a group and we just said, "I don't want to work there."  'Cause what our job was going to be was carrying (unclear), carrying--what our job was going to be was to fix up the railroad ties and whatnot along certain stretches of the railway.  And what we had to look forward to was that food at the end of the day and we didn't know where we were to sleep.  I think we were to sleep somewhere on those railroad cars, but when we saw the real conditions under which we would work, it was like, I can't do that--to a man, and as I said before we were not privileged in any sense, we were poor kids.  We could have used the seven or eight dollars an hour, which to us constituted a king's ransom for legitimate work.  But we decided, no I don't think I want to do that.
Story_ID: 295272
Speaker 1: This is seven or eight dollars an hour [working for the Missouri Pacific Railroad]?
Speaker 2: Whatever it was.
Speaker 1: In those days it seems like it was a little high, I don't--
Speaker 2: No I don't think it was high, I think it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seven or eight dollars an hour?
Speaker 2: I think it was somewhere in there.  It may not have been but at any rate--
Speaker 1: It was better money than--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But when we actually saw the conditions under which we would have to work, and where we would have to live, and the kind of food we would have to eat, even though we were not in any sense privileged kids or guys, we decided to a man that we could not endure those circumstances.  We didn't put it in those terms of course.  So we decided, well, I wonder will they ship us back, we found out quite quickly that you either take this job, or you want to go back to St. Louis [Missouri], you'll have to get yourself back because we brought you up here thinking that you would work and now that you don't want to do this, then you'll get back any way you can.  So the only way for us to get back was to start out walking hoping that we might be able to hitchhike.
Speaker 1: How long did it take to get back from--you like were 245 miles away I think?
Speaker 2: From St. Louis, Kansas City [Missouri] is 254 miles, for us to get back and walk I don't know how long it would have taken, but we got a few long rides, and we got as far as 110 miles from St. Louis.  And along the way we got a ride let us say twenty miles, we got a ride of thirty miles whatever, stuff like that, and we finally got grounded around 110 miles out.  I think out of a town called Wentzville [Missouri], I don't know whether that was Illinois or St. Louis but it was--we were going back east and--so then all along the way we would sleep by the side of the road.  Trucks, traffic roaring by, I mean dust.
Speaker 1: What did you have to sleep on?
Speaker 2: Nothing, we had no backpacks, we were not official hobos or anything like that, but we were living sort of a hobo's existence for those five or six days or whatever it was we were out.
Speaker 1: What did you eat?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't really remember.  We didn't have much if any money since we decided we weren't going to take the job, we did not bring a whole lot of money with us, maybe we had five or six dollars apiece with us.
Speaker 1: So how old were you when this happened?
Speaker 2: I think I was sixteen or seventeen and when I look back on it I say, "What are you talking about?  That sounds like the biggest lie one could tell," but it actually happened and the fact that we decided we'd walk back, we didn't know what we were subjecting ourselves to, that there could have been crazies on the road or something like that.  People who might have seen a bunch of black guys late at night on a road like this, of course it was the main highway back to St. Louis.  But it was one of the--it was kind of foolhardy in a sense because we were risking a lot.  We were risking our lives, but of course there again you look at it, and you say well how could that happen you couldn't do that today, because somebody would shoot at you.  In those days nobody did or said a thing.  We didn't encounter hostility.
Story_ID: 295273
Speaker 1: Tell us about the [U.S.] Army.  Now did you tell your [maternal] grandmother [Jeannette Williams] you were going to enlist?  How did she feel about you being kicked out of St. Joseph's [School for the Colored, St. Louis, Missouri]? That had to be a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh well of course she was--it was like her worst nightmare, 'cause that was the very thing that she may have always feared, that you're going to say something and you're going to get kicked out, and that's going to be the end of your life.  So she of course didn't like it.  So after I got kicked out of St. Joe for essentially the same thing that--the same reason I got kicked out of St. Nicholas [Grade School, St. Louis, Missouri].  It was all because I would run off at the mouth and say things that I shouldn't, or under those circumstances and that set of that rubric, that set of behavior that you just don't do certain things.  You learn who to talk back to and not, but I never learned, I never learned who to not talk back to.  I figured anybody who talked to me got what they deserved (laughter) and so when I got kicked out of St. Joe, I decided well this is about the end of it, you're not going much further than this.  So--and then I thought, one day I said, "I could join the Army," and the more I thought about it the more sense it made.  So I decided I'd join the Army.
Speaker 1: Now this is--what year is this?
Speaker 2: This is '45 [1945].
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-five [1945]?  So the war [World War II, WWII] was almost over (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was winding down, a fact that I was not unaware of.  I was no great patriot, this was not a great patriotic move, but it was a move that I thought that I can get something out of this, because if I go to the Army I will get, because of my service, I would get the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] when I get ready to get out, so I signed up for three years, and I'm sure there was a recruiting mechanism that I was aware of, and so I went.  I went in and I went to Jefferson Barracks [Military Post, St. Louis County, Missouri], which is a fort right outside St. Louis [Missouri] and they shipped me from there to Pittsburg, California and from Pittsburg, California I went to the Philippines and from the Philippines I went to a system of islands south of Japan called the Ryukyu Islands.  No first I went to Fort McClellan, Alabama for training, and I was there I think maybe a month then I went to these other places.  The one in the southeast, south of Japan called the Ryukyu Islands, in a place called [Amami] Oshima, and finished my basic training.
Story_ID: 295274
Speaker 1: Was the [U.S.] Army what you expected it to be?
Speaker 2: No, but see I don't know what I expected it to be other than I thought the Army was a place where--I thought that I had something that might generally fit in.  I didn't know I was just a piece of meat, just a piece of--you're just somebody to fill a space.  I simply did not know that I was nobody, unless I could follow orders I had no worth at all, but I went with the notion that eventually I'm going to make my mark here, and the truth was eventually I'm just going to get in trouble, 'cause I'm going to start arguing with someone and I'm going to get--just going to get in trouble, but I wasn't aware of that at all.  When I went into the Army and after I got to [Amami] Oshima, I became the mail clerk, which is one of those jobs that one does.  It's just short of goldbricking.
Speaker 1: Goldbricking meaning (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Meaning--what does it mean--it means, there's a better vernacular term which we can't say on television.  But it's bullshitting your way through.
Speaker 1: Okay, you're really getting paid for nothing in a lot of ways I guess.  You're getting paid for a minimal amount of work.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and but that was mail clerk.
Story_ID: 295275
Speaker 1: Did you ever have this confrontation that we're thinking you might have, being someone who likes to--who doesn't like authority in the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah I'm eventually going to get in trouble, 'cause I just never knew how the game was played.  I just never knew how to stay out of trouble, and I became a sitting duck for anybody who wanted to make an example out of me.  I became a person who--I didn't know what I was doing (laughter) to put it succinctly, I just didn't know--I didn't know how to ease my way through.  I would encounter the one person who could look at me and say I'm going to fix him.  So I really just did not know because--and I think here is where my not having had a father handicapped me in the sense that if I'd had--I'd like to think that if I'd had a father he would have given me more of, "Well this is what you do when you get out in the world son."  My [maternal] grandmother [Jeannette Williams] was wonderful, but the ladies can't tell you what to do out here especially when you're struggling with, "Well I'm a man, how dare you talk to me that way."
Speaker 1: So what happened, what was the incident?
Speaker 2: Well I was always in trouble.  I mean, if there was trouble to be found, I found it, and it had to do with the sense that I would flout authority, and I encountered a southern captain, who was captain of our little platoon and group, and there was something about me that just rubbed him the wrong way, but I could see what it was.  It was that I had a sense of independence, and he had not been accustomed to that in a black person, he was from the South, he was from Georgia.  So somehow he and I got on a collision course.  I wasn't important, but I was important to him to break.  I wasn't anybody, and maybe under more stringent conditions he would never have noticed me.  But I think he was a person who needed to show a young black man that you're not as important as you think you are, and I'm going to prove it to you, and I didn't know how to play that game.  I didn't know how to not draw attention to myself, and so on this collision course one day he decided, he said, "Williams [HistoryMaker Robert Guillaume], come to my office boy," and I wasn't the person who would necessarily get upset about being called boy, but I would get upset if you suggested to me that I was not capable of intellectual advancement, I would get upset, and so I would always want to be seen as a person who was bright, and intelligent and worth something, but he needed to demean me.
Story_ID: 295276
Speaker 1: And so he [Guillaume's platoon captain in World War II] called me into his office and he said, "Boy, this [U.S.] Army ain't big enough for both of us, one of us is going to have to leave, now who do you suppose that's going to be?"  I was smart enough to figure out what the answer was and I said me, and he said, "You've got that right boy."  So I said to myself, "Oh shit, I'm in trouble here."  "I'm going to give you--I'm going to let you out of this, you signed up for three years, I'm going to let you out, 'cause you're just not Army material."  Now in that he was right and in a sense it could be said, kind, his decision to throw me out, 'cause surely I was going to get in trouble if I went further.  He said, "I'm going to let you out boy, but you know what this means?"  I said, "No sir," my heart sank, here it comes.  "This means that you're not going to be eligible for enlistment, re-enlistment, induction, re-induction, you're not going to be able to get into the Army ever again," and I said to myself, be still my heart.  My mood--I was careful not to show that he had brightened my mood, and so I waited for the worst of it, and he said, "So I'm going to let you out, you're going to get a honorable discharge, I'm not going to give you a dishonorable discharge, I'm going to let you out and you're going get your benefits, et cetera, et cetera."  And my mood was further lightened, but he said, "This is going to follow you the rest of your life," and I was smart enough at the time to say, to myself of course, hell I'm ain't important enough for the Army to follow me the rest of my life, what the hell is he talking about, but I didn't ask him any of that or say any of that to him.  So I reviewed the options he'd given me, take a discharge and we'll pretend this never happened, and I thought that was a pretty good deal.  And it wasn't until years later though that I figured out that he could have been much harsher.  As harsh as I thought he was, he could have been much harsher, and why wasn't he, I don't know.  I don't even have it in the book ['Guillaume: A Life,' Robert Guillaume and David Ritz] that I thought there was anything about my encounter with him that was positive.  You dig what I'm saying?
Speaker 2: So did this follow you in any way?
Speaker 1: No one cared.
Speaker 2: So if it was an honorable discharge and you had your benefits (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no one cared.  I mean, it did not impact me.  My brother on the other hand who got into the [U.S.] Navy, and my brother was a nice, nice man who was only trying to do the right thing, and somehow he got caught up one day in a situation in which it seemed that he had stolen some money, this is what he told me, and before he could either give the money back, or he couldn't take himself out of whatever situation he'd gotten into.  And as a result he got a dishonorable discharge from the Navy, and James [Edwards] was a truly genuine, wonderful person, not at all like me.
Story_ID: 295277
Speaker 1: All right, in our last episode you were released from the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 2: Oh, I had gotten that far?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got out of the Army unscathed.
Speaker 1: It was a pretty good deal actually, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I came back to civilian life, and I went one day to talk with my buddies over at St. Joe High School [St. Joseph's School for the Colored, St. Louis, Missouri] and so I was out there one day when they had--they were in morning recess around 10:15 or so, and Sister [Anna] Adelaide, the one who had thrown me out before, saw me standing out there, and she said, "Would you like to come back to school young man," and I said, "Yes, Sister," and she said, "Well be here Monday morning at such and such and such a time."  So I came back, and that's how I got back in school.  Again she took pity on my poor butt and put me back in school, and from that point I went on and graduated, but I had missed the tenth grade and part of the eleventh, so she put me back in school, and I would have been then as a senior.
Speaker 1: So did she put you back in as a senior?
Speaker 2: She put me back, I think she put me back in the--we were coming to the end of the school semester, or the year, and I think she put me back in as a junior or something like that, I've forgotten now.
Speaker 1: Okay, how long did it take you graduate?
Speaker 2: Well I just went on through the eleventh grade and went into the twelfth.  My original class would have been '45 [1945] and I graduated in '47 [1947].
Story_ID: 295278
Speaker 1: You write about the graduation [from St. Joseph's School for the Colored, St. Louis, Missouri]--that they combined the graduations for one of the big (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it was the first time in the history of St. Louis [Missouri] that they had, in the archdiocese, that they had a graduation of the black schools with the white schools.  That was in 1947.  Subsequently the way that the St. Louis schools had integrated was used as a model in the '54 decision for the integration of schools [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], and they used the model of the St. Louis schools.  But in 1947 schools had decided for the first time that they would--the black schools and the white schools of the [Roman Catholic] Archdiocese of St. Louis would graduate together.  It was a ceremony at the St. Louis cathedral [Cathedral Basilica of Saint Louis, St. Louis, Missouri], which is a big beautiful cathedral there in St. Louis.
Speaker 1: From the way your book ['Guillaume: A Life,' Robert Guillaume and David Ritz] reads, is that you were really thrilled to be in that cathedral.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was a big deal, but the funny thing about it was, one of the things that I took note of that everybody else just--no one else thought it was of any importance at all but it's the kind of thing that stuck in my mind, that we had been told--the black students had been told when you come to--there was a rehearsal prior to the graduation, let us say Friday, and we were going to graduate Sunday, and so we went to the rehearsal and we had been told to be on our best behavior, in other words, wear something nice to the graduation and make sure you don't cause any this, that or the other.  So we went to the rehearsal before the graduation and we were all--we got ties and stuff on, all dressed up for the rehearsal.  We got over there and the white kids were just lolling about waiting for rehearsal to begin, and it's the kind of thing that used to stick in my mind as an indication of, we just couldn't be regular people, we just couldn't do what everyone else did, and I always insisted that we should be able to.
Speaker 1: The implication is that you have to do something special to be able to graduate with these white people where they took it as very casual (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you had to do something that was just against the grain.  I don't see why we couldn't just loll about like everybody else, smoke cigarettes and do whatever we did.  But everybody was so afraid that we were going to do something that was so against the rules, and we weren't but that was the impression.
Speaker 1: After graduation what were your prospects?  Were you thinking of using the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] to go to college, or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I didn't go directly I went to the post office [U.S. Postal Service].  I took the exam for the post office and passed, and they allowed me to come into the post office and be a clerk, and that was a good job at that time.
Story_ID: 295279
Speaker 1: So we were talking about the post office [U.S. Postal Service] and you were a clerk (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, just after I graduated I had--a friend of mine and I, Jack LaZard and another fellow by the name of John Hightower, we decided we were going to be in the women's clothing business.  Jack and John had been selling women's clothes with the idea in mind that they would eventually be in business, and they asked me to join them.  Not knowing that I was only looking for girls, and the women's clothing business seemed like a good way to start.
Speaker 1: So they were trying to dress the girls and you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was trying to undress them (laughter) and we went in business.  We had a little clothing store down on Franklin [Avenue; Dr. Martin Luther King Drive, St. Louis, Missouri] a short distance from my house that I used to live in, and it was called the Geraldine Clothing Shoppe [Geraldine Shoppe], and it was a very nice little, cute little place.  We fixed it up with fancy wallpaper and whatnot, and we had a few--we didn't have much stock but we had a few kind of upper middle class dresses and hose and some slippers and stuff like that, lingerie that we sold.  We had that business for about--I stayed in that business for about four or five years.
Speaker 1: So did you all do pretty good?
Speaker 2: We never did pretty good, but we did enough to get ourselves in trouble, 'cause we just never had the money to anticipate the season that was coming up so that we could get in on the ground floor and do what you would normally do in a business, but we never could get off the ground, for any number of reasons.  The main one being, I believe, that we just couldn't round up the customers.  We couldn't get them to come into our shop, although it was a very nice place, and we had good merchandise but we just couldn't get them used to the idea that these three black guys were going to run this place, and that it was our place and, et cetera.  They were convinced that our prices were higher than everyone else but it wasn't so.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you were working in the post office at the same time?
Speaker 2: At the same time yeah--
Story_ID: 295280
Speaker 1: I know you started to develop your singing at some point, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I started to do--I didn't really start to develop or go into singing or think about singing as an avenue I might take to get out of the ghetto, as it were.  I didn't do that until around eight or ten years later.
Speaker 1: Okay, but why didn't it occur to you to do that, 'cause you were a good singer.
Speaker 2: Why did it or why didn't it?
Speaker 1: Why didn't it, yeah 'cause you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had not reached a level of maturity to see it.  That it might possibly constitute an avenue out.
Speaker 1: Now I read in the book ['Guillaume: A Life,' Robert Guillaume and David Ritz] that you developed a taste for classical music and felt it was superior to the popular culture music that was on the radio and most people listened to, and felt it was even probably a duty as somebody trying to be more refined to listen to classical material, and to sing that rather than the popular.  Did this have anything to do with your decision not to use your voice?
Speaker 2: Well it had something to do with how I used my voice.  I think I had come up in an atmosphere and an environment which put down black music and we were trying desperately to avoid anything that suggested black, or it was part of the whole idea of becoming something better than we were, and there was not any frame of reference at the time that said it was no better, it's just another avenue.  And so I grew up thinking that to pursue classical music was an infinitely better choice than just to sing the music that I'd grown up with, which at that time was mostly blues, and maybe the beginnings of R&B.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a radio at home when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah but we never--it wasn't something that you listened to.  But I grew up with the notion that the roots of black music were less than what you would pursue.  I mean you couldn't pursue a career in--you wouldn't think of a career as a singer--that's the way I viewed it.  Not everyone thought that, but what I picked up from the dominant themes of the time among black people was that you should do everything you could to better yourself. And bettering yourself meant get away from anything black, and that was=--subsequently I thought that that was a mistake but it was years later.
Story_ID: 295281
Speaker 1: So you were working in the post office [U.S. Postal Service]--now did you get married around this time when you worked in the post office or had you--
Speaker 2: No I didn't get married--I got married [to Marlene Scott] in 1955, and immediately, I got married and I began to think outwardly of going away from St. Louis [Missouri], or going out of my--out of St. Louis.  I immediately began thinking of that.
Speaker 1: Now you--when did you become the--you became one of the first black streetcar operators in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Yeah this was 1953.
Speaker 1: All right, so is this before you got married?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I worked for the streetcar company for three years and it was at a time when one was likely to be the first black to do this or the first black to do that, and that was one of those kinds of jobs.  I guess I was about the eighth or ninth black person to be hired to run a streetcar.
Speaker 1: That was considered a good job.
Speaker 2: Yes it was.  Well, I had a--the post office was considered a better job even, but they were never going to satisfy me.  I would take a look at them and say, "I can do better."  By that time I'd started to have my eyes on a bigger prize.
Story_ID: 295282
Speaker 1: What prize was it, I mean, what did you discover (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think I was thinking in terms of something where I made more money faster, and since I wasn't going to be a criminal, and my [maternal] grandmother [Jeannette Williams] had died in '51 [1951], and there had been no money to bury her.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you said before that her health had started to deteriorate.
Speaker 2: Well it hadn't started to deteriorate; her ability to control us had declined because the natural strength that one would have to bring that endeavor began to decline, because she was aging, and she died when she was seventy-one, but when she had died we had no money to bury her.  That became for me an intolerable kind of thing, to have no money--not enough money to bury my grandmother, this woman who had done at that time when I thought was everything to make sure that I stayed afloat, we couldn't bury her.  That was just--I think of it now and it pains me.  I'm not saying it was peculiar to me, it must have happened to many black people at the time, or people period but certainly black people it must have happened many times that just was--we had no uncles, no aunts, no one could come to our aid, and we had announced that there would be a burial and such and such and such.  But we couldn't carry through on it, and that circumstance began to prey on my mind, that the reason for that was that no one in this family had ever made any money.  I mean, we were poor because no one had ever made any money.  Whatever money my grandmother had made had always been used immediately when it was made, and it wasn't that much.  If she worked three days a week at five dollars a day, that meant that would be fifteen dollars that she'd bring into her household.  For that week that meant that maybe we'd have some meat, and when I say meat I don't mean T-bone or porterhouse, I mean bologna, or what they used to call headcheese or stuff like that, at least you could put a couple of pieces of that between bread and have a decent sandwich.  When we had no money to bury her, it became the catalyst for me to think somebody's got to make some money here.  This is just ridiculous, so that's when I began to think, well how can I do that, and becoming somebody in show business seemed to me to be a possibility, that I could make enough money to have enough to help somebody without completely depleting my own resources.  If someone else needed some money I could loan it to them, somebody in my family.  So that's what I thought.
Speaker 1: So show business, did you conceive of yourself a singer or an actor or what?
Speaker 2: I thought maybe--I thought I'd make it as a singer, but little did I know that my years of thinking that black music was not worthy of my investigation, I began to think towards opera, toward classical music, toward a concert career, which would rule out any pop singing.
Story_ID: 295283
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-one [1951] your [maternal] grandmother [Jeannette Williams] dies, '53 [1953] you start working for the streetcar company [in St. Louis, Missouri] and I also read that you had an idea for some hair pomade or something to sell (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well that was like a little venture that I went into again with this entrepreneurial idea in mind, but I wasn't really a person who was suited for that kind of thing, 'cause the one thing I never knew at that time was how to stick to something.  I never had enough confidence in what I was doing to stay with something.  It was during the time when I sold aluminum pots and pans and stuff like that.  I'd make a sale every fifteen or twenty pitches, but certainly not enough to sustain you, but enough to say you had a gig let us say.  And it was the kind of thing that you may have sold a housewife on the product, and then her husband would come along and undo the sale.  So it was not very lucrative, but at any rate it was during that time that I did jobs like that, and one of the ventures that I got into was a little thing called--I had a hair pomade and I called it Sassy Curl, and we sold it around town to the various beauty shops, and we came up with the idea that it would do something for the hair.  In actuality it would have done nothing for the hair except provide the moisture necessary to pull the hot comb through.  It was a pomade, and we said it contained [Triton] X400 which was nothing but an idea (laughter) that could not have been scientifically proven.
Speaker 1: I read that X400--the jars of X400 was sold to beauty parlors as a special formula made for professionals.
Speaker 2: Yeah but it was--if it had been successful, it would have been a complete scam, I mean, you know, no more no less than scams today.  But had one been--I guess if I'd been a real con man it could have worked, but that's about all that was.  But--that was during the time when I did stuff like that.
Story_ID: 295284
Speaker 1: Now tell me about getting married.  Now where did you meet your future wife?
Speaker 2: I met her [Marlene Scott] at church.  We fell in love, and she was one of these cute little light skinned girls with blonde hair, and it was about as close as I could get to a white woman, in all fairness.  But she was a lovely woman, and she was eight years my junior, and we got married and we had two boys, Kevin [Guillaume] and Jacques [Guillaume], J-A-C-Q-U-E-S.
Speaker 1: When did you get married?
Speaker 2: Fifty-five [1955] they were born in '57 [1957] and '58 [1958], Kevin in '57 [1957] and Jacques in '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: You said immediately after you got married you started thinking about how to leave St. Louis [Missouri] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How to bail out.
Speaker 1: Of the marriage too?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't really about the marriage, I had nothing to complain about in the marriage except I didn't know what marriage was, I had no idea.  I had no idea that marriage would require the kind of personal commitment, and I suppose that anyone at my age might not have had the same--might have been in the same quandary.  I mean I can honestly say that I didn't know what it meant.  Although I loved Marley [Marlene Scott], I still loved myself more and that's a bad idea for marriage.  But at any rate I got married with every intention of staying married but also at the same time I began to think outwardly.  I began to think, well we've got to do better, and I had a good job, I was working at the streetcar company, and when I wasn't working there I was working other places equally remunerative, but I just had no commitment to marriage.  The kind of commitment it takes.
Story_ID: 295650
Speaker 1: Okay, 1955, you're married [to Marlene Scott Williams], you started attending classes at Washington University [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 2: Well I had gone to St. Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri] first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my first courses there were philosophy, English and accounting.  I got an A in accounting, I got a B in philosophy and a C in English, and I was astounded by this C in English because I thought I was pretty good in English.  It didn't register on me until years later that I'd been contentious with the professor, and I think he had said, "Well I'll fix you you little son of a gun, I'll fix you," and then he gave me a C.  It's the only way I can account for the C that I got, 'cause once again I did not know how to keep my mouth shut.  I did not know how to not be a lightning rod.
Story_ID: 295651
Speaker 1: But then when I got married [to Marlene Scott Williams] I went to Saint--I went to Washington U [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] and majored in music.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I read that two of your heroes were--early on were Marian Anderson and Roland Hayes?
Speaker 1: Well, these were people that were paragons of singing.  They were models if anyone wanted to sing, and especially if you were black and you wanted to sing at that time, one would likely choose from their repertoire to get yourself started, and at that time, for people like them, concert singing was a way out, because there still was not--there still were no at the time no black people at the Metropolitan [Opera, New York, New York], and they became the models.  Paul Robeson was part of that and--they were the three as I remember.
Speaker 2: So how long did you study at Washington?
Speaker 1: I studied at Washington University I think for about two years.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this takes us to about 1959?
Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957].
Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957], okay.
Speaker 1: When I went to Washington University I had a teacher was very fond of me, his name was Laszlo Chabay, C-H-A-B-A-Y [Leslie Chabay].  I was sort of a puzzle to him because he couldn't quite figure me out and he couldn't quite get me to use my voice in the way that he thought it ought to go.  But he worked with me as often as he could to try to get me into the very thing that I wanted into, concert singing, but he wasn't quite able to do it.  It was certain things that I just for one reason or another just never could bring within my ken and purview.  So I forever remained outside of the very thing that I wanted to do.
Speaker 2: What was the thing that kept you out?  What was the major (unclear) (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The major stumbling block I believe was, first of all I was very stubborn.  I simply could not do without an argument what you wanted me to do.  No matter what was suggested to me, I always felt well you can do it that way if you want to but why don't we do it the right way (laughter).  Yeah, we can do it that way but if we want to save time let's do it this way.  I thought I knew every goddamn thing and I knew nothing and didn't know I knew nothing.  But at any rate this man tried to get me through it, and I must have been a source of great consternation to him because he couldn't figure out, why would you use your voice in the way that you are using it, just let the voice go on up into the head, and I'd get so far up in the scale and I'd start manipulating the sound, which always kept me out of the kind of sound that would have given me credibility as it were.  I don't know whether that makes any sense but it's as near as I can come to explaining the dilemma.
Story_ID: 295652
Speaker 1: Towards the end of this experience, if--just following the chronology of the book ['Guillaume: A Life,' Robert Guillaume and David Ritz], now how did you get associated with Karamu House in Cleveland [Ohio]?  I mean, what happened?
Speaker 2: Well this man, Laszlo Chabay [Leslie Chabay], had given me a scholarship to Aspen, Colorado music school [Aspen Music Festival and School, Aspen, Colorado], 'cause he was a teacher on the staff there, and every summer he would go to Aspen, and this particular year in '57 [1957] I believe it was, he decided he would take me.  He would give me a scholarship, a nine week scholarship at Aspen.  And so I went and took advantage of that, and part of my duties, I had to learn a couple of arias by Henry Purcell.  I think he was a 16th century composer, 16th or 17th century.  So I was performing them in Aspen one night, and the people who ran the Karamu House, Rowena Jelliffe and her husband [Russell Jelliffe], J-E-L-L-I-F-F-E, they happened to be in the audience that night that I was singing this rather florid piece of music.  I guess I was impressive to them, so they contacted me backstage afterward and we talked a little bit, and they expressed admiration for what I had done and suggested that if I ever wanted to be on the stage, to come and see them at the Karamu House in Cleveland.  They gave me a little thumbnail sketch of what they had done, and Karamu House had been in existence--they had founded it in 1939 and it had had some success in the community as a community center in Cleveland.  They said come see us if you want to be on the stage, and of course it wasn't an idea that I was completely against.  I liked the idea, and so indeed in 1957 I decided I would take them up on it with the idea that I would go and try to secure a place for my wife [Marlene Scott Williams] and family in the east.  I mean, I wanted to get out of St. Louis [Missouri].  I had reached a kind of stalemate there and things just--it wasn't working, 'cause I couldn't find the kind of jobs--there was no place for me in St. Louis.  So I was going to leave St. Louis and try to reestablish somewhere in the east, either New York [New York], or if need be, Cleveland and that's how I went, with the idea that I would bring them along later.
Speaker 1: So what happened when you went to Karamu House?
Speaker 2: When I went to Karamu I had a bit of a success there.  The first thing I did, as soon as I got there they started grilling me on Billy Bigelow in 'Carousel.'  I don't know whether you've ever seen 'Carousel' by Rodgers and Hammerstein [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I've only seen parts of it, yeah, I've seen parts of it.  He's the--
Speaker 2: The barker, and it's the lead role, and I had never done anything on the stage.  I didn't have--except somehow I didn't have brains enough to know that I didn't know anything about it, they said go on the stage and I did it, take this role on and go on the stage and do this, do that and I did that.  Such was my brashness, and it paid off to a certain extent and then I did one opera, I did a [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart opera and then I did a--I did four or five pieces that year.
Story_ID: 295653
Speaker 1: So now who else was at Karamu House [Cleveland, Ohio] when you got there?  Karamu House seemed to be like a training ground for a lot of black artists in those days.
Speaker 2: Yes it was.
Speaker 1: So who was there when you were there with you that's memorable?
Speaker 2: There was a guy named Nathan [ph.] something who did a Langston Hughes piece called 'Simple Speaks His Mind,' that was one person.  Ron O'Neal was there, Clayton Corbin was there, these were all very talented people I remember being there.
Speaker 1: Ron O'Neal is famous for--
Speaker 2: 'No Place to Be Somebody' [Charles Gordone].
Speaker 1: And he is also famous for--
Speaker 2: 'Super Fly.'
Speaker 1: 'Super Fly,' that's the popular culture piece that he's most famous for.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the year that Ron was in 'No Place to be Somebody,' which was a Pulitzer Prize-winning play by Charles Gordone in 1970.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's quite a while away from when you all were there together, right?
Speaker 2: But the year that he won--that he was in 'No Place to be Somebody,' he won practically every award that they had that year.  What he didn't win, that little Italian actor won.
Speaker 1: Al Pacino?
Speaker 2: Pacino, yeah, but Ron made quite a splash in that piece.
Speaker 1: Anybody else there at that time?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember anybody else.
Speaker 1: So how did you do, were you--
Speaker 2: How did I do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How was your talent received--
Speaker 2: At Karamu?  I was someone they could use, and I don't mean that in a bad way or a negative way.  I mean, I had the requisite cojones to just go on and do whatever I'd been asked to do, and so they used me in that way.  I never thought I was all that promising in whatever I did, but I was using it as a means to learn how to do something I sincerely wanted to do.  I was using that opportunity so that if I went to New York [New York], I could at least say, "Well I've done this, I've done that and I did this over here and I did that back there."  And so some (unclear).  So when I hit New York I was--I had quite a bit of--I had a little resume.
Story_ID: 295654
Speaker 1: How did you take to acting?  I don't think you had ever had aspired--you had never in the past according to what--had you had any aspirations to become an actor before (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. No, I always thought of myself as simply a singer, and when after a while I began to get, or I began to get some strengths on the stage as an actor, I was quite surprised that I developed as an actor.  Because I went in it strictly as a singer.  That's what I did the first few years I was in New York [New York], and the way I got to New York was after being at Karamu [House, Cleveland, Ohio] for one season, and doing these four or five different pieces which were all musicals, a friend of mine, Howard Roberts, who had been at Karamu some few years before that, he was in New York, and he had gotten a job as musical director of a show that was going to leave New York and tour Europe and come back to New York.  So he came down to Karamu to audition people, being faithful to Karamu, 'cause Karamu had been good to him during his time there.  So he came back down to Karamu to see if he could find anyone, and indeed he found me and he found Beverly Todd, and he took us to New York.
Speaker 1: Now what year is this?
Speaker 2: This is '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so we left--no it was '59 [1959], this is '59 [1959].  I think I worked at Karamu from '58 [1958]--the '58 [1958] season, and I worked there that one year and I did all these things, I did five pieces.  Howard came down and auditioned, and we went to New York to do a piece called 'Free and Easy,' and 'Free and Easy' was a rehash of a 1946 musical called 'Free and Easy' with Pearl Bailey and Harold Nicholas I believe.  So they revived it--no, it was called 'St. Louis Woman,' and we called our piece 'Free and Easy,' and it was Harold Nicholas and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's kind of ironic isn't it, that you ended up in a play, 'St. Louis Woman.'
Speaker 2: But it was a rehash, and it was renamed 'Free and Easy.'  So when we--I went to New York, auditioned for it and got it, and I was in the chorus and understudy to the lead, which was Harold Nicholas.  It was just something like, if we ever have to use this guy, we'll find that we will either close that night or see if this guy can do it.  It was a marvelous piece.  The musical director was [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones, and he had assembled a large jazz contingent with Jerome Richardson, Clark Terry and a whole bunch of jazz people, and they were part of the action on stage.  But that's what 'Free and Easy' was, and I went, and came back to New York, got the piece and we went on tour with the idea that we would tour the continent, retracing the steps of the '52 [1952] to '56 [1956] 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin] triumphant tour throughout Europe and Russia, and we were going to take that same route but two weeks into--or two months into the thing the producer and the director got into a knock-down, drag-out fight, and we aborted in Paris [France] and equity [Actors' Equity Association] had to come and get us.  So what was to have been maybe a two-year tour where we were going to come back to the Palladium [New York, New York], Sammy [Davis, Jr.] was going to join us, take over and bring us into New York to one of the New York theaters.
Story_ID: 295655
Speaker 1: So this is about 1961 or two [1962]?
Speaker 2: This would have been 1960.
Speaker 1: Sixty [1960], okay. All right.
Speaker 2: But of course, we [company of 'Free and Easy'], as I said before we aborted in Paris [France] two weeks after we had started or something like a very short time.
Speaker 1: So what did you do when you came back to the [United] States?
Speaker 2: Well fortunately I had worked enough to qualify for what they called unemployment compensation, and that worked enough so that I could hang on in New York [New York] until the next job came along, and I decided to do that.  In the meantime I had asked my wife [Marlene Scott Williams] to come and join me to go to Europe, but she had gotten gun shy and said, "Well if he leaves me here like this he may leave me in Europe, and God forbid," and so she didn't join me, and I kept trying to get her to, but it didn't happen.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you split up, or?
Speaker 2: No, we stayed together.
Speaker 1: So you are in New York City, did you take acting lessons or classes in New York when you were there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, but I was going after jobs and I kept auditioning for stuff and trying to get in and get myself something to do.  I had a little song that I used to use all the time for audition purposes, 'cause I still thought of myself as a singer and so I would go in and I would sing 'Without a Song.'
Speaker 1: Can you sing a little bit of it for us?
Speaker 2: I can't sing anymore.  (Singing) "Without a song, the day would never end--."  "Next!"  Before I could get--I mean, I'd get, "Without a--."  "Next!"  But that's what I used to always sing around town and I was pretty diligent about it.  I didn't go everywhere I could have and should have, but I went to enough places so that they began to get embarrassed when I would come around, and said, "We ain't got nothing for him to do, here comes that guy again, what's his name, Guillaume [HistoryMaker Robert Guillaume], what does he call himself, Guyumi [ph.], what he?"
Story_ID: 295656
Speaker 1: When did you change your name? When was it that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had changed my name when I first got in; I told you that from the beginning.  I decided that Williams was not--
Speaker 1: When you--yeah I know, but did you change it at Karamu [House, Cleveland, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and everybody told me at Karamu, said, "Nobody will ever remember that."  But I knew that people will have trouble pronouncing it but once they get used to it, it is as common as anything else.
Speaker 1: When you think about it, in those days you had Sidney Poitier, that's not a household name, you've got [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, that's not a household name.  I mean other people were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well they were household names but they--
Speaker 1: I mean the last name was not household name when they popped up on the scene.
Speaker 2: Yeah they weren't names that one would encounter in dealing with black people.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: I suppose if I had to change it today I wouldn't have changed it, because I know more now.  I would not have had to change it; I wouldn't have had that in my mind.  I didn't have to change it then but I thought I wanted to get a fresh start.  I wouldn't change it today.
Speaker 1: Tell me this, this occurred to me as I was--that's why I asked you about acting lessons.  You have a real--you seem very relaxed as an actor, and very cool and mellow and dignified about how you approach it, as if it's nothing to it.  There is really nothing to it at all.  Was this your persona before--I mean you seem just as natural sitting here now talking about yourself as you do when you are acting.  Is it something that--were you like that before you took acting lessons?
Speaker 2: When I first started I was the most self-conscious guy in the world.  I couldn't figure out how to stand on a stage.  I had all these notions in my mind of how this is supposed to go and how that is supposed to go, and none of it worked.  I was getting nowhere with it, and I just had an aversion to being anything other than natural and I didn't--I wasn't really able to articulate much of that, until one day I told myself, "Well how much worse can you feel if you just act natural?  If you stop trying to be somebody or be something and just," and it wasn't until I told myself, hey this all I've got, I'm no more than what you see, I'm no less but I'm no more.  I should not have to pretend anything, and when I, when that came to be, I began to relax.
Story_ID: 295657
Speaker 1: We were talking about acting, yeah, and you were talking about your technique and how you finally relaxed (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah well I finally decided--well one thing I decided specifically was I don't have to be a great actor, I don't have to be a great singer, I don't have to be anything but what I want to be.  Now what is that?  Once I decided on that kind of approach I began to relax, and I began to accept whatever it was I was presenting.  It wasn't always as spectacular as I thought it could have been or needed to be in order to be discovered, but I was willing, for the sake of the long run, to wait until I had the strength and the courage to do what I wanted to do, and that time did not arrive until 'Benson.'  When I finally decided that I was strong enough, I had courage enough to be funny on my own terms.  I was determined that I was not going to do anything that wasn't funny to me.  So the whole character of Benson [DuBois] was built on my recreation of people I had known who could make you laugh, and they wouldn't crack a smile, and they didn't mean it necessarily funny, but it was funny coming from them.  My brother [James Edwards] was one of those people.  My brother used to tease me and my two sisters [Dolores Edwards Maclin and Cleo Edwards Ruffin] unmercifully, and when told to stop by my [maternal] grandmother [Jeannette Williams], he would feign total ignorance of everything, "What, I didn't do nothing?"  And he never cracked a smile (laughter).  But as I talk about him I smile because I can't say it like he said it.  "What, I didn't do nothing, what?"  "James, you leave those kids alone in there."  "But I ain't doing nothing, what did I do?"  And as soon as she was off his case he'd start right back, "Mommy you better make James stop."  "I ain't doing nothing to them," and several other people that I knew at the time, older people whom I knew were funny as hell but they never cracked a smile.  Their humor was not based on buffoonery what it was based on I don't know but there was a kind of deadpan approach to the humor that worked, and that's what I employed in 'Benson.'
Story_ID: 295658
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But it was a question of--I was trying desperately to find a way to do that character [Benson DuBois] without insulting every black person I knew 'cause I was wearing an apron.  It was important to me not to insult black people that's what was important to me.  I was fortunate that the character was written against type, but I had to use several models, my [maternal] grandmother being one, who was not a stupid woman, but people that she would go to work for would think of her of stupid, or not smart really, because she was black.  She never allowed that to occur.  She would go to work sometimes and the woman she would go to work for would be already at nine o'clock in the morning drunk, and trying to instruct my grandmother on how to wash the laundry, and my grandmother would stand back patiently as this woman undid her load, and rearranged what she'd put in the washing machine.  And my grandmother would say, "Now if you want me to do that, do the laundry, but two of us can't do it," letting the woman know that she was not to be micromanaged in that manner, but of course the woman would say, "No, Jeanette [Williams], don't--."  My grandmother would stand back, hands on hips and silently watch this woman.  But it was that kind of approach to the job that I thought might be funny, and then I happened on the idea 'cause I was always thinking about how in the hell do you that, I was always thinking about it and I came up with the notion that what people call a menial job was not really a menial job.  You could not have an idiot in this job, 'cause they would burn down your place.  They would do something stupid that you just couldn't have, so you had to have an intelligent person doing this job.  So I eventually came up with an attitude based on that notion, which allowed me to think in between the spaces in this part, otherwise I would have--I'd just been another model of 1936, you know Willie Best and Stepin Fetchit and that kind of thing and I was determined I wasn't going to go there, I was determined that just it gave me nightmares.  That I could not advance if I'm not going to advance this character, I don't want to do it.  I can't do it, and I thought I was deathly afraid of failure in that regard, but of course that was of no concern to anyone but me, as it should have been.  Fortunately I had had the courage at that time, I had built up enough courage to do what I wanted to do, and I wasn't swayed by anyone.
Story_ID: 295659
Speaker 1: I remember one time I was doing the audition, and the director said to me, and they're out in the audience just howling over my audition which you know that's a good idea, that sounds great.  So the director said to me, even while he was chuckling himself, he said, "Well make sure they know you're only kidding," and you know actors, we are suggestible, and you say and an actor tries to incorporate it in what he's doing.  So I said to myself, hmm, so the very next time we did that scene I tried to incorporate the idea that I was just kidding.  They stopped laughing.  I had the presence of mind to say, "That don't work."  The humor in this character is that he does mean everything he says, and that is what is funny.  "What are you doing, Benson [DuBois]?" "What does it look like I'm doing. Cooking, and it's eggs."  Well you know, eggs could kill mister, he can't eat eggs, hmm I see, and because when I tried to incorporate the idea, that I was just kidding, they stopped laughing.  The audition began to be a bust.  I went immediately back to, "What does it look like I'm doing? Cooking, and it's eggs."  "Now you people went into that dining room last week, and you threw food in there, now you're going to have to live with because I'm not coming back in there again till Thursday."  "Benson, I'd like for you to cook fish, no, I'd like for you to cook for dinner this evening Beef Wellington."  "Beef Wellington, are you out of your mind?"  I mean you can imagine a servant talking to the people who hired him this way, but I managed to get through it and be funny at the same time and not put you all back in.
Story_ID: 295660
Speaker 1: It was an interesting character [Benson DuBois].  Now we jumped way ahead, we were at 1960 and now we are--when did 'Benson' start?
Speaker 2: 'Benson' started in '77 [sic. 1979].
Speaker 1: Seventy-seven [1977] okay, and I think your first television role was around '69 [1969] or '70 [1970]?
Speaker 2: Seventy [1970].
Speaker 1: I don't know how true this is, but I've got a filmography that says 'Julia' was the first show, was that the first show that you appeared in?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, television show, but before that during the early '60s [1960s] you did pieces in New York [New York] with a whole group of black actors that later became famous.  You were in 'The Blacks[: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet], weren't you?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You weren't in 'The Blacks,' I thought you were in 'The Blacks.'
Speaker 2: No, I was nobody in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay so what did you do in--you were in some plays--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in some musicals and stuff like that from '60 [1960] to '77 [1977].  I was in New York seventeen years.
Speaker 1: And what got you--how did you get involved in television?
Speaker 2: The first thing I did on television I think was 'Julia,' as you say, and I had come out as a result of doing a show in New York called 'Jacques Brel is Alive and Well and Living in Paris' [Eric Blau and Mort Shuman], and that was a musical that I had done.  I had been very successful in, but I didn't originate the role so I never got any reviews in it, but I did that in several different cities and states.  From I think '68 [1968] to about '71 [1971].  I did it in Boston [Massachusetts], Chicago [Illinois], L.A. [Los Angeles, California], New York and I was very successful in that.
Speaker 1: Now what did your family think about you involved in the arts as an actor and a singer and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Well they could never figure out, why in the hell did they pick you.  My sister said to me one day, I kidded her a lot about it before she passed on, and she said to me, "I saw your show Rob [HistoryMaker Robert Guillaume]," and she looked at me suspiciously and said, "So what's the name of it, Bronson?"  I said, no it's 'Benson.'  "Well they call it Bronson here."  You know how your family is contentious and they don't really think you know what you're doing anyway, you're always kind of unruly and wanted to go your own way, and everything we tried to tell you to do you never did it.  She said, "Let me ask you something Rob, now don't get mad I know how you are, does this mean, and you've got this new show, does this mean you don't work at the post office [U.S. Postal Service] no more?"  I said, "No baby how could I work--."  "Well don't get mad at me, I don't know why you ever left the post office, you could have moved up."  I said, "Moved up where?"   She said, "Don't get mad at me."
Speaker 1: We're not supposed to laugh out loud so--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Boy but I mean it was real fun dealing with the family, 'cause they can't believe first of all that you can make any money at it.  "Why did they pick you?  You're just doing what you always did," well I said, "That's the art, Cleo [Edwards Ruffin]."  "What you mean art?"  That's the nature of the business to figure out how to look natural doing what you always did (laughter), if it's worth anything.
Story_ID: 295661
Speaker 1: And it was only after--I didn't discover anything until I discovered myself, through acting I discovered myself.
Speaker 2: What do you mean by that?
Speaker 1: By that I mean I began--the world that I'd always wanted to inhabit intellectually began to open up to me because then I figured out, "Oh you do have something to offer," because I wasn't interested in being a laborer.  In a sense that's what I was looking for in the [U.S.] Army, but the old man relieved me of that and said, "It ain't going to happen here boy, now one of us is going to have to go, who do you think that's going to be?"  He relieved me of any notion that it was possible to be a thinker in the Army.  Do what we tell you to do and that's the end of it.  But in the theater I found a way to be somebody or at least it--yes I did I found a way to be somebody and I needed that.  I remember a movie 'An Officer and a Gentleman' when Louis Gossett [HistoryMaker Louis Cameron Gossett, Jr.] and Richard Gere fought, and they had a knock-down, drag-out, and Louis finally bested him, and they were on the ground, and Louis said to him, "Why don't you just give up, get out of here."  "I'm going to recommend so and so."  He said, "Oh don't you do that," and he said, "Why?"  And he said, "'Cause I've got nowhere else to go."  I mean I can just feel he and the actors, the director and the actors trying to get that scene to that point, and Gere's response, "I've got nowhere else to go, dammit, don't you do that."  It touched me really and it was like that with me in show business.  I had nowhere else to go.  I'm either going to be in show business even as a nothing, 'cause I've got nowhere else to go and I found a place in it.
Speaker 2: That's interesting, a certain amount of I guess freedom in this within a structure that different from being in the Army (laughter) or working for the post office [U.S. Postal Service] or working for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh of course, yeah, but it's legitimate because it fit me.  I'm not recommending it for anyone else, and I'm not recommending for anyone else how I chose to do things.  It was important to me that I not set back the cause, whatever it was, of black people.  It was important to me that little black men like me gain some kind of recognition.  It was important, and that's what I always thought I was doing.  I would not set that back.  There may be some who say, "Well you didn't advance the cause," okay, that I'll accept but at least I didn't set it back.
Story_ID: 295662
Speaker 1: Well, the character of Benson [DuBois]--now you were in, just to follow up on chronology, I guess you were in a lot of television shows and guest roles of people doing various things until the role of Benson came along.  Wasn't 'Benson' like a spinoff of--
Speaker 2: 'Soap.'
Speaker 1: Yeah 'Soap' right, your character on 'Soap,' and then they spun off?
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact I liked the character of Benson on 'Soap' better than Benson on 'Benson,' it's a different character a little bit.
Speaker 1: Yeah I kind of--I agree I saw (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We sort of figured that since I was going to be the lead character I couldn't be so free swinging, whereas on 'Soap' I could say anything, do anything.  The episode on 'Soap' where everybody was sitting around listening to Bob [Campbell] the dummy discuss various people in a bad light, the dummy was saying anything he wanted, and he said something about Benson and Benson just went over and snatched the dummy out of Bob's hand and threw it out the window.  I mean that was the kind of thing you could as Benson on 'Soap' that I couldn't do as Benson on 'Benson,' if that makes any sense--if that difference makes any sense.
Speaker 1: As you were saying the character is unique in television and in comedy in a lot of ways because before that time, when you go back to the old days, comedy there was hardly a comedian that doesn't crack a smile and wasn't joking too.  Buster Keaton didn't crack a smile but he made funny things happen around him and get people to laugh.  Jack Benny was--everybody was laughing at him though he took himself perfectly seriously.  Everybody around him laughed but his character was always straight ahead, and people played off of that but the joke was on Jack Benny always.  But in your portrayal of Benson the joke was on everybody else and Benson was straight during the whole show.  It's an odd kind of--I'm trying to think of another show where that takes place and I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I've always thought of that character as being a creation of both the writer and myself, and me, and I've always thought of it rather ordinarily in the sense that well you've got to think of something and it's what makes the audience laugh, ultimately, that we're going after.  But I think any search would lead you away from something you'd seen thirty, forty years before at least me it would.  I would no more dream of doing a drawl in that persona, I wouldn't have gone there.  That's where I went away from it, and I thought well now they've written humor here, but where is it, and it wasn't always so detectable.
Story_ID: 295663
Speaker 1: It became detectable in Benson's [Benson DuBois] attitude.  I mean Benson would say outrageous stuff.  I remember one time and again in 'Soap' when Mrs. [Jessica] Tate had some of her girlfriends over and they wanted to look at a particular--what are the books that you have old photographs in?
Speaker 2: Albums?
Speaker 1: Album, they wanted to look at it, and Benson was always out of sorts.  "Benson, would you get that picture album?"  And Benson right on point would say, "What do you want to look at that stuff for, you're going to look at it and cry and I've got to wipe it up and clean it up and whatnot, why do you want to see that?"  That was funny to the audience and they'd say what the hell is he, why wouldn't he just go on and get the book?  Or Benson dusting, this is his idea of dusting, the doorbell rings, now it says on the sheet here Benson goes to the door and I was always thinking, well what happens if Benson doesn't go to the door and keeps dusting as if he doesn't hear the bell.  Ding ding, and he's not dusting he's just doing that (gestures), and so he--doorbell rings three times and he finally looks at Mrs. Tate and she's looking at him and he says, "You want me to get that?"  And she says, "If you don't mind," and Benson goes to the door mumbling, "I don't care, it ain't got nothing to do with me."  But it's that kind of thing that was not written but it fit the character.  And so we finally--we got a look into the personality, and I found that it resonated far beyond black people, it resonated with everybody who wanted to tell his boss at one time or another to go to hell.  No I'm not coming in tomorrow, it's my day off and a lot of people felt that way but they could never say it and Benson said it and that's what was interesting and funny about the guy.  No he would never last in a real household, but the average guy in a real household, you wouldn't put him on TV and pay him hundreds of thousands of dollars to do this.
Story_ID: 295664
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about 'Benson.'  Was there--what are the secrets of 'Benson'?  Benson--
Speaker 2: Benson [DuBois] was a real person, and he was modeled on a person who used to work for a very famous person in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] and he was like the majordomo of that house and he rounded up the kids in the house and made sure that there weren't smoking pot somewhere with their friends.  Benson would go and find them and tell them to get their butts home and that this evening is over, get out of here and get back to the house.  "Oh, Benson."  "Did you hear what I said?"  I mean he was a real person and he--the person who hired him to do this happened to be in Chicago [Illinois] and he was talking to another friend of his, and he said, "I need somebody at my house while I'm on the road.  I need a male presence at my house," and the guy told him I know a black man who is living in Florida who might just fill the bill for you and he said, "Yeah, well can you get him up here?"  Indeed Benson came up and the guy took--he asked him a couple of questions and so forth and so on, and they talked for a moment or two and he gave the keys to the house in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] to Benson and Benson came and took over.  And that's who the character was that I played.
Speaker 1: In the context, well in real life and maybe in the television show, is there a secret about Benson, 'cause I always thought when I saw the show I wonder who Benson really is I mean in terms of he seems smarter than his boss, he is better spoken than his boss (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well that's what I always said, that that's who you hire.  You don't hire somebody that dumber than you to do the job.  You always have to hire someone who has got some brains and that's who Benson was.  But the idea of working for someone in that capacity always carried with it this stigma that they're not very bright, well how can that be?  You wouldn't hire somebody who is not very bright to do that.  You'd have to hire someone who knew what to do.  It's like people look at short-order cooks and these fast food restaurants not in the Wendy's or the McDonald's or that sort of thing, but I'm talking about a place where the short order cook fills all these different requests from the customers and keeps all of the information precise.  This one wants ham with eggs, this one wants ham and boiled eggs, this one wants sausage, and he can go right down the line and do it just like that.  Well but you don't call him a chef, and yet he has a mind as good a chef, but that's the kind of thing I'm talking about that it's not an idiot who does this.
Story_ID: 295665
Speaker 1: On the show ['Benson'], did they ever reveal any secrets about Benson [DuBois], that he was, I don't know--about his educational background or what his interests were off camera or off duty?
Speaker 2: Yeah we went into that on 'Benson.'  He had his own apartment and he was a--if he hadn't been black, would we have ever thought anything about him, no, I doubt it.  If he had a smart mouth and hadn't been black would it have been of any significance, not much, but you put the two ideas together and they are against type, and that's what became funny.  We had several episodes--we had one episode in which a kid, six or seven, was entertaining the little girl next door one afternoon, and she began to choke on something and he called his mother, and when his mother got in the room he was giving the Heimlich maneuver, his version of it.  He said, "That's okay mommy don't do it, I know how to do it, I saw them do it on 'Benson,'" and he was giving her the Heimlich maneuver and she was frantically calling 911 'cause the little girl was turning blue but he finally popped it out and he claimed that it was because he had seen it on 'Benson.'  Well we had indeed done a show ['Lifesaver'] in which we were talking about Heimlich maneuver and we demonstrated it and that sort of thing.
Story_ID: 295666
Speaker 1: That was one episode we had [on 'Benson'], and another episode ["No Sad Songs"] we had, was my mother was played by Beah Richards and she had come over to cook me something and she talked of being tired and she went out of the room and went into the living room.  She didn't even come back, or went into one of the back rooms, and didn't come back for a long time and Benson [DuBois] finally went in wondering where she was, and indeed she had died.  The episode ended there with Benson talking to God.  Well one time I was crossing--coming back from New York [New York] on a transcontinental flight and I noticed--I was sitting in first class and I noticed someone came out of coach and came up to the magazine rack in first class and every time he would go back he'd shoot me a look.  It was two or three times he did that before I became aware that he was doing that and so finally he came up, went to the rack and started toward me and it was then that I noticed that he was what you would typically call a redneck.  Looked like somebody from Georgia or from the South or something like that.  So he comes back and heads for my seat, and I'm sitting on the aisle, and he kneels down at the seat and he said, "You that boy play on 'Benson' ain't you?"  I decided to forgo an investigation of the term boy in favor of hearing what he had to say.  I said, "Yes," and he said, "Nice to meet you," and I said, "Nice to meet you too."  He said, "I don't want to take up none of your time but you did this show on your show, that show called 'Benson'--he said you all did a show one week where your mother died," and he said, "my mother died under similar circumstances."  This is a man who looked to be about fifty or so, stocky.  He said, "My mother died under similar circumstances and I never was able, excuse me, to reconcile her death until I saw y'all's episode," and he said, "I just want to thank you for doing that show."  Man it broke my heart, 'cause when I think of it, I think of my prejudice, and all the shit that I've been through and that this man had been affected by something that we'd done and he was not ashamed to say it or not hung up saying it.  He said, "I never got my mother's death together until I saw y'all's episode, and I just wanted to thank you."  I can't tell that story without those tears; I can't tell that story without understanding something about the power of television and our ability to affect people.
Speaker 2: So you considered television not just a form of entertainment but a responsibility to communicate to people on some level?
Speaker 1: I guess so, I don't want to get highfalutin about it but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But it is a tool, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah but we seldom think of it that way, that it has that kind of power--
Speaker 2: Well, on the show--
Speaker 1: --to bridge gaps between people.
Story_ID: 295667
Speaker 1: Now on the show ['Benson'] you were able to--not everybody is interested in doing this but you were able to manipulate your character, to add to the script.  And is that--do you find when you talk to some of your colleagues in television that they have the same ability or interests in changing the image and improving (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I must say that I don't find many people who care that much about it, or at least they never talked to me about it.  I just think I'm an old dyed-in-the-wool progressive, who can only express his progressivism and liberal political instincts through what I thought needed to be done with that character, and I was lucky to be able to do it.  I thank God that I was able in that sense to do it.  I mean I've talked to many people, particularly black men, who were in love with that character, because they perceived something that I didn't perceive, and that was that Benson [DuBois] didn't take no shit, and I used to argue with them that isn't what I trying to say.  I was simply trying to say that Benson was a man among men, and in that regard had to hold his own, and had to understand that there was as much dignity in his pursuit as anyone else's.  He didn't have to be a man of letters in order to have dignity.  But in that regard I wasn't trying to play dignity, I was trying to play my own sense of truth.  I'd never seen anybody--I had seldom seen a black man sell out in his personality.  I had seldom seen that, and I would not have known what to do with it had I seen it.  But of course I was lucky I was born in a certain time when and in place--in a certain place where that did not take place that much.  I don't know whether that makes sense (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah that makes some sense.
Speaker 2: Not much though huh?
Speaker 1: That makes sense.  You mentioned Beah Richards, I think I didn't see that episode ["No Sad Songs"] but gee whiz, it seems like if I had to pick a TV mother for you that's who I would probably pick for the character.  How was she chosen?  Was she chosen by the regular way, or did you have any input in it?
Speaker 2: No I didn't, I tried never to have input into who was chosen to do this that or the other.
Speaker 1: Well she seemed to be the perfect choice.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I didn't want to exercise any prejudices I may have had.  I mean it's one area that I always really tried to stay out of.  I wasn't always happy afterward that I hadn't exercised more muscle to get this one in and that one in.  But at the same time I never tried to influence who they would hire to do one thing or another.
Speaker 1: Now did they give Benson a girlfriend on the show at any point?
Speaker 2: I think I did.  I think I had one, I think Roz Cash [Rosalind Cash] was one of my girlfriends, and I think Beverly Todd was one, but there I don't think I was as successful as I would have liked to have been.  I really wasn't all that effective in that regard.  I wish I had been more so.
Story_ID: 295668
Speaker 1: How many years did 'Benson' run?
Speaker 2: Seven.
Speaker 1: Seven years, okay.
Speaker 2: Two years on 'Soap,' nine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And if I hadn't been so ambitious after the run of 'Benson' was over, if I hadn't been so ambitious to show another black man, I could have gone on as Benson [DuBois] I believe for another at least four or five years, and I wish I had done that, but there again my vision wasn't of sufficient length.
Speaker 1: So you just kind of got tired of it?
Speaker 2: Well no I didn't get tired, I didn't know there was something about television that I really didn't understand and it was that the audience simply would not accept you as somebody else.  To me there was the need to be somebody else.  I wasn't tired of Benson, but it just didn't occur to me at the time to really prolong that character, call him somebody else but it's the same character, it didn't occur to me.  Not saying that I am necessarily right but I think I would have been righter in that regard than I was in what I did choose to do.  I thought I was going--after Benson I got another show called 'The Robert Guillaume Show,' and I thought here's a chance for me to show another black man in a different guise, but it didn't work for any number of reasons.
Speaker 1: Now who did you play in 'The Robert Guillaume Show'?
Speaker 2: I played a guy by the name of Sawyer, Dr. [Edward] Sawyer and for one reason or another, I mean I--not to make a long story short, too late (laughter), it didn't work.
Story_ID: 295669
Speaker 1: Do you have any other favorite roles, I mean in movies or television?
Speaker 2: I guess my favorite role, I guess my favorite role was Purlie [Victorious Judson].  I understood something about that, I liked him.  I thought--once again I thought that I could play something that made some sociological sense.  I was always thinking of something that would enhance if I were a black man coming through this society.  I was always trying to think of something that would enhance his way.  I was always trying to make him more legitimate, because I thought that in many ways black men of my type had been short changed.  They had been told they were stupid, dumb, ignorant, lazy, incapable of complicated thought, and I always trying to give the lie to that.  And there was something about it in terms of television that I really didn't understand.  I was always trying to take an audience somewhere else.  I was always trying to do what I could to get them out of their prejudice and notions about who other people were, and I always tried to make sure that my relationships, in any show that I was doing, was based on equality.  But of course these were ideas that people said, "Who cares, is it funny, no that's not funny."
Speaker 1: People care, there are people that do (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah there are people who care but I don't think that TV is the cauldron that can be boiled in.
Speaker 1: It's in there but somebody will strain it out.
Speaker 2: Well I don't think it will happen through sitcom.  The kind of thing that I wanted to happen I don't think was going to occur in sitcom, because you see I've always seen race as one of the extreme follies of man and especially America, because they put so much faith in it, and yet it's the weakest foundation on which you can build anything.  But I was always talking to people who thought that race was immutable, and had to be dealt with on this kind of terms and no other.  I always saw that race is very, very funny if you're not afraid, but if you were afraid, you're going to make a botch of it.  You're going to make a mess of it or you're going to do something gross that ultimately, please get it out of here, it stinks to high heaven.  I always thought that race was worthy of high satire, but of course satire is what closes in New York [New York] on Saturday night.
Story_ID: 295670
Speaker 1: There's one satirical TV show--cable, a movie made for cable TV I guess that you were in called 'Cosmic Slop,' I think it was, with three episodes, three short stories (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) "Space Traders."
Speaker 1: Yeah '[The] Space Traders' by Derrick Bell [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.], and that kind of satirized race in America any thoughts on that one?  You were the lead in it and it seemed as though to me as I watched it that your character could have easily been a flat kind of Uncle Tom-ish character or something like that but it wasn't.  It seemed like a man thinking about what he was doing and trying to protect his family.  It was more complicated that it could have been.
Speaker 2: Well maybe, but that's one of the problems.  The only time that my idea of sociology, in terms of race I was ever successful with it, was on 'Benson' because it wasn't identified as having that, but the fact that I took it where I took it, and I was allowed to take it there by the producers and the writer, and that sort of thing, that was the only time I've been successful with it, 'cause other times it just--I'd run into people who were just scared to death of race.  And they didn't see how stupid we were as people and I always saw that.
Story_ID: 295671
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: That we would have a different concept of ourselves, that we would open up our minds and eyes and finally realize that our one shortcoming is that we cannot think for ourselves.  We are much behind the curve, always behind the curve, and we cannot think for ourselves.  I mean, when I say that I mean right or wrong, we are afraid to step out and say this is what I believe and I don't believe this over here because of that.  If it's not popular we cannot adopt it, and I think that's because for years we just were not able to think for ourselves.  I mean literally--I mean it's always been if he thinks this and he's in charge that's what I'll think, and my hope is that we can overcome that.  Now certain people are afraid that that will lead to some kind anarchy or something and I say well so be it.  I'm not an anarchist or a person who wants anarchy but I realize that the thing is bigger than us, but I would like to be a part of a change for black people.  I would like for us finally to address our needs in terms of what we think our needs are and not what someone tells us our needs are and what we ought to be in favor of, et cetera.
Story_ID: 295672
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything that you've done up to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I think for the ambition that I had, I wish I had had a longer reach.  I've often looked at myself and said, "You arrogant bastard you, who do you think you are?"  Whatever caused me to say that, I wish I'd been more of that.  I wish I had been more secure in my notion of what had to be done or what should be done, or what I'd like to do.  I wish I had been--I wish quite frankly that I'd had higher goals than simply standing in front of a camera and doing whatever I do, although I think I'm lucky to have gotten as far as I did with as much as I did, but I realized when I did the 'The Robert Guillaume Show,' that I was not really prepared to fight my way through at a higher level.  I really didn't know what was required.  I thought if I had a good idea, everyone would recognize it, which was a measure of my arrogance I suppose, but I wish that I had really been hip to the idea that we have not all lived the same kinds of experiences.  What you may think of as essential and necessary, I mean, I could take a look at it and just not consider it at all, that didn't occur to me.  I thought good ideas were good ideas and that's the end of it you don't need to further explain them.
Speaker 1: Now if you could do whatever you wanted to do at this point is there like a dream project that you would undertake?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  If I were to do films, I suppose I would choose material that had some aspect of race in them, because I think those are some of the greatest stories ever told or ever lived.  Very few of them have been told.  I mean America's ability to do one thing or another, they've always foundered on race and it's because we haven't been strong enough as a people to confront it.  We've thought that race is much like religion you don't talk about it.  Well unfortunately, you have to talk about it, and because we have not talked about it, it is still with us, and we've wasted a large part of our inheritance on that thing we stubbed our toe on: race.
Story_ID: 295673
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point what would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Thank God we had somebody who thought he knew what the hell he was talking about, I don't know.  My legacy, I don't know that my comments on that idea would be all that flattering, and it might tip over into hubris, you know my comments.  I really don't know.
Story_ID: 295674
Speaker 1: Now is there anything that we have not asked you that you want to discuss or talk about before I ask you the last question we have?
Speaker 2: Well, as I see it one of the things that I did in my career was one of the things that I came into this business to try to do, and that was a role called '[The] Phantom of the Opera.'  I came into this business thinking that I'd once loved to get a role in which all my talents as I saw them could be used, and I could acquit myself reasonably well.  'Phantom of the Opera' was that role and I had an enormous amount of fun with that role.  I played it for eight months down at the (unclear)--a theater downtown--I've forgotten the name of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, but it was downtown Los Angeles [California]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Ahmanson [Theatre, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Ahmanson Theatre.
Story_ID: 295675
Speaker 1: The last question we ask is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a person who despite his flaws and failings tried to think for himself.  Who went for it, as it were, against all odds.  I remember when I was younger coming through New York [New York] and the plays and things I did, I remember auditioning for Sportin' Life in 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin], and I remember that most people made it quite clear to me that I was nobody's idea of Sportin' Life.  I wasn't their idea of anyone who had ever played the role.  I was, but I just didn't have the talent.  They made it quite clear to me that whatever I was thinking while auditioning at and rehearsing that part, why would you do that, that's not Sportin' Life, et cetera et cetera.  You don't know how to do this and I remember thinking that well, if this is not it, I'm the one they've entrusted to and this will have to do until the real thing comes along.  I remember that the people who were criticizing me as not being a proper choice for the role, their intention was to stop me and to stop me through--they would have not have said it at the time, but to hurt me, to humiliate me may be a strong word, but.  I remember almost every role that I went up for and especially when I was trying out for leads and stuff like that, and they would say, "He's not Purlie [Victorious Judson], he doesn't know what he's doing, he's nobody's idea of this, come on let's get real."
Story_ID: 295676
Speaker 1: I had a point and I've forgotten it, please can you refresh my memory on what the question was (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we were--the question was how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 1: Oh, I said that I would like to be remembered as someone who thought for himself.
Speaker 2: Right, and persevered I guess despite--
Speaker 1: Yeah, and, no just thought for himself but it was that something in me that kept pushing me forward and I don't think in an unnatural or arrogant way, but just that I had every right to do what I was doing, and if someone didn't want me, I'd leave under my own power.  You'd get no fight out of me saying, well we don't want you to do it we thought about it, and we don't want you to do it anymore, 'cause I have jobs taken away from me 'cause I couldn't do them sufficiently well and I readily admit that and those were painful times when that happened.  But I'd like to be known as someone who despite all of that moved ahead, and kept going back for the audition until somebody finally said, "Oh my God here comes that guy again don't you have anything out in the Midwest for him to do, no we don't.  I'm going to leave the room until he leaves."  "Without a--." "Next!"  And I kept coming back knocking on that door because I firmly believed in the idea that somebody's going to say, "Can you give him a job, get him out of here he's embarrassing me, I can't--how do you do Mr. Guillaume [HistoryMaker Robert Guillaume] it's so nice to see you.  You have anything you want to sing for us today?"  "I'd like to sing 'Without a Song.'"  "Didn't you sing that for us last week?"  "Yes but you didn't hear it all."  "Okay go on ahead."  (Singing) "Without a--"  "Next!"  I kept coming back, that's what I'd like to be known for.
Story_ID: 295677
Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't ask you about your family today.  You have some children involved in music, too, don't you?
Speaker 2: Yeah I have a son, Kevin [Guillaume], he's involved in music, and my son Jacques [Guillaume], who we lost in 1990 as I was finishing up Phantom ['The Phantom of the Opera'], he contracted AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], and I have a daughter who lives--I have a daughter, Pat [Patricia Carpenter], who was my first child, who lives in Springfield, Illinois and she is now retired as a social worker.  I have a daughter, Melissa [Guillaume], who wants to be in the business and has every right to be, she's extremely talented, a good singer, and I have a younger daughter, sixteen, her name is Rachel [Guillaume].  She is one of the loveliest people I know, and that's it.
