Story_ID: 635632
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers archive.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing is Tommy Hooper [Thomas Hooper].  Ma'am, could you please spell your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My first name is Aja, A-J-A.  Middle name Richarna, R-I-C-H-A-R-N-A.  Last name Graydon, G-R-A-Y-D-O-N [HistoryMaker Aja Graydon].
Speaker 1: All right now, is there a story behind your name?
Speaker 2: Yes, (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My parents, my father is a history buff, and my father wanted to name me, I mean, it's actually really embarrassing but, I'm gonna tell it.  My father wanted to name me if I was a girl, he wanted to name me Sojourner.  And, if I was boy, he wanted to name me Toussaint L'Ouverture (laughter).  It's terrible.  But, my mother [Susan Knox Graydon] wasn't really that excited about those names.  But, couldn't think of anything better or extravagant or anything like that that could match these names that he came up with.  Until my parents received a gift, a record by Steely Dan, which was named 'Aja.'  And, my mother thought it was a really beautiful name and so my parents decided to go with Aja.  So, I was named after a record.
Speaker 1: Okay.  By Steely Dan.
Speaker 2: Steely Dan.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, is there any, is there a story behind--
Speaker 2: My middle name?
Speaker 1: Richarna?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My father's name is Richard [Richard Graydon] (laughter).  And, they couldn't come up with anything better (laughter).  So, Richard, Richarna.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born September 25, 1978, at Cedars-Sinai hospital [Cedars-Sinai Medical Center] in Los Angeles, California.  My parents wanted to move to the West Coast.  They're East Coast babies all day, from Washington, D.C., both of 'em.  And, just wanted a new adventure.  My mother moved and my father followed her.  And, they got married out there and I was born, conceived and born in Los Angeles.  But, they moved back to Washington, D.C. to be near family before I even turned a year old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a singer/songwriter.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is May the 22nd, 2012.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at the offices of the Media Shack, which is, my husband [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler] and I, we own a production company.
Story_ID: 635633
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up.  And, they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, what is it?
Speaker 2: Cake.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Chocolate cake (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).  All shades of green.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Africa (laughter).
Speaker 1: And, the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Oh, so many.  But, I think probably the one that people hear the most is probably goodness goodnight.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind that?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  It's probably just something country that I started saying that I just can't stop saying, when I get shocked or irritated: goodness goodnight.
Story_ID: 635634
Speaker 1: Well I'm gonna ask about your family history now.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family, and your father's [Richard Graydon] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Keep 'em separate and then we'll bring them together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Susan, S-U-S-A-N, Yvonne, Y-V-O-N-N-E, Knox, K-N-O-X, Graydon [Susan Knox Graydon].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is June 29, 1949.  And, she was born in, in, I wanna say it was San Antonio, Texas on a, on a [U.S.] military base.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was it [U.S.] Air Force base, or?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  My, my grandfather was in the military.  She was born in military--it may have been Austin [Texas].  I can actually get some confirmation on that (laughter).  But, it was in Texas.  I know for sure it was Texas, and she was born on a military base.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It was [U.S.] Army though rather than--?
Speaker 2: Army, not Air Force.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  All right.  Now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side?  I mean, how far back can you trace them?  And, what occupations and what things were they doing in history?
Speaker 2: Well, the only--as far back as I know is probably my great-grandfather and my great-grandmother.  My great-grandmother and my great-grandfather had ten children in total.  What I do know about them is actually very little about what they did for a living.  But, they did live in rural Virginia.  And, my grandmother lived in a household where some of her siblings were not of her mother.  But, her mother took on her siblings, who were, like her half-brothers and sisters.  About half of them were actually not her mother's children.  And, she raised them because they were biracial and at the time, it was very difficult for them to be accepted within the society they lived in.  And, so, she decided that it would probably be easier for her to raise them as her own.  So, as a result, my grandmother is not quite sure about how old she is because they basically had to lie on records about how old the children were so it would seem as if they had the same mother.  So, she knows probably within one to two years.  But, there really isn't a lot of that.  So, there wasn't really an official record of her birth.  And--
Speaker 1: This is your grandmother?
Speaker 2: My grandmother.
Speaker 1: And, what was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: My grandmother's name is Susie Brent [Susie Brent Gaskins].  And, it's Susie.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: Oh, S-U-S-I-E.
Speaker 1: Her last name?
Speaker 2: Brent, B-R-E-N-T.
Speaker 1: B-R-E-N-T.  All right.  Okay.  And, so, she was born in Virginia?
Speaker 2: In Virginia.
Speaker 1: Do you know what town?
Speaker 2: I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't.
Speaker 1: Is it rural?
Speaker 2: Rural Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Farm area.  She had a really tough upbringing.  She met my grandfather when she was very young, and married.  And, began having children when she was in her late teens.
Speaker 1: Now, when do you, do you have a guess of, as about when she was born?
Speaker 2: Well, it's our understanding that she's about eighty-four.  So, let me see, if I can do that math (laughter).
Speaker 1: Like 1926?
Speaker 2: Around that time.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I guess, yeah, I guess so.
Speaker 2: I do wish I had known we were gonna--my mother knows all of this (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, so, I take it your grandmother at some point, you said she got married early.
Speaker 2: Very early.  She was in her late teens, probably seventeen, eighteen years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, now, when did she move to D.C. [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: I'm assuming my grandfather moved her there.  And, some of her other brothers and sisters moved there, my Aunt Helen [Helen Brent Ally] and my Aunt Anne [Anne Brent Smith].  So, it was about her and her sisters and maybe one of her brothers moved from Virginia, and they settled in Southeast D.C.
Story_ID: 635635
Speaker 1: Now, what about your [maternal] grandfather?
Speaker 2: My grandfather actually was--that's an interesting story.  I have two grandfathers.  My grandfather [William Knox], whose name my family carries, is not actually my mother's father.  The story is that my fa- my grandfather whose name we carry is actually adopted.  And, so, his name, our family name, isn't even his name.  He was adopted by a family.  His mother was a teacher and gave him away for adoption and he was raised in a foster family.  He went into the [U.S.] military and married my grandmother very young.  And, they had, on record, eight children together.  My grandmother married very young and really I assume was not in love.  And, my grandfather travelled a lot and I guess as some men have their exploits and moments within marriage.  And, my grandmother had children whose births were questioned.  And, (laughter), later on in life my mother [Susan Knox Graydon] came to know her real father who my mother found out, she was a product of an affair.  Which this is actually documented information.  My grandfather actually took out an ad in the Jet magazine about their divorce in, like a social page.  So, this is actually something you can Google.  It names my real grandfather who is Rudy Morris, Rudolph Morris [ph.] and my grandmother Susie Gaskins--I mean, Susie Knox [Susie Brent Gaskins] at the time, and talks about that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, who--what did Rudy Morris do?
Speaker 2: Rudy Morris was a historian and a photographer, and he worked for the school district, and he was artist.  He taught art to students.  And, I guess, if my mother had known this all the time, she would've definitely seen the connection 'cause my mother is an artist as well.  She paints.  She's very creative.  This grandfather definitely makes more sense to be connected to me because my grandfather who I've known most of my life is a military man.  He's all about education.  He has various degrees.  He's a very straightforward man when you meet him.  Well, when you would have met him.  He, he passed away last year.  But, so, I'd always felt a little bit separated from this personality.  But, when I found out about my actual blood grandfather, his story definitely rang more true to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So is, so is your, your grandfather, Rudy Morris still alive?
Speaker 2: He's not.  He passed away when I was two, of cancer.  And, he was living in California at the time.
Story_ID: 635636
Speaker 1: Your mother [Susan Knox Graydon] grew up in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] I take it, then, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  She did.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh. And, now, did she have a chance to finish high school and go to college or anything?
Speaker 2: My mother finished high school.  She graduated from Spingarn High School [Joel Elias Spingarn High School] in Washington, D.C.  And, she did not go to college but she had a very promising, you know, talent.  But, she decided to stay and work for the government, which a lot of African Americans in Washington, D.C., that's kind of like a very common thing, you know, government jobs are very plentiful.  And, so people tend to get those jobs and move up in the ranks with that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, she worked for the government.  And, what, what did she do?  What agency did she work?
Speaker 2: She worked in several different parts of government.  She worked for the [U.S.] Senate most of my early growing up.  And, then she went on to work for several attorneys that worked on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.].  One of those attorneys was Ron Brown.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The former secretary of commerce, who--
Speaker 2: Right, Ron Brown.
Speaker 1: --died in a plane crash.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Interesting story about Ron Brown in connection with my mother was that he--my mother was one of very few African American secretaries that worked in the office.  And, she definitely there was a separation between the women who worked in the office at the time.  There was a lot of very visual segregation that happened in the office where lots of the--and this is kind of common I guess in the '80s [1980s], where you had lots of secretarial staff that was right in front when people would come into the offices.  And, they would place a lot of the white or very light skinned secretaries to the front and the black, African American or darker skinned black women to the back of the office.  And, so, the women would talk about this a lot and he was, you know, the only person that really would kind of speak out about, you know, make comment about it.  And, so, that's kind of how she ended up connecting to him and just speaking to him.  She didn't work for him.  And, so, he asked her about her children and about, you know, what her--her life and everything.  And, we were involved in theater arts, my sister and I were involved in music and things like that.  And, a program came up where she had to pay tuition and she couldn't afford it.  And, she didn't know how she was gonna do that.  So, she figured, I'm working in this office with all these rich attorneys maybe one of them would wanna do some charity or something like that.  And, so she decided to write a letter.  She wrote a letter and gave it to Ron Brown and he paid for a whole year of tuition--year worth of tuition for my sister and I to attend this performing arts program.  And, that was the first kind of organized entertainment type of thing I did in my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what school was you all attending?  Was it--?
Speaker 2: It was program called the Children's Urban Arts Ensemble, CUE.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Children's Urban Arts Ensemble.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, we'll probably get to that later 'cause I probably got a lot of questions about that.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But, okay, now, did you mother have a aspiration growing up that she wanted to achieve that she?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She wanted to be an artist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She wanted to paint.  That was like a big thing.  My mother still paints.  She draws, she paints; she's very artistic.  I have my mother's work hanging in my house.
Story_ID: 635637
Speaker 1: Did she have any stories about growing up that she shared with you that--
Speaker 2: Oh, lots.  My mother [Susan Knox Graydon] grew up in a household with eight children.  So (laughter), there was always a lot of stories to be told about growing up, and fun and, you know, shenanigans and all kinds of things that they got into.  But, my mother was, you know, my mother was a Washingtonian to the core.  I mean, my mother grew up during all of the times and the changes that happened within the city.  I mean, she witnessed the riots, and the March on Washington, and my mother was, you know, a person who roller skated at Kalorama [National Arena Roller Rink, Washington, D.C.].  And, you know, went to see people perform at the Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.], and you know, she just was, she was a D.C. girl through and through.  So, she has that story.  So, growing up in Washington, D.C. all the things that happened in D.C. in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] are all things that my mother talked about growing up.  But, more than anything she just has a real similar story to a lot of people.  They didn't really know they were poor.  They enjoyed living together and, and having fun.  She lived in a very small house, shared a room with her two sisters [Jackie Knox Brown and Lorraine Gaskins Ray] and, you know, just had a really, you know, basic kind of upbringing.  The only thing was obviously there was quite a bit of scandal once she got older.  But, she had a father who was in the [U.S.] military, who wasn't really around a lot.  When they divorced their life changed.  My, my mother, my grandmother [Susie Brent Gaskins] remarried [to Lorenzo Gaskins] and so they definitely had a nicer life.  So, she remembers that change, and.  But, mostly, she tells me about growing up in Southeast D.C. when the streets weren't paved yet and it was still red clay.  And, it still felt like country.  And, just watching things change and remember how the neighborhoods in D.C. were very much self-contained because of segregation.  And, remembering what it was like to not be able to go downtown, you know, and you know, not shop there.  And, was shopping specifically in our neighborhood and how that changed, and, how the neighborhoods changed after that when you could go downtown.  And, watching the stores, and department stores close down, and the doctors, and the people who lived within the community leave, and watching the community pretty much change.  I did an archive for the Smithsonian in Anacostia [Anacostia Neighborhood Museum; Anacostia Community Museum, Washington, D.C.] 'cause I guess I'm one of the few people from D.C., I guess, within the entertainment industry that actually grew up in Southeast, Anacostia area.  And, that, that neighborhood is very indicative of what happened to Washington, D.C.  I mean, that, that's an area that was so devastated by the change of, of integration.  And, watching people pretty much just exit in a neighborhood that was beautiful, that, that has the home of Frederick Douglass there, just become a war zone.  So, my mother had a lot of pleasant memories of growing up, and it definitely didn't mirror the same neighborhoods when--by the time I came up.
Story_ID: 635638
Speaker 1: Let me go to your, your father's side.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name is Richard, R-I-C-H-A-R-D, Burris, B-U-R-R-I-S, Graydon, G-R-A-Y-D-O-N [Richard Graydon].
Speaker 1: And, what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth is October 18, 1943.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And, where was he born?
Speaker 2: In New York [New York].
Speaker 1: New York City?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Harlem or Brooklyn, or?
Speaker 2: I--Long Island, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay, now, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: I know that my dad says that our ancestors are Blackfoot Indian [Native American].  And, that, and that they, and there is slave blood.  But, it's West Indian slave blood.  That's all that I really know.  I mean, that's what was shared with me.
Speaker 1: So, Blackfoot Indian and West Indian.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, did he describe what a Blackfoot Indian is?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  It's just a word I heard growing up (laughter).  And, and truth be told, you know, I've heard a lot of African Americans say that they had Native American blood.  But, I've watched programs about it and the reality is that probably less than 4 percent of African Americans who went through the slavery system have Native American blood in them.  So, I'm not sure how accurate it is.  But, as a child growing up, I've heard this a million times.  Our family is Blackfoot Indian, our family is Blackfoot Indian.  So, that's what I know.
Speaker 1: This just a throw out for whoever is watching this.  An Indian said that a Blackfoot Indian is supposed to be a, the baby of an Indian and a black person that they, you know [sic.].  So, it's not really a tribe, it's just a--
Speaker 2: Well, exactly, so I didn't know that.  That's just, like I said, that's--I'm happy to know that that's what that means and I can pass it on to my family, 'cause I have no idea.  It's not--and the funny thing is that over the years I have never heard anyone speak about it.  You know, in terms of, I've heard lots of tribe names, I've read a lot of stuff.  I've never heard it come up.  So, I, I reluctantly even shared it with you just because I know how you get family folklore and you know.
Speaker 1: Well, this is about the stories, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It doesn't have to necessarily be true.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, it's what the family says.  So, he says that, 90 percent of the families we interview say they have Indian blood or about, roughly.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, but, you know, as you said 4 percent actually have it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Actually, they were saying, I say this on one of those shows about specifically genealogy and African Americans and people tracing their heritage back, actually, to Africa.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, were there any stories that your father talked--was his family, is there another, I would think there is another origin then for his family, a couple places.  Probably places down south where the Indians supposedly were (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) North Carolina.
Speaker 1: North Carolina, okay.  So, was his mother or father from North Carolina?
Speaker 2: His mother was from North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: His father was from New York.
Speaker 1: And, then somebody was from the West Indies too.  One side--
Speaker 2: I'm assuming that it's his father's family that's from the West Indies, just simply because of the geography of it all.  Many West Indians kind of settled within the New York area.  So, I'm assuming that that was more than likely his father's side of the family.
Speaker 1: Would it be Jamaica?  Or, do you, is there any--?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  I know there is a story that goes through my family that many of our family members were indentured servants and that they weren't actually slaves.  And, that they came to the West Indies as indentured servants.  So, that's about the extent of what I know about the West Indies in terms of my dad's family.
Story_ID: 635639
Speaker 1: Now did you know your father's grandpar- I mean, his parents?
Speaker 2: I didn't.  I know my--well, I knew my father's mother.  She died when I was eight years old.  So, yeah, I did know her.  But, my father's father died when he was three.  And, from what I know about him is that he was a musician.   And, that's all I know.  My (laughter), my grandmother on my father's side, her name is Bessie, Bessie McVay [ph.].  And, she was a big woman, and she was tough (laughter).  And, she really was a great cook.  But, she was very tough.  And, she didn't really mess around with anybody.  And, she had two loves; my father and her dog (laughter).  She loved all her kids but she--that was family where there was a clear favorite.  And, because my dad was the clear favorite then I, I also got the benefit of being the child of the clear favorite.  So, my, my grandmother kept me next to her a lot.  She cooked me separate food from everybody else.  She would make chicken and she would make greens and all these things.  But, she would make a whole other batch of chicken that was just mine.  Nobody could touch it or eat it.  So, she was very particular and she was very tough and people didn't mess around with her, and (laughter) I do remember that.  She, like I say, she's very particular and she had--she wore wigs.  And, she was the only woman that I knew who wore wigs or that I had seen, or I knew wore wigs.  And, she had like four wigs.  And, all her wigs would be set up on the side.  And, I remember they used to scare me.  She had a bed that was so big it barely fit into her room.  'Cause she had this little country house that was in Southeast D.C. [Washington, D.C.] which literally that you would tell the house had been there before, you know, all the kind of major construction of, you know, the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] and stuff like that.  So, the house was very old.  And, so, her bedroom was very small.  So, the bed almost took up the whole room.  And, I remember she would let me lie there and watch TV, and I was one of the few grandchildren could go in her room and do as I pleased.  And, she was, she spoiled me a lot and she was actually the first death that really remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You were eight you said--
Speaker 2: Eight.
Speaker 1: --when she passed?  Okay.  And, she was raised in, was she raised in North Carolina, is that?
Speaker 2: Far as I know, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 635640
Speaker 1: Did your father [Richard Graydon] have any stories about growing up in--now, did he grow up in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] or Long Island [New York]?  Okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my father's story is--yeah, he grew up in D.C.
Speaker 1: He grew up in D.C., okay.
Speaker 2: My father's stories about growing up were a lot (laughter), were a lot rougher.  You know, my dad was kind of a thug.  And, his brothers were thugs and that's kind of what they did, and they hustled a lot.  And, so, my dad has pictures of himself and, you know, shark skin suits and hats, and you know, looking slick and even smoking cigarettes since he was twelve or thirteen.  And, he just has a kind of a tougher story.  My mother's story was a little bit more, you know, family oriented and the whole thing where my dad's story is a bit more street.  Him and his brothers just, they were tough guys and they were respected.  And, my older uncle, his older brother, my Uncle Butch [ph.] is--was always a guy who was somewhat feared in the streets.  And, my dad kind of was more of a lover not a fighter.  So, he liked women and, you know, he kind of more was a hustle guy.  And, you know, he, kind of you know, he definitely finished high school.  And--
Speaker 1: Now where, where did he finish?
Speaker 2: I think, you know, I, really I don't know.  I know that he went to sch- high school in D.C.  I don't remember what high school he went to.  I wanna say, if it was Southeast or North- I'm really not sure.  But, I know he did.  Both my parents.  But, he did go to high school and everything but he just, he got into everything (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, he ended up going to jail and for, I guess, which was the crime of the '70s [1970s] I suppose, bank robbery.  And, he has an inter- well, this more of him as a young man less--more than him growing up.  The one thing I do remember him telling me about when he was little boy, was that they were immaculate children.  That my grandmother was very particular about the way they looked, about how they did things.  Everything was immaculate.  And, my mother [Susan Knox Graydon] too, the same thing.  So, I guess that's more just like a old school mother type thing.  But, when he became a young man, like I said, he just became kind of a thug and ended up going to jail.  And, he was, I believe, the person who drove the getaway car.  And so, he didn't get as much time as the others.  And, he was really intelligent.  So, he was able to get his sentence shortened by writing letters to help other prisoners apply for parole or try to get parole.  And, so he tried to help them by writing the letters for them because a lot of them were illiterate or couldn't write well.  And, he started out doing that and got his sentence reduced and he moved from maximum security to minimum security.  And, then he got on some sort of work release program and came up with a business plan.  It was like in October where he was, decided he was gonna sell these pumpkins and (laughter)--.  So, he got these other guy who were on work release to also sell them.  So, he like, created this business and got this money together.  And, because he just had shown all this initiative he was kind of released of his own recognizance or something like that, as far as I know, if that's the word, the proper word.  But, he, it was, the story goes somehow that by him working and writing these letters and doing all this stuff in jail, he was able to get his sentence reduced twice, and then ended up on work release and then parole.  So, he was a smart guy.  Just, he really is a classic story of a kid whose energy just wasn't probably used properly, you know.  And, he did come out and go to college.  He got a few semesters in of school.
Speaker 1: Now, where did he go?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: He went to, it was called, it was called, at the time--it turned into University of--UDC [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.].  But, before it was call DC, it was called Federal City College.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, he went to Federal City.  He got a few years in there.
Speaker 1: So, that's now UDC?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's now UDC.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 635641
Speaker 1: And, then he went into being, oddly enough, a guidance counselor at trade schools (laughter).  I'm sorry, it cracks me up when I think about it.  My dad [Richard Graydon] is just, he can make a way.  He's a guy who just can make his way through life.  He doesn't really, you know, he--you can drop him in the middle of the desert with a rubber band and stick of gum and, (laughter) you know, he'll meet you back in South Philly [South Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, so, that's what he did for a living, is a guidance counselor?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  At trade schools.  Like in the--you know, early on in the '80s [1980s] when, you know, people would go to like these tech schools instead of going to college or, you know, he was a counselor and helped job placement and stuff like that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And, you said he was into history and he wanted to name you Sojourner Truth?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  My dad likes history.  My dad gave, first book my father ever gave me was 'The Autobiography of Malcolm X' [Malcom X and Alex Haley].  And, then he gave me another book called, 'Stokely Speaks' ['Stokely Speaks: From Black Power to Pan-Africanism,' Kwame Ture] which ironically was a person who my fa- who my husband, my future husband [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler] grew up around.  So, it was just interesting that that was one of the first books I read, and that I ended up, you know, marrying my husband who was somewhat connect to him.
Speaker 2: To Stokely Carmichael?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Or, Kwame Ture as he's called.
Speaker 1: Kwame Ture.  They, his family was a part of the same community in Atlanta [Georgia].  So, Imam Jamil [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin], and all those people were a part of that same community.
Story_ID: 635642
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Yes.  (Laughter) My parents met while my mother [Susan Knox Graydon] was waiting in a restaurant for someone else.  And, I told you my dad [Richard Graydon] is a man who wants what he wants (laughter).  And, so he talked, and talked and talked, and took advantage of the other guy's lateness.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Did the other guy, so the other guy made it but too--?
Speaker 2: He made it but it was too late (laughter).  It was too late.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when did they get married?
Speaker 2: My parents got married June 17th (laughter), I wann--I was born in '78 [1978], I think 1977.  I know it was the 17th of June.  Probably about a year before I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, there's a story about your mother going to California or something and your father following her.  That's what you were saying (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: What happened there?  Is this--was she trying to get away from him or what?
Speaker 2: No.  She went to California because early on in her adulthood is when she found out about her birth father [Rudolph Morris (ph.)] and he lived in California.  It was a very emotional thing for her to reveal to her mother [Susie Brent Gaskins] that she knew about it.  And, just trying to make sense of it all.  And, she was just coming into her womanhood.  And, she, you know, hadn't gone to college.  She was just, you know, my sister, I have an older sister, she already had my sister.  So, she was a young single mother and just going through it.  And, really just wanted t- a new environment.  She just happened to meet my father around the time where she would, right before she decided to make the move.  And, they were early in their relationship and he just loved her and didn't want her to go.  And, she went, as my mother would do.  And, he said, "Well, you know what?  I'm moving too."  So, he packed his stuff up and gave up his apartment and moved (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, that's dramatic.
Speaker 2: That's dramatic (laughter).
Speaker 1: And, that shows that he really was dedicated and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He loved her.  He loved her.  Well, my parents' marriage was a mess.  It really was.  But, one thing about them two is that they are both really passionate people and they're both really smart.  And, I think my parents were just victims I think--not victims but they were products of the '70s [1970s] in every way that you can image.  From, you know, from drugs, from, you know, just the onset of single parenthood, you know.  A lot of my friends who were born in the '70s [1970s], they were born to single mothers.  And, they just, my parents were kind of the poster child for this dysfunction of the time.  And, so, they had a lot of great things about them and I--and, probably had a lot of potential of being a great couple.  But, all the things that, that were going on around them, you know, I think were probably gonna add to that, you know.  There was a lot of, what do you call it, casual drug use.  So, my father got very much caught up in that.  You know, people felt like they could just party and get up and go to work, and people did it all the time.  But, it just didn't add into having a healthy home life and being a husband and a father and all of those different things.  And, my dad just was a street guy, was a street kid.  He felt he could beat it, he could rock it.  And, he just couldn't.  My mother couldn't take it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, they split up--?
Speaker 2: They split up when I was little, after they moved back to D.C. [Washington, D.C.].  They split up, I was probably about five.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, they married in 1977?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They split up around 1982?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, and you have an older sister?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, any other brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My father has other children.  I have two other sisters and a brother from my father.  And, my mother has just another older child, my sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Tasha [ph.].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: That's the sister I grew up in the same household with and, you know, have all of the growing up memories and everything with.
Story_ID: 635643
Speaker 1: Now, when you th- consider your parents' personalities and their dispositions and their, their habits, their interests, their looks--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --their mannerisms, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Wow.  I think I am a total mixture of the two of them.  I'm literally half and half, you know.  I think I have my father's charisma and personality in terms of my dad [Richard Graydon] can totally fit into any environment.  But, I know I have my mother's compassion.  My mother [Susan Knox Graydon] is the most compassionate person.  She probably doesn't even have limits to it.  So, it's probably compassionate to a fault.  My dad is, you know, just a person who--both my parents I feel are talented and artistic.  But, my mother is extremely artistic, so I feel like I get that from her.  But, my dad has confidence and he--you can rarely shake his confidence, and I have that.  So, it's just lots of different things I see about myself with my parents in terms of who they are as people and what they gave me.  I can be a bit of a procrastinator.  My mother is a terrible procrastinator (laughter).  When I was kid, I had a difficult time with the truth.  I had this thing where I didn't always like, if I didn't like what was happening the life--in my life at the moment with my family, I just would make something up.  And, that was something that my mother saw early, and she said, "Look," (laughter) "you wanna be proud of whatever going on in your life, no matter if it's something sad, or something happy, it's what's meant to happen."  So, my dad, I found that my father was that person too.  He really, if he was unhappy with something or didn't like the way things were going, he would just lie.  And, so, I realized I never wanted to kind of be like that.  So, once my mother kind of made the correlation but without saying it in a hurtful way, and pointed out to me, I remember being little and thinking, okay.  Let's be okay with the truth.  So, that was one thing I would say I probably fought in life in terms of being like my dad.  But, my father is just a brilliant guy and just--it's interesting because growing up I just was like, "I don't want to marry anyone like my dad."  Just 'cause he couldn't keep his marriage together, and he wasn't really very faithful.  And, so, that was like a big deal to me.  "I don't wanna marry anyone like my dad.  I don't wanna marry anybody like my dad."  Although, I will say that some of the best things about my father are in my husband [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler], you know, some of the best things.  That sense of survival and the confidence; that is all my dad.  Like, so, I got lucky 'cause everything that I love about my father, I see it manifest in myself and I see it manifest in the person that I love, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: That's a great explanation.
Story_ID: 635644
Speaker 1: When you were growing up it's basically, after the early period of time, it was just your mother [Susan Knox Graydon] and your, you, and your older sister and you--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in the household?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the majority of my life was that.  My mom and me and my older sister.  So, we had a very typical, single parent upbringing.  You know, you struggled sometimes, and we had cut off notices and we, you know, had you know, very little.  But, my mother worked two jobs.  I saw my mother in the morning and there was just a lot of that for a long time, for a long time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now that I'm an adult, I see my mother even went through some depression when we were kids that I didn't recognize 'til I got older.  But, because she just was so thorough about the way she handled things, she, you know, we still functioned through it.
Speaker 1: So, you're older sister is Tasha [ph.], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, my sister was like a little mom.  She--my sister is seven years older than I am.  So, she was able to babysit, cook, clean, all those kinds of things.  And, so, I was probably a little less self-sufficient than a person, than a lot of people because just so much was done for me.  But, my mother was really particular about things being done and, you know, really us, you know, coming together.  But, she was extremely honest with us, you know, about money, and she never tried to make a situation seem like it was something it wasn't.  I had friends whose mothers were struggling but would like get a second job just to buy them brand name sneakers and never tell them that that was why.  My mother always said, "Look, this is what we have.  This is how we're gonna split it up.  If there's anything left, we'll do something."  She was very always up front.
Story_ID: 635645
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Ooh.  My earliest childhood memory.  My earliest childhood memory is probably a story somebody told me.  I probably don't even really remember it.  But, I remember living in an apartment complex called Marbury Plaza, which is still standing in Southeast D.C. [Washington, D.C.].  And, I remember playing on the playground out there and being very little.  I know I must've been maybe two or three years old.
Story_ID: 635646
Speaker 1: What were, can you describe the neighborhood you lived in, and what, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.  In our house, and we had a couple, we moved a lot, so we had a couple different places.  But, my earliest memory of living somewhere with my parents [Susan Knox Graydon and Richard Graydon], our house had this crazy, ugly, '70s [1970s] furniture that was just horrible (laughter).  And, it had this big rocking chair that looked like a Barcalounger with a rocking chair bottom.  And, it was horribly ugly.  But, I remember it was soft and it felt really good.  And, my parents had this 8-track system and we weren't allowed to touch it.  And, when we were kids, they used to have this thing called the Mr. Yuk campaign.  Where it was this little green stickers that your parents were supposed to stick on, like, ammonia.  And, stuff you weren't supposed to touch.  And, it's like everywhere you saw the green Mr. Yuk, you don't touch things.  And, I remember my parents put the Mr. Yuk sticker on the 8-track tape player (laughter).  And, they also had one on their bedroom door, on their bedroom doorknob.  So, I remember my parents had a Mr. Yuk sticker on their bedroom doorknob.  Which know, let's me know as a grown up that my parents were still getting it in, which is scary and gross.  But, (laughter), I was like, but it was, though, I remember that we had, that my dad when we were young, that my father used to take us sledding and we never had a sled.  My dad would, we would break down these paper cardboard boxes and we would go sledding on the cardboard boxes.  And, he was a master sledder.  Like my dad could get this running start and he would be running so fast and he would jump on there.  And, just chest first, boom, and he'd be going like the speed of light down there.  And, he was like a huge kid.  He loved doing this.  And, we used to just have a lot of fun when we were kids, you know.  My dad used to make pancakes.  But, he learned how to make 'em from his brother.  And, they're like the perfect pancakes.  They're always really light and fluffy and just perfect.  And, just growing up always smelled like incense.  I remember the smell of incense always make me think of my growing up.  My parents were artistic, '70s [1970s] parents, you know, that just was, music.  My father had lots of records.  So, we listened to Malcolm X speeches and Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and Miles Davis.  And, my dad's favorite song was 'Moody's Mood for Love,' and he sang it to my mother all the time.  So, it was like, I just remember that song being sung in my house.
Speaker 1: This is, is it 'Moody's Mood for Love'?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: James Moody, or?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, Chuck Brown and the Soul Searchers did a version of the song, and it's a huge classic in D.C. [Washington, D.C.].  And, when Chuck passed away earlier this week, I just blasted 'Moody's Mood for Love' in my house.
Speaker 1: How does it go?  Can you hum a little bit of it for us?
Speaker 2: (Singing) "There I go, there I go, there I go.  Baby, you are the soul that snaps my control.  Funny thing but every time I'm near you I never can behave."  So, I'm sorry if I sing it, I'ma cry a little bit, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. That's so beautiful.  Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Thank you.  Thank you.  James Moody the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --'Moody's Mood for Love.'  Okay.  All right.  All right.  So, yeah, so he, he was, he liked jazz and he liked speeches, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Loved jazz a lot.
Story_ID: 635647
Speaker 1: Was you father [Richard Graydon] associated with any of the social--I mean, the Pan-African organizations or cultural organizations in town?
Speaker 2: You know, yes, and no.  I mean, like I said, my dad was a guy who respected it and liked it a lot but he wasn't an activist, you know what I mean.  He just was too street for that (laughter), you know.  But, my dad just always just loved it and respected it.  I mean, he had a lot of respect for that and we were, we were expected to know it, you know.  We were expected to know that information and so we were, it was given to us, you know, we were supposed to know it.  And, my--but, my dad just really, and my mother [Susan Knox Graydon] both, just really wanted us to love who we were.  And, so, it wasn't a thing where they were super involved in it.  It was just about us kids.  Just knowing who we were and just being proud of that, 'cause we had all of it.  Redd Foxx records and all that stuff too.  We had all of it in my house.  And, and then, we--my, my parents also were big hand dancers.  I know this is like not exactly what you were asking me.  But, hand dancing is like Chicago stepping.  And, my parents were just really deep within D.C. [Washington, D.C.] culture.  My dad is a fantastic hand dancer, so is my mother; fantastic dancer.  And, so, a lot of that all molded together at that time, you know what I mean.  It just was all about loving yourself and really letting your kids know about their culture whatever way it came.  So, no, he wasn't really like a Black Panther [Black Panther Party] or anything like that.  But, he had friends who were.  We knew people who were.  People came in and out of our house all the time.
Speaker 1: Did you attend the black bookstores and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, see, I grew up in D.C., there wasn't nothing but black bookstores (laughter).  I mean, you know, I didn't know what it was to go in a store and somebody follow you around or dealing with any kind of institutionalized racism that was outside of a book until I left D.C.  The--it's like growing up in a bubble.  When you grow up in D.C. you, you know blacks, black politicians, you know black doctors, you knew black lawyers, you knew a black dentist, you knew a black trash man, you knew a black, you know.  It wasn't that there was some things that were for the--there was black elite, there was black middle class, there was black working class, there was black poor.  There was--everybody just s- was the gambit.  When I went other places, I realized that for a lot of other people, African American community is really relegated to the working class and the poor, and a lot of other places you go.  Whereas, I didn't grow up like that.  So, it was, you know, the concept of, "Oh, come support this 'cause it's," (gesture), "black owned."  Well, we didn't know what that meant.  Everything was black owned.  So, it was like (laughter), you know, well what, well why is it special here, you know?  So, so, you know, yeah, we frequented a lot of places, and restaurants, and--
Speaker 1: So, this is an era, the era that you grew up, Washington, D.C. was 80 percent black.
Speaker 2: Eighty-five.
Speaker 1: Eighty-five, okay.
Speaker 2: You know--
Speaker 1: I stand corrected.  That's--
Speaker 2: You know--
Speaker 1: This is Chocolate City?
Speaker 2: Chocolate City.  Which--no more. We don't even, African Americans do not even represent, probably represent, at this point, just at maybe 50 [percent] now.  I read an article about it just a week ago.  And, but, yeah, at that time, yes, very much so.  It had earned its right to be called Chocolate City because it just was.  And, we didn't think anything about it.  Because it just was what it was.  It was just home.  And, then you just didn't realize it 'til you went someplace else and thought, oh, okay.  Maybe it's different someplace else, you know.  So, yeah, I didn't, I didn't understand that part of it.  But, I was glad that my parents made me read things and I knew things.  Because when--it prepared me for later when I did leave home.  And, you know, how to just kind of ingest life being black someplace other than D.C.
Story_ID: 635648
Speaker 1: I was asking you about sights and sounds and smells.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did we finish that?
Speaker 2: Sights and sounds and smells, well, yeah.  Everything, like I said, music is everywhere; that was the sound.  The smell was just, my--like I said, is that, that smell that I'm sure everybody knows, is that your parents in your home just has a smell that is, its own thing.  Like, even to this day, if I go through boxes in my mother's [Susan Knox Graydon] own stuff and I pick it out, and it's just like, and it comes right back to me.  It's some mixture of incense and Kool cigarettes and (laughter), my dad [Richard Graydon] smoked Kools and, you know, and, I don't know, perfume, and just whatever it was that was in our house, you know.  My mother's cooking.  And, just everything to me that's the, just the smell of happiness for me, you know, or my childhood--the happiest part of my childhood, you know.
Story_ID: 635649
Speaker 1: Was there anything, how, I guess, is, is Southeast D.C. [Washington, D.C.] seen different from Northwest D.C., in, in a sense?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess, yes and no.  I mean, you have your, your things that you remember most about Southeast, I guess.  To me, I've lived in Northeast as well.  I lived all kind of, pretty much all over the city at some point or another.  But, southeast to me just always felt like a city, in and of itself, because it's across the bridge, you know.  There's, there's Southeast that's on the side of where the Capitol [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.] and everything is, and that's Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] which is technically Southeast.  But, most Washingtonians don't consider that like Southeast.  It doesn't start of get Southeast 'til you cross the bridge, you know.   And, because you're on the other side of the water, it just seem like its own little country (laughter).   And, so, that was what I felt made Southeast different.  But, in the late '80s [1980s] and early '90s [1990s] all of D.C. was a war zone.  It didn't matter where you were.  I didn't have it's, you know, the only thing that made it different was just how many young kids getting murdered.  It was just bad, you know what I mean.  So, it--the beautiful things about those areas where people frequented, you know, Southeast had--my mother [Susan Knox Graydon] up in Northwest was Kalorama skating rink [National Arena Roller Rink, Washington, D.C.] and Southeast had Crystal Skate [Washington, D.C.] and the places where the go gos were.  And, you had the Black Hole [Washington, D.C.], and you had, you know, all of these different places.  And, Ibex [Washington, D.C.] and places where they were having the go gos.  And, you know, when we were kids we went to go gos at the private schools way uptown.  And, so, every, every area had cool stuff, you know.  And, when we did the thing for Anacostia for the Smithsonian [Anacostia Neighborhood Museum; Anacostia Community Museum, Washington, D.C.], they talked about the big chair ['Chair'].  It's this area where there's like a minimart, there's a big chair, it's an art installation.  And, that's where I went to the dentist was at the big chair.  Everybody knows about the big chair.  And, so, Morton's [Morton's Department Store] which was like Forman Mills [Forman Mills, Inc.] here.  It was like a cheap department store.  And, so, yeah, we had like lots of stuff that, that set it apart.  But, the problem was, like I said, by the time the '80s [1980s] got there, so much stuff was just going away, shutting down.  And, if it was still open, it was just crazy dangerous.
Story_ID: 635650
Speaker 1: Where did you start school?
Speaker 2: I started school in Head Start, government, school district program that allowed kids to get free preschool.  And, you had to be, I don't know if you still have to be interviewed for it.  But, at the time, you had to interview to get in.  And, my mother [Susan Knox Graydon] always tells a story about how the lady asked me, "Why did I wanna go to school?"  And, I told her, because I needed, I needed to learn how to read.  And, I started school there and I went to elementary school at Robert Brent Elementary School on 3rd [Street] and D [Street] Southeast on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] (laughter).  And--
Speaker 1: Robert Brent?
Speaker 2: Robert Brent Elementary School.  It's still there.  And, my principal's name was Dr. Plummer [Frances Plummer].
Speaker 1: Okay.  What do you remember about Dr. Plummer?
Speaker 2: She was serious.  Like, you didn't mess around with her.  But, she was the classiest, most put together woman.  She--her suits were always super crisp.  Her hair was always perfect.  Makeup perfect.  And, she just was regal.  When she came into the room, it was like, you know, all the air came out because everyone was just holding their breath because she just held and command that kind of respect by just walking in the room.  I did a show many, many years later for the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] and for a big convention for the AKAs.  And, I performed and sang and had just a ball.  And, Dr. Plummer stood up after my show and walked up to the front and, and it was like I was nine.  It was crazy.  I was like, "Wow, she's the same person."  But, yeah, she was amazing.  And, I was taught at a school where there was all women.  I was taught by all women teachers.  Not that that's unusual, 'cause most teachers are women still to this day.  But, I grew up in an environment where there was all African American women taught me, from kindergarten to sixth grade.  And, they had master's degrees and they were just beautiful women.  I mean, I remember each one of them and what they gave me and who they were so specifically.  My kindergarten's teacher's name was, was Ms. Tillman [ph.].  And, she wore a different flower in her hair every day.  And, I thought she was just gorgeous.  And, she always matched her clothing to a T, and she was so caring and loving.  And, she--it made me realize later on that you do have to have a special personality to be a kindergarten teacher.  Kindergarten teachers are just loving, open, sweet people.  They just have--you have to be a certain person to teach that grade.  My first grade teacher's name was Ms. Harper [ph.].  And, she had a really great laugh, and she smiled a lot.  And, she would do my hair over, 'cause my mother would tie my hair too tight and it would be pulled so tight that it would hurt my head.  And, then she would redo my hair every day.  And, never told my mom about it, 'cause I think she thought she might hurt her feelings or that she might be upset about it.  'Cause women are funny about their children.  And, black women are real funny about their children's hair.  So, (laughter) she just, would just do it and just not say anything, and she was really sweet.  And, that was when my reading went from just kind of basic, I could read, and in her class I just to like third grade reading in her class.  From first to like, boom, I could read like crazy.
Story_ID: 635651
Speaker 1: Ms. Greene [ph.] was my second grade teacher.  And, she literally had gray hair that was so gray it almost looked green.  But, she was tall and brown skinned.  And, she--I loved her because I was tall and she used to always tell me to stop slouching.  I was the tallest person in class and I was always at the end.  And, she made me stop slouching.  Ms. Dudley [ph.], third grade; mean as a snake.  Don't mess with her (laughter).  But, she was like a mother, and she would beat you (laughter).  She would beat you.  She didn't care.  She was like, "Look, if you're in here, you're mine.  And, if you act out, you getting a beating."  Fourth grade was, oh gosh, why can't I remember her name?  I'll remember it later, but bottom line was, she was gorgeous and young and my father [Richard Graydon] had a big crush on her (laughter).  Fifth grade was Miss Mayo [ph.], and she had a master's degree and she was--could speak three languages.  And, she wore this crazy wig that was never on right.  But, she was so smart, you could tell.  She always had tons of books in her class.  She had so many books in her class that you didn't even have to go to the library to study for reports.  She just was super smart and she was a person who saw in me that I could be an intellectual.  She always really encouraged me to write.  And, she is a person who got me into private school [Maret School, Washington, D.C.] 'cause she didn't want me to go to a public junior high school.  So, she wrote a letter and recommended me to a private school that I went to after sixth grade.  And, sixth grade was Ms. Thomas [ph.].  And, Ms. Thomas is the one who gave me my reality check.  She was like, "Look, I know you smart, and I know that you're talented but you've been getting a cakewalk and I'm gonna be hard on you."  And, she graded me very tough.
Speaker 2: Now, is this at the private school?
Speaker 1: Nope.  This was elementary school.
Speaker 2: Still (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Public elementary school.
Speaker 2: Still at Robert Brent?
Speaker 1: Robert Brent.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: Sixth grade; Ms. Thomas was my last teacher there.  And, she whipped my butt into shape.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, this is something.  This is--we rarely get this.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Remember every teacher and a description of them.
Speaker 1: She was awesome.  I'll never forget that.  It's defining moment of my life, really; those women.  And, then there's Michelle Johnson [ph.] who wasn't my teacher.  She was the head of CUE.  You asked me about CUE earlier.  I was trying to tell you about CUE earlier, Children's Urban Arts Ensemble; Michelle Johnson.
Story_ID: 635652
Speaker 1: CUE, just the letter Q?
Speaker 2: C-U-E, Children's Urban Arts, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, C-U-E.  Oh, I--like that, I see; Children's Urban Arts.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: CUE, C-U-E.  Now, is this a, this is a school program then that--?
Speaker 2: This wasn't a school program.  She [Michelle Johnson (ph.)] wasn't a teacher.  She was actually a friend of the family who was a school teacher.  But, she realized there was no arts and theatre in the schools.  So, she started out with a theatre company that was associated with the school that she worked at.  But, then she opened it up to citywide, to students.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, in CUE, now what did you do in CUE?
Speaker 2: Oh, everything.  We did lots of musical theatre.  We learned about mostly African American musicals and stuff like that.  Because this is the stuff that we as kids just didn't get to know about.  She took a whole group of kids, I was too young for this, but my sister went, a whole group of kids up to see the original cast of 'The Wiz' and 'Dreamgirls' and stuff like that.  And, we redid a lot of plays and made up our ending.  And, she wrote some of our plays herself.  And, we learned to sing and dance.  We got voice training, dance training, theatre, all of that.
Speaker 1: So, you saw the Broadway production of 'The Wiz' and 'Dreamgirls'?
Speaker 2: I didn't.  But, she did bring children to do that.  I was kind of young at the time.  When 'Dreamgirls' came out I must've been, I was pretty young.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  You were about nine that year.  Well, it was out earlier than that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, I was kind of young.  So, I don't reme- I didn't go.  My sister went though.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: But, it was a big deal, you know.  We did those productions over ourselves.  And, I knew the words to all of the songs and everything which I find has just come full circle for me 'cause tonight I'm gonna go see my son be in 'The Wiz' and, that was like one of the first things--
Speaker 1: So, did, so what were the production that you did when you were a student?  You said, 'The Wiz' is one, right?
Speaker 2: 'The Wiz' was one.  We did 'Purlie' [Ossie Davis, Philip Rose and Peter Udell].  We did--what's--'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry].  We did 'Dreamgirls.'  Those the ones I can remember the most.
Speaker 1: So, you all did 'Dreamgirls' in the CUE?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The older kids mostly did it.  And, then when I was little, we did like chorus stuff.  And, then we did 'A Chorus Line.'  We did 'A Chorus Line.'  And, I was in that.  Now, I was like ni- of course, I was just in the big number at the end (laughter).  But, these were, we were little kids up to teenagers up to young adults.  So, there was a lot of wide range of ages.  We also did some original stuff like things, takes on like, tales and fables and stuff like that.  We did lots of stuff like that, and that was more geared toward the younger kids.  And, but, I also was involved in another program through the school district [District of Columbia Public Schools] called, the gifted and talented program where we had a teacher named Ms. Swinton [ph.] who taught us about Shakespeare [William Shakespeare].  And, that was a big deal for me 'cause we went in competition in that for several years.  For about three or four years.  From about fourth grade to sixth grade.  And, no, about--probably more like third to sixth.  And--
Speaker 1: You had to do a Shakespeare play or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was in several of 'em, excerpts and you know, monologues.  We did 'Hamlet' [William Shakespeare].  I, I played Hamlet once.  We did 'Hamlet,' 'The Taming of the Shrew' [William Shakespeare], 'The Tempest' [William Shakespeare], 'Macbeth' [William Shakespeare].  We did do another thing called Odyssey of the Mind which, they still do that here I think, where we had to come up with these, solve these creative problems and stuff like that.  We did a lot of stuff as kids under a lot of the programs that were out then that helped to feed that creativity.  But, I really liked Shakespeare.  I really, really got it.  I dug it.  I still do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Sounds like you were, sound like you were really active in grade school--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --doing creative things. Now, did you like to draw and paint too?  Did you like art?
Speaker 2: I liked art.  I, I didn't really get to explore art as much until I got to private school [Maret School, Washington, D.C.] because the art program in private school is way better (laughter).  So, I was able to do things like pa- like, beyond papier mache, you know.  We could work with tiles and we did sculptures and we did all kinds of different things within art that exposed us to a lot more.  So, yeah, I mean, I enjoyed that too.  But, it wasn't--that was mostly my mother's [Susan Knox Graydon] thing.
Story_ID: 635653
Speaker 1: Your last grade was the sixth grade at Robert Brent [Robert Brent Elementary School, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, now, what school were you on your way to, what?
Speaker 2: I went to the Maret School, M-A-R-E-T.  And, it was a small kind of a private school.  It went from K to twelve [kindergarten through twelfth grade].  Had a nice little campus up in Northwest D.C. [Washington, D.C.], in really the richest part of the ar- of the, of the city.
Speaker 1: Now, give us a background on the school.  Who, do you know who started it and how they--or, I mean, or why it was started and what it--?
Speaker 2: Why the school was started, I'm really not sure.  But, originally this school only had like, when you, when you would go down the hallway and look at the pictures originally, I think the original class of this school was maybe about ten people.
Speaker 1: About when was that?  When was--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And that was like maybe in the early 1900s.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  So, it goes all the way back to the turn of the century.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I believe so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, is this an integrated school?  Like a--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  It got integrated at, you know, somewhere in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: All right.  And, so, did you have to pay tuition?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I mean, I went there on a scholarship, partial.  And, but, it was prob- something a little, a little over two thirds of my tuition was taken care of.  But, my mother [Susan Knox Graydon] still had to struggle to come up with the last little bit.  But, it was a hard transition for me; very difficult.  I had a very hard time there.  I liked it, but, I had never been in an environment what was basically 85 percent white.  I was in an environment where, the few black students that were there, weren't there on scholarship.  So, not only was I one of few black kids, I was one of few poor kids (laughter).  So, I had a classism and a racism issue (laughter).  So, it was just hard for me.  I had, as you can see, I had such a really emotional connection to my teachers and my environment.  That, looking back on it, I just think, leaving the kind of warmth of that really was traumatic for me.  And, the environment there was just so open, there was really no structure.  I mean, there was structure, but it was really free.  And, I wasn't used to that either.  I probably shouldn't've been trusted with that much freedom (laughter).  The teachers, you could call the teachers by their first names and it was just something I had never even experienced in my life.  I probably just wasn't mature enough to really, to really, you know, make the best out of it.  And, I was there on academic scholarship.  So, I don't really think that my presence there was really important to the school.  So, that was just one of those situations where they probably didn't press me as much. If I had maybe played volleyball or basketball or something, then maybe there would've been a reason to, you know, press me to do my work or, you know, stay on top of things.  But, I just think I just had a really rough time.
Story_ID: 635654
Speaker 1: My English class specifically, we, we--the first book we read was 'Lilies of the Field' ['The Lilies of the Field,' William Edmund Barrett].  And, we had to watch the movie.  And, I just had issues with the imagery and it bothered me, and, I was young so I wasn't, you know, as respectful of Sidney Poitier, I guess, as I should've been at the time.  To me it looked like, "Why is, why are we watching this movie with this singing, smiling, black man and these--?" (Laughter) It just bothered me.  I came from an environment where my dad [Richard Graydon] really exposed me to a lot of literature about stereotypes and about African Americans and certain kind of respect.  And, I just was bothered by watching it, in a room, full of kids who I didn't really think got it.  Who laughed when he sang, and it, it angered me.  And, I got in trouble a lot, you know, with, with that teacher.  And, I didn't under- and then we were reading material that I couldn't relate to, and I had to write about it.  And, I remember having to write a paper about a book called, 'The Chocolate War' [Robert Cormier] where these kids, these, these students in this private school were rebelling against the, the, rebelling against the administration about selling this chocolate.  And, I just couldn't understand why they were upset.  I just was like, "You're rich, you go to private school, like, why are you upset?  This is ridiculous."  And, I just couldn't understand the whole concept of this book and it just made me feel like an outcast all the time.  Until they did the school play (laughter).  And, they were doing 'West Side Story' [Arthur Laurents].  And, I was just like, "Yes!  A musical" (laughter).  And, I was like, "Okay.  I'm down with this."  So, I went and I did my audition and I blew everybody away.  And, they were so excited.  And, I was like, "Mom, they were doing music, and da da da da da," and I was so excited and came home and then they posted the, you know, who made the play.  And, it was like I was in the chorus and it just killed me.  I was like, I think that's when I just, I just shut off after that.  I think after that I was just like, "Man, this is crazy."  I said, "How do you do a play about a bunch of brown people, and," (laughter), "the person who's singing all the songs is blonde."  Like, this didn't make any sense to me, you know.  And, at the time, obviously, these kids were older and probably had been in a couple of plays prior.  But, they just didn't have, to me, any of the oomph, that I felt like should've been there.  And, I knew that I could sing better than them.  And, it just bothered me.  And, of course, it was probably because they were really more, they were just more experienced at working in that environment, truth be told.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: So, you're at the Maret School and they did 'West Side Story' and put you in chorus.
Speaker 2: Put me in the chorus.
Speaker 1: And, so, what year is this?  Now, you're like--?
Speaker 2: This is probably 1990.
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety [1990], okay.
Speaker 2: Ninety [1990] or '91 [1991], one of those two.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, I mean, like I said, I mean, I was a kid.  So, obviously, you know, I, I was, you know, felt I was unjustly placed into the chorus.  When it was just probably because it was my first time auditioning.  And, I was upset.  But, I think I checked out after that (laughter).  I thought it was my one chance at glory and, you know, and I just felt a little bit smashed, so.  Seventh grade was a bust and I just, my grades weren't up to par, so my experience at Maret just was one year.  And, then my mother moved, my mother decided to move us out to northern Virginia, right outside of the city, the city limits, and we were there for two years.
Story_ID: 635655
Speaker 1: So, you moved to northern Virginia.  This is about 1991, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, what part of northern Virginia?
Speaker 2: Alexandria [Virginia].
Speaker 1: Alexandria, okay.  And, where did you go to school there?
Speaker 2: Hammond Junior High School [Francis C. Hammond Junior High School; Francis C. Hammond Middle School, Alexandria, Virginia].  Hammond is actually somewhat famous, to an extent.  Because it was like a sister school to T.C. Williams [T.C. Williams High School, Alexandria, Virginia] at the time, which is, they did a big movie about it, 'Remember the Titans.'
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Was about that school system and that district at the time.  I mean, not at the time I was there, but in the beginning of T.C. Williams and their big football legacy there, but.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, all right, so Hammond Junior High School.  So--
Speaker 2: Yep.  I went to Hammond.  And, I think I probably found my stride there.  Really kind of multicultural school, outside of D.C. [Washington, D.C.], kind of a new environment, just was happy there.  Got a chance to do music.  Got a chance to, you know, make new friends, and do that whole thing.  So, I think I just got more comfortable in my own skin.  Probably an environment that really lent itself to me doing a lot better.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any particular teachers that stand out there?
Speaker 2: Probably the principal.  Oddly enough, I don't really remember his name.  But, he was a fairly young man and probably the first male teacher that I felt like made a big influence on me.  And, he was, he wasn't a teacher, he was the principal.  But, he was very encouraging and just the fact in seeing him be so young, and he was probably in his thirties, and, really have control over the school and just knowing everybody's name.  And, just, it was a good environment for me.  I think he's probably the person, the standout person there for me who just told me that things would be okay.  And, you know, obviously, being a teenager and going through all of those different things and, you know, changes and coming into the knowing of certain things.  When you're little, you know, your parents are going through stuff.  But, when you become a teenager, you start to really see the story.  It comes together for you.  So, I think probably for me, being a teenager was just tough.  Just living with the absence of my father [Richard Graydon], and coming into liking boys and changing and being tall and looking a lot like a woman, and I had that issue too (laughter).  And, but, still being a child and just kind of managing my way through that.  But, that was really the time when I just decided I really wanted to sing.  And, my mom [Susan Knox Graydon] just was never scared of it.  And, I think that's probably what made me really happy, was my mother never heard the words, "I wanna be a singer," from me, and saw red or anything.  She felt like, that was viable choice for me and she acted like it was.  She took me very seriously about it.  So, by the time I was thirteen, fourteen years old, she actively tried to help me to pursue it.
Speaker 1: Now, tell me this, now, were you, now did you sing in church or anything like that, or did you--?
Speaker 2: I didn't.  My mom grew up in a Methodist church which is like really conservative, United Methodist not A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal].  And, it's a very conservative kind of environment.  And, they sing a lot of choral music and it wasn't gospel to the extent of what, you know, we know, you know, gospel to be.  So, growing up when we would go to church, it wasn't an environment where I felt like, "Oh, I have to be in this choir."  The choir was always like older people.  And, it wasn't until I got to junior high and I would go to church on my own; me and my sister, and you know, we would visit, like, Baptist churches.  We went to a Baptist church for a little while.  And, you know, and I listened to a lot of contemporary gospel music and so that really inspired me.  And, I sang a lot of that.
Story_ID: 635656
Speaker 1: Did you have favorite gospel singers growing up?
Speaker 2: Let me see.  I mean, all of the gospel singers of the day.  I mean, there was, what was my girl's name?  I mean, it was like Tramaine Hawkins, and all of those people from the '80s [1980s] and '90s [1990s].  And, oh god, what's my man's name?  He use--
Speaker 1: Was it 'Stomp'?  The guy that did 'Stomp.'
Speaker 2: Oh, Kirk Franklin, that wasn't 'til later.  But, these were--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  That's right.  That's in the mid-'90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: These were like--why can't--why is the name escaping me?  And, he became a big R and B producer.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: I don't remember.
Speaker 1: The Winans weren't, weren't out.
Speaker 2: The Winans.  We loved The Winans, Commissioned, all those groups, you know.  So, it was, this, there was like a lot of late nine- late '80s [1980s], early '90s [1990s] contemporary gospel that as really like blowing up at that time, and I listened to all of that.  You know, Karen Clark [Karen Clark Sheard], and all of that.
Speaker 1: Now, what about popular music on the radio and that sort of thing, when you?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was into everything.  I mean, I love hip hop music, love hip hop music.  So, I listen to gospel but I definitely was, I mean, it was really schizophrenic, you know, when you think about it.  Like one minute you're listening to, you know, The Winans, or Take 6, or Commissioned and then the next minute you listening like, N.W.A. [Niggaz Wit Attitudes] (laughter).  And, so, I listened to everything.  I really liked hip hop a lot.  I liked a lot of West Coast hip hop.  I like everything, you know.  But, then I like Tribe Called Quest [A Tribe Called Quest].  And, I liked a lot of people who sampled jazz.  So, a lot of them sampled a lot of jazz music that I already knew.  And, then they sampled a lot of R and B.  But, I love rhythm and blues.  I mean, I loved New Edition, and Bobby Brown, and Teddy Riley and, you know, all of those people.  I mean, that was the music of my growing up.  So, I was totally into it.  All of the R and B groups, Hi-Five, and Troop and Today and like any, any R and B '90s [1990s] group there is, I listened to it.  I bought it.  But, I also had like, Red Hot Chili Peppers CDs [compact disc] and I had, and I listened to Natalie Imbruglia, and a lot of different stuff.  I listen to everything.  But, as a teenager, like I, I listened to a lot of different music.  And, my mother [Susan Knox Graydon] used to always be freaked out because she would always be like, she would never know what I was gonna be listening to from moment to the next.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Was there any particular artist that real--that you liked the best in those days?  Or--
Speaker 2: Well, one of the first artist that I tried to imitate that I really would like sing her records, like in terms of like contemporary, not Chaka [Chaka Khan], Aretha [Aretha Franklin], 'cause you know, we all tried to sit there and sing like them, to no avail.  But, (laughter) you know, in terms like contemporary singers, like was probably Lalah Hathaway.  She had just, a fantastic voice to me.  I just loved her.  I listen to her single again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and I wanted to try to sing like her.  And, I liked, Caron Wheeler from, from Soul II Soul.  And, she had a solo album that I played religiously (laughter).  Loved her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think of who I just wanted to sing like (laughter).  But, then I liked a lot of male singers too.  So, I really like Peabo Bryson, I listen to him a lot.  And, I really liked, well, Donny Hathaway.  Because really, you know, a lot of my male friends have always said, he's an influence on them.  But, I listened to his music hard core, like I really loved it.  I really enjoyed listening to him and tried to sing like him.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite song of his?
Speaker 2: Oh, so many of 'em.  I (laughter) was like, let me think.  My favorite Donny Hathaway song is probably 'He's Not Heavy, He's my Brother' [sic. 'He Ain't Heavy, He's My Brother'].  Because he sings these notes where he holds a note like super long.  He has like so many breath counts in that, in that note that it's just like, wow, how did he get the breath control to sing that like that.  But, I love a lot of his music, but that's probably one of my favorite songs.
Story_ID: 635657
Speaker 1: When you said you wanted to be a singer, your mother [Susan Knox Graydon] tried to help you--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: At the time my mother had a friend, his name was Gary Pri- his name is Gary Price [ph.] and he was the director of 'Video LP' on BET [Black Entertainment Television] at the time.  And, this was a guy that she grew up with.  And, so, that was like the only person she knew in the music business or anywhere close to the music business.  So, she reached out to him and said, "You know, my daughter really wants to sing and I don't really know how to help her.  So, I'm asking you, do you know anything about this and what she could do?"  And, and, he introduced me to my very first manager who was a sound engineer at BET, and his name was, oh, gosh, Charlie Jones (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, now, BET was produced, was producing shows in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, their only studio at the time was in D.C.  That was like, I guess, you know, our claim to fame at the time.  But, at the time it was just little cable station.  It was a small station, you know, everybody watched it, but, you know, it was a small station.  It was not nearly the juggernaut that it is now.  At that time it was just like, you know, if you wanted to be on 'Teen Summit' or 'Video LP' you just got in line on Saturday or whatever day they were taping and you pretty much could go and be on the show (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so when did you, did you have plan for what you were gonna do?  So, you had Charlie Jones, did he come up with some kind of a plan for you to get (unclear) (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah, I mean, at the time I was thirteen, fourteen, so then like Brandy and Monica and Aaliyah and a lot of these kinda young girls were out at that time.  So, it was an opportunity that looked like it could happen for me if I, you know, if I played my cards right.  So, he really kind of got me into studio boot camp, and taught me how to record and you know, taught me how to interpret songs that were original songs and not trying to imitate other singers and coming up with my own style.  Because, honestly even though I was trying to imitate the other singers, it really wasn't that great 'cause it just wasn't my thing anyway.  But, I, you know, I knew I could sing.  It was matter of finding my own stride.  So, he helped me to develop that; my own sound, and you know.  But, in hindsight, it really wasn't even my sound, it was his that he came up with.  Which happens a lot of time which young artists.  They don't--haven't matured enough to have a sound.  So, I just did what I was told.  I sang what I was told to sing.  I wore what I was told to wear.  I took the pictures, sang the songs, did the dance moves and, and I did that.  And, I did that for four years.  And, I got a record deal.  I managed to get a record deal about a year after I met Charlie.  And, with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is 1994, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 635658
Speaker 1: I got a record deal with Delicious Vinyl, which at the time was like, really more like a hip hop label.  They had a lot of West Coast rap like, Tone Loc and Young MC and The Pharcyde, and so they, the only real R and B they had was a group from overseas called The Brand New Heavies.  And, so, getting into the R and B teen pop arena was (laughter), was new ground for them.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  So, did they, so did you produce a record 'em right away?
Speaker 1: I did.  I worked on an album for a long time and pulled together some songs.  The album never came out.  I just kept getting older and it just wasn't coming together.  The album wasn't really getting finished.  The company went through a lot of internal changes.  They were originally being distributed from Warner Brothers [Warner Bros. Entertainment, Inc.] and, I don't know if you remember, but Warner Brothers black music department fell apart.  And, that was a big problem they--with Prince.  Prince went berserk and was basically, not berserk but he was angry for a good reason.  He wrote the word slave on his face and, you know, was, it was a big problem with Warner Brothers at that time.  And, I just happened to be one of the new artists that fell through the cracks at that time.  And, then they went to another company, and then another company.  And, so, I, you know, that was, you know, and I just continued to record but nothing really came out.  And, like I said I just was getting older and I didn't wanna sing things that I had recorded when I was fourteen.  And, I just was liking different kinds of music, and other things were happening in music at the time.  Then, D'Angelo hit and then Erykah Badu hit.  And, then, this was the kind of music that I had wanting to do from the start.  I was like, wow, this is, this sounds like what I wanna do.  This other stuff, I mean, I can sing it, and it's cool I guess.  But, I--my heart really wasn't in it.  So, I started writing, and no one paid attention to my writing.  Nobody cared (laughter) about my writing.  I just wrote.  So, I didn't have any music to write to, so I would write songs to like existing music.  So, I had like a book of stuff that I had written.  And, it was must for me pretty much.  I tried to write a couple of times and my producer at the time, my manager at the time [Charlie Jones], kind of shrugged it off.  He really just had a really tunnel visioned way of looking at what he wanted me to be.  And, so, I did everything, moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] for a little while, and, well, I moved to New York [New York] first, now I'm skipping.  By the time I got to be eighteen, seventeen, eighteen years old and nothing had happened, my manager suggested that I move to New York.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, had you graduated from high school yet?
Speaker 1: No.  What happened was, I basically was failing.  I was so hurt that my dream didn't seem like it was coming together.  I was just totally distraught.
Story_ID: 635659
Speaker 1: You're in high school but you say you're not doing too well in school.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I started out high school very well.  I was happy.  I wanted to do music.  I had a record deal.  I really kind of was the envy of a lot of kids because I was in school but I was also recording at night.  And, I was, you know, doing well.  I mean, I was happy, you know.  And, but, as another year--you know, as you tell your friends, "Oh, I have a record deal, my album's gonna come out next year," and then it doesn't come out.  And, then they don't understand about distribution companies and this, this, that, and the other.  And, it's just like, "But, I thought you were doing music," and, you know.  And, you get a little lazy with your classwork because you're thinking, I'm gonna be a star, so I'm really not gonna need this Algebra II class next year, you know, a C will be fine (laughter).  So, I wasn't really focused, you know.  But, I started out doing really well, but then it just progressively just got worst and I was less focused.  I was depressed.  I really wanted to do this and I felt like my dream was kind of falling apart.  And, my manager [Charlie Jones] suggested that, at the time, I really was ahead of the game.  I actually could've graduated early.  But I, well, they told me I had to take like maybe two extra classes at night.  And, so, I took--went to night school so I could graduate early.  And, I just lost focus.  I just was so upset that it was always something different going on.  "Oh, we can't do it. It won't come out until the fall. It won't come out 'til such and such and such."  And, you would think that that would make me more focused on school.  But, it made me less focused.  And, I really botched an opportunity to be an early graduate to the point where I probably wasn't even going to graduate.  I had to bust my butt at the very end and basically get, you know, my high school diploma through one of these tutor programs from, like the artists get into.  Like actors, kid actors do it a lot of the time.  We had to pay a bunch of money so that I could actually even get my diploma on time.  I had to basically go through tutoring half the day and this kind of craziness.  And, so, I actually end up graduating, thank god, 'cause my mother [Susan Knox Graydon] was so terrified that I just wouldn't get a high school diploma.  And, my manager said, "Hey, why don't--we're moving to New York [New York].  Why don't you move here with us?  You can do your music full time.  You'll be a--you have graduated, you'll be an adult, everything'll be better."  I was in New York for a little while and really was a great time.  It was a time for me to really get independent.  I was much more independent.  I was treated a lot less like a child.  I was able to go and come as I please.  I had a beautiful apartment.  I had money 'cause I had a deal.  So, I had money.  In about six, seven months after that, I moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] 'cause my manager moved out there.  And, when I moved to L.A. I was just sad.  I missed home.  Nothing was happening.  It was just (laughter) like, nothing.  It was just like, it's a story that people tell you about the music business that you don't wanna believe.  But, it happened to me.  I was in L.A. alone, no family, no friends, in an apartment that was furnished.  I had money but I didn't have anywhere to go.  I was scared to go places 'cause it was just a place that I wasn't familiar with and, you know, I was lost.
Speaker 1: This is 19--this is--?
Speaker 2: This is probably 1997.
Speaker 1: Ninety-seven [1997], then, okay.
Speaker 2: Ninety-seven [1997], '98 [1998].
Speaker 1: When did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: Ninety-six [1996].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, you graduated from what high school?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't graduate from a high school.  I have a basically a high school diploma from the State of New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, from the State of New Jersey.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Fatin [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler].
Speaker 1: Oh, they gave it to you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  They give it to you through the--
Speaker 1: --when you were in New York?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  When I was in New York.  The program goes through the State of New Jersey.  And, you know, they send you a diploma.
Story_ID: 635660
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-seven [1997] you're in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --and, just, so--
Speaker 2: My mother [Susan Knox Graydon] got ill.  That's what made me come home.  My mother began getting really sick.  My mother had chronic asthma all through high school.  But, her health started to really deteriorate and one of the first times she ever really was in critical condition, I came home, and I just never went back to L.A.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is, is this still in '97 [1997]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, what was, what was next?  What was next?
Speaker 2: Well, I came home (laughter).  I had to fix all my mess.  I was just not recording enough that was really happening.  So, they tried to hook me up with a songwriter in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] to start on some brand new material.  Just, "We're gonna start from scratch.  We're gonna, you know, approach it from an adult standpoint.  We're gonna cut out all the teen pop crap that you don't like.  And, we're going to start writing music from your point of view.  And, guess what, we're gonna acknowledge now, even though you've been writing songs for four years, we're gonna acknowledge now that you're a songwriter."  So, (laughter) it was like, "All right, cool."  So, they didn't trust me to write songs by myself so they got a guy [Eugene Hanes] to co-write with me.  And, the guy they got to co-write with me was--his claim to fame, was writing the song, 'Freak Like Me' by Adina Howard (laughter).  This was his claim to fame, the writer, that they got me to write with.  But, he was a nice guy though in the interim.  He had actually started doing gospel music.  He had written some songs for Yolanda Adams, too.  But, the money that built his studio came from writing, you know, the, oh so eloquent and profound, 'Freak Like Me' (laughter).  So, me and this guy went to New York [New York] because I said, I wanted to work with The Roots.  Because their production team, their production was written all over a lot of the soul music, or at the time, they were calling it alternative R and B, or whatever that was out at the time.  So, I said, "Okay, this is who I wanna work with, them."  So, I went to New York to meet with them, and that's where I met my husband.
Story_ID: 635661
Speaker 1: Prior to this time, had you written a song that was, that was produced?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You hadn't.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I had written, I had a book of song- I book, a book of poetry and songs and stuff that I had written.  But, I, I--no one paid it any mind.  I mean, you have to understand, I was coming up in an industry at the time where singer/songwriter just wasn't something that was synonymous with R and B music at that time.  I mean, you--if you were a singer/songwriter you were a producer.  You were Babyface or you were Chuckii Booker, or you were that type of person.  You certainly weren't a female (laughter), you know what I mean.  You had Mariah Carey, who still to this day people don't even really count her in the list of profound and great and wonderful genius songwriters, even though she is, you know.  So, at the time being a young female in kind of R and B, hip hop world, that just wasn't expected for you to be writing songs and you just more so were kind of like, you were the singer and then you just rolled with the machine.  And, that was like what I was kind of taught to do.  But, now after years of that no working for me, now I was really going into brand new territory.  And, because now it was kind of thought of as something cool for artist to write songs from this kind of open and free format, you know, 'cause you look back on D'Angelo and Erykah Badu and Maxwell,  all those different people, when you look back on that stuff, it's very open.  It's free.  It's not structured R and B records that either from, you know, the '70s [1970s] or--where it was like, you know, 'The Sound of Philadelphia' ['TSOP (The Sound of Philadelphia)'] where it's like orchestrated.  Or, the '80s [1980s] where it was really highly produced, you know.  It was just this free kind of expression.  It was a hip hop mentality-ed R and B.  So, that's where I found myself was in the middle of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you met Fatin [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], right?  When you--
Speaker 2: In New York [New York].
Speaker 1: In New York.  Okay.  So, you were going to New York to work with The Roots?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They were there?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, that was like the first time I had recorded a song that I've written.  Literally, the first time I went to New York I, I wrote a, I had a song that I'd written and I sat down and recorded it.
Speaker 1: Now, what were you, well us like, what were the themes that you were writing about?  What were you--?
Speaker 2: Oh, heartbreak and, you know that kind of thing 'cause, I mean, I had gone through a big breakup.  The one real relationship I'd ever been in and, you know.  So, it was all about breaking up with this guy, in the beginning.  And, then, oddly enough when I met my husband, it was all about meeting somebody new (laughter).  So, I guess, it really were, you know, love stuff.  But, just about that coming of age kind of stuff.  Just learning about who you are, becoming a woman.  Because I'd really been through a lot.  And, I just had all these different experiences but I was just really becoming a grown up.  And, I had grown up in the music business.  I had grown up in entertainment.  So, now, I had all this stuff to think about, and I didn't want anyone writing those feelings.  I wanted to write them.
Story_ID: 635662
Speaker 1: Now, how did you meet Fatin [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler]?
Speaker 2: Literally, one day he was brought in to, to write songs with me.  Eugene [Eugene Hanes], I forget his last name, but Eugene who was the guy who came to New York [New York] with me, came to me like, came with me that one time, and pretty much didn't come back.  And, so, you know us girls, we can't be trusted to write a song by ourselves.  Fatin was brought in to, to write songs with me, and we clicked right away.  He wrote a great song and it was like, "Cool."
Speaker 1: Now, he had written for, for Bell Biv DeVoe and some other groups.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Were you familiar with his work?
Speaker 2: I mean, I was familiar with it once he told me about it.  I was like, you know, everybody knew who Bell Biv DeVoe was.  And, I mean, you know, soon as it told me I was like, "Oh, cool."  So, it was like something to tell when I went home.  "Oh, I met this guy, and he wrote for BBD," and, you know, like, "and we're working together."  So, it was cool.  It got my respect.  I definitely saw him as a, you know, valuable songwriter with a resume and all that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  All right, so, so was there like an immediate kind of a sync, synchronization of the music, in terms of--?
Speaker 2: No.  Actually, in the beginning we did like maybe one song together.  And, then the environment just got more open and free.  It was less about sit down and write songs.  It more was just about kind of develop as an artist 'cause it was lots of stuff going on at the same time.  I came around at the same time as a few other artist, or that they were already there and they were just developing themselves.  They were writing songs.  They were trying to perform live.  They were having jam sessions, and everything was just free.  I was experiencing music in a way that I had never experienced before, just trying to grow as an artist.  Like, I didn't even know what that was.  Like, discover who I was.  I was used to, "Be at the studio such and such a time.  Today we're cutting backgrounds, tomorrow we're cutting leads, you got this much time, we're gonna stack this many vocals.  After that, you have to go and do a photo shoot.  After that, you have to go to dance class.  After that, you have to do," you know.  That was my life, prior.  Now, it's just like, "Oh, we're gonna have a jam session on Friday, come around," you know.  And, there's gonna be musicians there, and there are gonna be writers there, there're gonna be singers there.  And, it's like, wow.  Like I felt like, this is, this is great.  I didn't know what it was to be a part of like a community of artists.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so that's actually what you had wrote on there, a community of artists.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah, definitely.  It was just like, kind of like a family setting, kind of like, you know.  People lived near each other, and you were always at each other's homes.  And, you know, if somebody was around and they had a guitar then it's like, "Oh, well, let's write something, or we'll go to the studio and write something, or let's record something," or, you know.  People had their own little bands or put together a little band here or whatever and perform, and, I just, it was just a whole new world for me.  And, I just wanted to be a part of it all the time.  So, I was in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] once they came back to Philly, I was in Philly all the time.  I was back and forth from D.C. [Washington, D.C.] to Philly all the time.  I got a little apartment and I was like, I had my place and I just come back and forth all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, what led to the contract with Hidden Beach [Hidden Beach Recordings]?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's a big jump.  Well--
Speaker 1: This in ninety--well, take it one bite at a time, I don't know, I just have outline here so I'm (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Well, Fatin and I really--the Hidden Beach thing happened after we dated, got married, had a baby.  We had already been together.  And, then we started the group, which was my husband's idea.  And, then, we were performing every week at the Black Lily and just building our show, building our band.  He got, you know, he pulled together musicians from guys that he knew in high school and that he knew--had known for a long time, and we pulled together this band, and it came together.  And--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, was this, is this later than '98 [1998]?
Speaker 2: No.  This is all--this is later than '98 [1998].  This is after we got married.  We got married in '98 [1998].
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Cause they got, they had [HistoryMaker] Steve McKeever down here for '98 [1998], so.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, that didn't happen yet?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we got married in '98 [1998].  My son [Aquil Dantzler] wasn't even born until '99 [1999] and all of this happened after my son was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, you got married in 1998.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Your son was born in '99 [1999].
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 635663
Speaker 1: Tell us about the Black Lily.  Now, this is important in the development of y- of you two and a lot of other artists, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, this is a venue [Five Spot] here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was.  It started out like jam sessions and that's what carried me back and forth to Philly all the time, was that we were having these jam sessions every week at Ahmir Thompson's [Ahmir Khalib Thompson] house who was better known as Questlove from The Roots.  And, he had a row house and we would just pack into his house and they would set up the, you know, drums, and keyboards and everything in his house.  And, it started out like that.  But, because they're a hip hop group, primarily it was a lot of guys that wanted to rap.  So, it wasn't really a wealth of singers.  And, singers it was harder for them to get on.  And, singing freestyle is a lot, I wouldn't say more difficult, but it's just a different animal than just rapping.  So, we had to, you know, jump in there whichever way we could.  And, sometimes that meant, you know, singing the hooks for the raps they were doing or whatever the case may be.  But, you know, I found it to be kind of exhilarating.  I never felt like it was issue with, you know, "I can't get on."  But, that was definitely an issue for some of the other artists, especially the female ones.  And, so, they started this event called the Black Lily where they felt like okay, this is gonna be just our event for all the women.  It was supposed to be like for women.  And, at the time, even though I started out at the jam sessions, in the interim, Fatin [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler] and I got married, we had a baby [Aquil Dantzler], and our lives had changed.  So, I wasn't, you know, there every Friday and all the time, you know, all that kind of stuff.  I was starting a family.  And, once we decided to really do music again, the Lily was kind of up and running.  And, my husband was telling me about it and he went to go check it out, and said, "You know, you should go."  So, my first time actually going to the Lily and performing there was by myself.  And, was shortly, when my son was an infant.  And, my husband stayed home with him and I went.  And, it was semi-traumatic for me that first time just being away from my baby and just hadn't been really singing in a long time.  But, it was a, the bug kind of hit, bit again and it was really cool.  So, once we really decided we were gonna start a group, it just made sense that we would do this weekly event.  And, because I was a girl, then it made it okay for my husband to be there too.  So, that's how it started.  But, performing there every week, you know, performing every week just polishes you.  There's no way around it.  Doing anything consistent just makes you better.  And, as we pull together a band, and he had this vision of this big like, War, Earth, Wind and Fire type thing and I was just like, "He's crazy."  Like I didn't know what he was doing.  But, I was glad that he did it.  Because the sound was so unique to anyone else that was on the show.  Already we were husband and wife team, and that in and of itself was just like something that nobody from our generation was even thinking about doing.  And, then the fact that we had the ten piece band and we had four background singers, and four horns, and it was just like (laughter), just a gazillion people on this tiny little stage.  And, you know, college students and you know, bohemes or whatever you wanna call 'em, came out every week to support us, even though none of us had record deals.  None of us had records that were out.  None of us had any of that.  So, they supported us regardless.  It was a really beautiful time.
Story_ID: 635664
Speaker 1: I have a note here that Alicia Keys, Jill Scott, Tracey Moore, Mercedes Martinez--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --India Arie, Floetry, all these people were at the Black Lily.
Speaker 2: The original lineup from Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], 'cause it was a New York Lily [at the Wetlands Preserve, New York, New York], and then it moved to Philly.  But, the original lineup in Philly was, the Jazzyfatnastees which is Tracey Moore, Mercedes Martinez; Jaguar Wright, Flo Brown who is a rapper, 3 7000 9, which was another girl-guy group, Kindred the Family Soul and Floetry.  And, you know, well, Floetry came on a little bit later.  But, that original lineup was what I just said, minus Floetry, and then they came along later.  The other women came to the Lily but they weren't like in residence there.  They came and definitely after it became a thing where it was like the place to be and people came.  And, Jill came early on, you know, she came and, and was involved early on in the Lily, and performed there.  But, she just wasn't performing there regularly.  So, that was like the only difference.  But, people like Alicia Keys and India they came much later after it just became such a thing.  And, it was just where you needed to be on Tuesday in Philly.  If you're in Philly on a Tuesday, that's where you should've been.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is on Tuesday?
Speaker 2: Tuesday night.
Speaker 1: Tuesday night.
Speaker 2: And, it cost five dollars.  And, you even think of anything you can do for five dollars, now?  Nothing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a total coming of age for all of us.  It really was.  And, me and Fatin [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler] were young parents and a young couple and we were maneuvering our way through a lot of different stuff but that was just an amazing feeling.  And, we would come home after a good show and we would, you know, when we had a really good show, and we would, you know, we would catch a taxi home.  Like that was the thing.  Like, we would catch the trolley down there (laughter), but then it was like, when we were like high off a good show, we get in a taxi and go home.
Speaker 1: Now, at five dollars a head for the people that--how many people would get in there?  How many does the Black Lily hold?
Speaker 2: Probably about three hundred people, if it was packed, maybe a little bit more than that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Could've been close to four, but I think more like three.
Speaker 1: So, were you all paid?  Did you get paid to go?
Speaker 2: We got money.  But, it wasn't like a, you know, a paid gig like that.  We got money because the environment was like a family.  And, the, the manager at the time of The Roots, well he's still there as their manager, Rich Nichols [Richard Nichols], he just wanted to keep everybody around because the environment was really dope, you know.  So, people made themselves, people made themselves valuable and did things, and you know, they got money here and there.  And, we did start getting paid to do the Lily after a while, you know.  But, we all kind of were supported off of The Roots organization.  They just made that commitment to growing the community like that, you know.  And, and really more so I would say it was probably Rich, because The Roots just more tolerated it, they, they were good with it, but, you know, he really was at the helm of that, you know, for a lot of years, you know.  And, we were all just broke artists so a couple hundred bucks [dollars] here and there was cool.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, then my husband was just extremely resourceful.  And, when we were just fulltime doing music, he did lots of stuff to make money in order to support us as a family.  So, we weren't totally getting what we needed from dong music.  I mean, he did everything.  He worked at a flower shop.  He delivered school lunches.  He did lots of different odd jobs and did things until we could really, we were really able to support ourselves on it.  But, God is great because we supported a family off of music, you know, for--going on now fourteen years.
Story_ID: 635665
Speaker 1: It says, what I have here is that Jill Scott is, sort of discovered you all and shepherded you towards Hidden Beach [Hidden Beach Recordings]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She was already signed to Hidden Beach and you know, had done like a deal with them through, she had a production deal with Jazzy Jeff [DJ Jazzy Jeff], and, with Touch Of Jazz [A Touch of Jazz] at the time, and then they did deal with Hidden Beach.  And, so, she was working on her album and we definitely knew her and we also knew her husband at the time, Lyzel [Lyzel Williams].  And, they both really spoke highly of us to [HistoryMaker] Steve McKeever and really, they just, you know, talked about us to him.  And, we had like some recorded music that they were able to have him listen to.  But, I think the kicker was that he came to see us perform at the Lily [Black Lily].  And, honestly, I think the Lily was just, would've been an overwhelming experience for anyone to go into a club and see it packed to the wall for a group that no one heard of.  That no one, that was being played on the radio, that didn't have a music video, you know, and this is, you know, this is 2000, this is when that's, that's unheard of, you know what I'm saying.  So, we had an, we had an unusual situation with that.  But, I think the kicker was Steve McKeever came to see us perform and we sang a cover of 'We Are One,' by Frankie Beverly and Maze.  And, people were just, it was not one hand that wasn't in the air and it was just the perfect night, you know.  It's that story that artist tell about the moment.  And, that moment happened for us that night, and it like, blew him away.  And, that was like the end of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, the beginning of it, I suppose.
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).  So, Steve signed you all to Hidden Beach?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Pretty much, was very little time after that.
Speaker 1: This is in 2000, right?  July of 2000?
Speaker 2: That sounds about right (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: December.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--okay, December of 2000.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, what happened next?  Was it hard for him to--I mean, did he, did he take a long time to produce a--?
Speaker 2: It took a long time for the album ['Surrender to Love'] to come out.  But, mostly, was because like, now I'll give it to you like this, in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], the big music in D.C. is go go, right.  And, the big story about go go is that everybody loves it as long as it's live.  But, whenever people try to record it in a studio, it loses something and it just has not been as successful.
Speaker 1: Example of go go would be E.U.'s doing 'Da Butt,' right?
Speaker 2: Right.  E.U. is doing 'Da Butt,' which was a huge record.  But, the, which was actually outside of the box of what I'm talking about.  But, there's a gazillion go go bands and go go music is fantastic and people love it and they go see it again, and again, and again, and again, and again, every week, all the time.  But, as a genre, it's not been as successful once recorded because it just loses some of whatever it is that it has, you know.  There've been people who been successful like Chuck Brown, like E.U., but just kind of like standouts in a sea of go go bands.  So, the kind of same thing happened to us to an extent.  It was difficult to translate what was so cool live into recorded music.  So, and, and deciding what that sound was gonna be.  Was it gonna be more a programmed sound?  Was it gonna be all live?  Were we gonna record the whole album live?  Were we gonna have some live instruments and some programmed instruments?  Was it gonna be really produced?  Was it gonna be really open and lose?  It was a lot to be considered.  And, Steve McKeever definitely had a lot of input on it and had his own ideas as to how he wanted to move forward.  And, so it seems like that it was, in the beginning, somewhat the best of both worlds.  Where it was like, yeah, we had this really controlled record company environment but yet we were still pretty much allowed to be ourselves.  So, it was mixing and matching that back and forth which made the process of making the album probably a little longer than usual.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, what, what it ended up being was something we never anticipated and that was very adult contemporary.
Story_ID: 635666
Speaker 1: Now, did you have to change an- what were you calling yourselves then?
Speaker 2: Oh, when we first got started we were just Kindred.  Well, no, when we first got started we were just Fatin and Aja [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler and HistoryMaker Aja Graydon].  Then, we became Kindred.  And, then we changed it to Kindred the Family Soul just because once the trademarking and all that came into place, we had to make sure that, there were other groups and other, well, other entities and things called Kindred.  There's actually a hospital in Atlanta [Georgia] called Kindred Hospital.  So, we just wanted to make it clear what we were about.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And, did you--now, so you conceived the--what was the album conceived as being, I mean, in term of content, I mean, what was it, what was the conception?
Speaker 2: Well, we wanted to definitely pull in the songs that we'd already written, that we were already doing live, the original songs.  We were already doing a song called "Rhythm of Life."  We were already doing a song called, I wanna say we were already performing a song called "Stars."  Yeah, we were.  We were doing "Stars."  We were doing "Rhythm of Life."  I think we were already doing "Far Away," too.  And, so, we were doing like quite a few songs already.  And, we wanted to make sure those staple songs from the Lily [Black Lily] were on the album.  So--and another song called the "Family Song."  There was a song called the "Family Song," "Far Away," "Rhythm of Life," "Stars."  Those were the songs.  And, those ended up being the biggest songs from the album in terms of, you know, what people really die to, I mean, you know, hooked onto.  And, then we did a few other tunes.  We did some tunes in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] with, with, that we produced with [HistoryMaker] James Poyser and, who is now, I mean, who was then, before, but also currently with The Roots as well; plays with them on Jimmy Fallon and everything, with James Poyser.  And, we did some things with Ant Bell [Anthony Bell] was a producer who has appeared on every Kindred album.  And, also with some producers out of Chicago [Illinois].  And, so, rounded out the album with a little bit more diversity outside of our basic songs that we had already, you know, that were really our staple tunes.  So, it came together.  It was a really beautiful record.  And, I think that we tried, that we did a good job of pulling together that live sound and still giving people a polished and produced, you know, studio album.  And, still 'til this day, four albums in, though we have a lot of very dedicated fans who love our music, they love that first album.  That first album is just, they really--it is like a quintessential Kindred record, which is think happens many times with artist.  I don't care how successful they get.  People are very much attached to their first project.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, is it 2003, that the album was released?
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Surrender to Love.'
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 635667
Speaker 1: There's a video that was produced too, to go along with it, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We did a video for 'Far Away' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For 'Far Away,' yeah.
Speaker 2: Which was like a little story of how, the 'Far Away' video was the story of us, you know, what happened.  The dropping off the kids at the babysitter, and catching the train or the taxi down to the st- to the, I mean, having this kind of regular life during the day, with kids and work and everything.  And, then dropping the kids off and going down to this club and living this dream, and performing, and that was the whole story of that video was our real life.  And, I just think it was turning point for a lot of people who listen to music 'cause they just had never seen anything like that.  You know, anyone expressing having a normal life and being happy with your normal life and celebrating that in music video, you know.  You can rewind back to the late '90s [1990s] where Biggie Smalls [The Notorious B.I.G.] and everybody was spending a million dollars on a video where they're like in a speed boat.  And, it's like thirty butt naked women and it's like, you know, everything is just like--and they're like in a, in a Rolls Royce, fifteen Rolls Royces and it cost all this money.  And, we did a video about my husband [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler] working for, for the--driving a bus, a trolley for a living and me being at home with my kids during the day, and us singing in a little tiny club in our spare time.  And, we did a video about that.  So, (laughter), I, I, to this day, I don't care what level of success we get, that was some revolution, revolutionary shit.  I don't care what nobody say.  That had not been done.
Speaker 1: The song 'Far Away,' I mean, when I came in here today, I hadn't connected the song to you all.  'Cause I'm old and I just don't--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --listen to enough music.
Speaker 2: That's all good.
Speaker 1: When your husband played the song, I said, "Oh, it just brought back so many emotions for me."
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: And, it's just a--the rhythms and the--that song is just a classic.
Speaker 2: Oh, thank you.
Speaker 1: It's just a classic.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: And, so, I mean, I think I saw the video once.  I kind of vaguely remember seeing that.  But, and I didn't, you know, but, every time I heard it, it reminds me of what I was doing in those days when it was out--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --like a lot of music does.
Speaker 2: Awesome.
Speaker 1: So, you just a, I guess people bounce back to that 'cause it really is a--
Speaker 2: I mean, it's a blessing that anybody calls anything you did a classic.  And, in this business it's really difficult to look past, you know, what you want, the trappings of success and not hear the words that come out of people's mouths.  The word, classic, is a word that people don't throw around.  And, we've heard it a lot about that song.  And, that's something that we really, you know, that it's easy some days to take for granted.  But, we try hard not to.
Story_ID: 635668
Speaker 1: So, you're in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] here--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --a city that's, where, a gambling hub, creating--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --classics, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that are played on the radio all over the country on Sunday afternoon to people driving home--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --with the whole family in the car.
Speaker 2: Yes indeed.
Speaker 1: And, do you, it seems as though you all sort of bear in mind that there are families, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes, indeed.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: I mean, we just, we didn't know in the beginning that's what it was gonna be, you know.  We didn't sought out to do, seek--I mean, seek that out or decided to do that knowingly.  We just had a lifestyle and we were writing songs about our personal experiences.  And, so, no, we couldn't really write songs about stuff that wasn't really happening to us.  So, we wrote things about what was really happening.  And, that really translated to people because this is an experience that we're not the only people having these experiences.  And, so, it ended up being a voice for a group of people that seem to be voiceless within the music, you know.  And, so, that was really what's carried us throughout all of this, is that connection to people.  And, the reason why it sustains itself is because every time one group has the experience and moves forward, they're moving forward with you.  As another group is just beginning the experience.  So, ten, I have in the past ten years, people who were ten (laughter), when 'Far Away' came out are twenty, and maybe they're falling in love for the first time.  And, maybe they're meeting the love of their life.  And, maybe they're getting married.  And, then they're experiencing the first child.  And, as they move to on their--the music is new, the experience is new to them.  So, you know, we're lucky in that way because our music really represents something that will continue to happen.
Story_ID: 635669
Speaker 1: Is there anything you remember the most about recording the album ['Surrender to Love']?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).  I remember fighting about the tempo of "Far Away" (laughter) with, with the record company [Hidden Beach Recordings].  And, the vibe of it.  I remember that originally the song did not have a guitar solo.  And, having--and it's a brilliant solo by Randy Bowen [ph.] who is a fantastic musician.  And, fighting about that it was too, that the tempo of the song was too slow because it used to be a programmed beat.  And, then we went and did live because that's how we had been performing it.  But, you know, when you do it live, it might be one tempo one night and another tempo the next night.  So, when we recorded it, it was like, "Oh, the tempo's too slow.  It's too slow."  And, then fighting about, "Well, should we, what kind of, what kind of solo should go here."  I remember at one point where the, where the guitar solo was, there was just a string solo.  It was like, Larry Gold had done this wonderful--and it's on the album, it's this beautiful string arrangement for "Far Away."  And, if you listen really closely, 'cause it's mixed really well into the, into the song, but it is an amazing thing.  And, then there was a string solo there.  And, so, I just remember arguing about the tempo, and is it right, and should it be this, or should it be that.  And, the fact that people love that song so much and that it really resonated with people makes me happy about the decisions that were made.  And, that thing came together the way that they did because we, we kind of fought about that record with the record company (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, the--did your suggestions win most of the time or, did the record company's?
Speaker 2: Our suggestions kind of lost.  So, it goes to show you that you should trust outside ears sometimes.  I mean, there were things we fought for, there were things that we, you know, certainly we picked the musicians and we wanted it a certain kind of way and the sound and that kind of thing.  And, you know, we actually convinced the producer of the original track for us to record it live because she really wanted the original track.  So, those were decisions we made to record it live because we were like, "No.  We wanna record it live," because that is the way we'd been performing it.  So, the decision to go live in the first place was really ours, and so it was a mixture of both things.  But, certainly the tempo at the end of the day, I would have to give credit (laughter) where credit is due.
Story_ID: 635670
Speaker 1: That year you all were nominated for the Soul Train Award [Soul Train Music Awards]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --for best R and B soul album.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was, very cool.  That was first time every being on a red carpet, first time, you know, get--doing the whole shebang, the dressing up, and the going, and everything.  But, it was also kind of a, it was also a reality check because it was great being acknowledged but we lost to B2K.  And, they were, they were a big R and B hip hop pop group.  And, the funny thing was they had broken up already, and they won anyway (laughter), for 'Soul Train' (laughter).  It was like, you know, so, it was heartbreaking, you know, that whole idea of waiting so long to be acknowledged and then, you know, and then for it to kind of be taken away in that way.  Just like, "Oh, wow."  Only one of them even showed up to get the award (laughter).  So, we were bummed out, to say the least.  But, it was cool, you know, it's something that looks good on your resume.
Speaker 1: So, so, did you tour in 2004?  Did you do some touring?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did a lot of touring.  We, we worked everywhere.  We went everywhere.  We went overseas.  We did, we did everything.  In '04 [2004] I was pregnant again.  Well, I was pregnant in 2002 right before the album came out with my second children [Diya Dantzler].  So, my son [Aquil Dantzler] was born.  He's on the cover of the album 'Surrender to Love,' he's on the back cover.  And, in that photograph I'm also pregnant with our second child.  But, most people can't tell that I'm pregnant in the photograph.  Then, '04 [2004], I was pregnant again with our third [Nina Dantzler].  And, (laughter) I'm also pregnant on the cover of our second album ['In This Life Together'].  But, I'm hiding behind him [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler] so you can't see it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, yeah, we toured in '04 [2004].  The whole time I was pregnant, we toured my full pregnancy.  I remember driving through France on a tour bus, you know, with my tummy full, my baby, she rolled.  She went everywhere.  And, we had a ball.  We, we did a lot.  And, we opened up, we headlined some places and we opened up other places.  But, we opened up for everybody.  And, we realized it was really cool because we could open up for everybody from The O'Jays, and Chaka Khan, to I mean, any of the contemporary R and B soul acts that were out at the time; Musiq [Musiq Soulchild] or Jill [Jill Scott], or you know, whomever was out at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, 2005, I mean, how long did you tour for, did you tour for what, six months or?
Speaker 2: We always worked year round, pretty much, you know what I mean.  We didn't really go on long extensive tours.  We never really did that.  We did it a few times later on.  We did it when we, when 'The Arrival' came out, and we did that.  But, we did some promo stuff and things like that.  But, we never really went on these extensive tours.  We were always just a working band.  I would say it's fair to say our whole career has been like that.
Story_ID: 635671
Speaker 1: In 2005, now interject anytime you think I'm going too fast--
Speaker 2: I'm good.
Speaker 1: --or going over something that needs to be covered--I mean, too fast.  But, in 2005, Black Lily closed.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: For good.  What happened?  What was the story?
Speaker 2: It ran its course.  Most of the people that started out there had recorded albums, were on the road doing their own thing, you know what I mean.  And, the people who patronized the Lily had gotten older, and you know, maybe they graduated tempo.  They weren't (laughter) there anymore, and they went on about their business, you know, and things changed.  And, it just ran its course really.  We missed everybody and I had told my husband [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler] how badly I, I missed doing it, and how I wish that we could all get back together.  And, my eighth anni- wedding anniversary, he pulled together a reunion with everybody and that was the last time we were all together.  And, I mean, everybody was there.  We were all together for the last time then.  And, then, I wanna say like six months later, then the club, the Five Spot [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that the Lily was in, that we held the Lily at, it burned down.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's always terrible when things are just completely gone--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and don't--
Speaker 2: It's sad because, it just was such an important, and turning point in all of our lives.  I mean, it was our moment.  It was our, you know, that was our St. Elmo's fire.  That was our (laughter), you know, that was our moment.  And, to see it burn down was kind of heartbreaking.  But, I think it was cool, it was, it was meant to be that way.  It had to be destroyed, you know what I'm saying.  So, that the moment could be preserved, you know what I mean.  I, I think the thought that there will be another one again, and that that moment happened and now it's gone, I'm actually settled with that.  But, my husband went out there the next day and the sign was broken.  The Five Spot sign had fallen and had broken and shattered.  And, when he brought home the little broken piece of it, that really was just the end, that was like the, the signature, you know, across the little film screen when it writes it out.  It was like, wow, it's gone.
Story_ID: 635672
Speaker 1: In 2005, you released your second album, and it's, and the title is a tribute to [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis and [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  You know, the albums were a--were just a living diary of us in--growing in our relationship.  And, 'Surrender to Love' was all about that dropping your pride and really trying to be together.  And, just really the transition of going from being just thinking about you to then having another person to think about.  And, that whole album was about that process.  'In This Life Together' was about the process of being in it, was like, okay now done, we done made that leap, we've made the transition and now how do we maintain this.  How do we stay together?  How do we live together?  And, the idea that we had this example, Ossie and Ruby who been together fifty years.  It was like, "Oh, okay."  See, now, this is what we do.  We name the album after this goal we're trying to attain and, you know, that was the name of their memoirs, 'In This Life Together' ['With Ossie and Ruby: In This Life Together,' Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee].
Speaker 1: That's right.  So, so, what were some of the hit songs on this album?
Speaker 2: It was song called "Where Would I Be" ["Where Would I Be (The Question)"] and was done with a young producer [Kristin Price] out of D.C. [Washington, D.C.] who was, you know, I didn't mention that.  I told a story early on about working with a producer when I was a kid and her name is Elise Perry.  And, after my relationship with my former manager [Charlie Jones] was over with, my relationship with her carried on.  And, she was the original writer of the music for "Far Away," and for "Rhythm of Life."  And, so, she was also around during the making of that album and she had a protege who she was working with, a young producer out of D.C., and, she did the track for "Where Would I Be."
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, now how did this one do?  How did this one do?
Speaker 2: The album did well.  We had a big, like, we had a really big song with "Where Would I Be," and people really loved that song.  I would say the, 'In This Life Together' was a win and a fail in my opinion.  Because it was a great album and the single came out, one of the best, biggest videos that we had done to date, and it was just really a good push.  And, then, we never did another video and never put out another single.  The record company [Hidden Beach Recordings] just didn't wanna spend the money.  And, it was just shocking for us because we just couldn't understand, you know, what was going on.  And, they had a habit of doing that because on the first album, we ended up having to finance our own video for our second single, which was "Stars."  We did our own video for it.  Taped it in my house, where I live, that house you came to (laughter).  We taped the video in my house, and I was pregnant with my daughter [Nina Dantzler], my second daughter, and my third child, so that was the same pregnancy.  And, you know, so then when we did the, the video for "Where Would I Be," we thought, oh, great.  Great video, first video, but that was the same story.  Second single came, no video and this time no single.  So, there was song on the album called "Woman First," which did well and people played even though it wasn't officially a second single.  But, it was a big turning point with my female, with our female fans.  Because it was song about transitioning as a mother after having a baby and how you look at yourself, and feeling like a woman still.  And, feeling sexy, or you know, or not seeing yourself just as, just this caretaker.  And, there was a subject matter that no one had really addressed in music.  And, a lot of women have responded and still respond to that song.  And, so it was kind of what I like to call like a, like a quiet hit.  A song that people all love, love, love but was never like a huge song for us.  My husband [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler] always talks about we should do, go back and do a video for it (laughter).  But, you know, 'In This Life' was a different album in terms of that, we kind of made the album in a bubble.  We went and we made that album, and it wasn't a lot of people around.  We didn't go and do a whole bunch of big live sessions with a lot of musicians.  There was live instrumentation, but a lot of it was done one instrument at a time.  And, it was kind of our very quiet introspective album.
Story_ID: 635673
Speaker 1: In 2006, Kindred the Family Soul's song "My Time" is named as the official song of the National Education Association's Read Across America, right?
Speaker 2: I forgot about that.
Speaker 1: Did you?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I think it's interesting.  Now, I don't know how--if--when I saw the name of it, "My Time" I thought about a book by a Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] author of children's books called 'Now is Your Time!' ['Now is Your Time!: The African American Struggle for Freedom'].
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.
Speaker 1: That's, I'm blocking on his name right now.  But, he's, Myers, Myers, Walter Lee Myers, [HistoryMaker] Walter Dean Myers.
Speaker 2: Walter Dean Myers.  I know, I know this author.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Aw, man, my kids--I know this author.
Speaker 1: And, they read his books.  I'm sure they do.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I mean, I know this author.  They learn about him in school.  But, they're--
Speaker 1: Well, he wrote a book of pictures of--
Speaker 2: This is your time.
Speaker 1: --black folks throughout history and it's dedicated to kids who are living now and the title is 'Now is Your Time!'.
Speaker 2: Wow.  I have to buy that for my kids.  They, "My Time" (background noise).  "My Time"--it's bound to happen (laughter).  "My Time" was a song that just really was a song that Elise [Elise Perry] and I sat and started and did together.  One of the few songs that--me and my husband [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler] pretty much write everything together.  And, it was one of the few songs that we sat and wrote, she and I.  And, it was like one of the first songs that we recorded for 'In This Life Together.'  And, I just had felt like I had learned so much, you know, and that I was still young.  But, I felt like all those feelings, you know.  The song is like, "After all of the hard work, and all of the things I sacrificed, now I finally know my worth, the whole of me, it has no price."  It was just about that moment, you know what I mean.  And, even 'til this day, my sister says it's her theme song.  So, she gets up in the morning and listens to that song and it gets her motivated and, you know, I can understand that.  We had a couple one time, a guy was proposing to his wife and wanted us to sing that song; said it was her favorite song, so.  We have--that's the beautiful thing about our music is that, our music accompanies moments in people's lives.  And, you can never, I mean, you can never replace that kind of importance to people.  You be like, my baby was born, or I got married, or that was when I got over the death of someone who I loved, or something like that.  And, we get all kinds of stories.
Speaker 1: Are there songs that you remember, I mean, that, you know, mark passages for you the same way that your--?
Speaker 2: All of 'em.
Speaker 1: Or, music.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Many, many, many, many, many of the songs, you know.  I just remember the song that we've actually never recorded the song fully but, it was, there was a little reprise of it on 'Surrender to Love,' a song that we used to sing called the "Family Song."  And, that song was one of the first songs I had ever, I had written after I got married and I was pregnant [with Aquil Dantzler].  And, I wrote the first half of that song when I was sitting home by myself and just reflecting over things.  And, so, hearing that song, my husband was playing a part of the song that, a cappella on the computer one day when he was just going through old files and stuff.  And, it just made me cry on the inside because I just remembered, you know, that beginning of everything and that, my life, and how it changed.  So, that song means so many things to me, you know.  Everything does.  I think that's the beauty of being a songwriter, and being able to have that.
Story_ID: 635674
Speaker 1: In 2008 you had twin, twin girls [Ain Dantzler and Lanaa Dantzler].
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes.  Yes.  And, we were waiting on them to come.  And, that's what we named our album, 'The Arrival,' because it was a crazy thing.  We didn't know we were even having twins until the very end.  About four weeks before they were born, we found out that we were having twins.  And, I was a traveling, singing mom.  So, I, and I, most, and had at that point two out of three of my children had been born at home.  So, I've been having home births and I believe in midwifery and that's kind of just something that I have a personal thing about.  And, so, I was used to childbirth.  I was pregnant, okay, pregnant (gesture) I'm rolling, we're working, we're singing, we're touring, we're recording, and we're doing what we would normally do.  I did notice I was a litter bigger and I was a little tired.  But, I thought, "Hey, I'm not a spring chicken anymore, had a couple kids already, maybe it's time to turn it in."  But, I just started to grow and grow and grow near the end.  And, I was busy and had never gone to get my ultrasound.  I'm like, "I don't care what the sex of the baby is.  Boy or girl, I'll be happy."  I was healthy as a horse, no high blood pressure, no gestational diabetes, nothing.  I was like, working it.  And, finally, I went to see my midwife and she says, "Aja [HistoryMaker Aja Graydon], you're getting a little bigger.  I'm concerned."  And, and I was measuring as if I was gonna give birth, and I had plenty of time left.  So, we went to get the ultrasound, and that day we found out we were having twins, and that they were girls.
Story_ID: 635675
Speaker 1: Well tell us about the album 'The Arrival.'  What, what were the songs and what were the hits on that album?
Speaker 2: Well, the album came out, and we did somewhat of a musical departure from what we would normally do.  And, but, but, the subject matter was right on point with what and who we were.  We wrote a song called, "House of Love," which was a culmination of everything that had happened to us up until that point.  And, just all the things that we had learned and everything from, you know, that point.  And, that's how we're gonna open the album was with this big song and was very heavily produced.  And, well, actually not really heavily produced, it's kind of minimal in the track.  But, we, we did somewhat of a musical departure.  And, to this day, I think we probably wondered if that was the right decision.  Although the song and sentiment of the song, I think, was extremely important.  And, is also one of my favorite songs, lyrically, that we've ever written.  And, that song was another--we just really came out to no support on that album.  Really, it was very minimal.  We weren't able to get a video for that album and we once again funded our own video and went to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] with a filmma- well, with a budding video director who had never really directed a video before, and contacted us on Myspace.  And, my husband [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler]--and his name is Matthew Cherry [Matthew A. Cherry].  And, we went out to L.A. and shot a video with him for "House of Love" and it came together really well, and we were able to get it played.  But, it just was a very tough album, and it was a tough time in the country, you know.  Things had started take a downturn within the music business, the economy was starting to go south.  Things were just, it was a tough kind of time, you know what I mean.  It was the beginning of a tough time, you know.  The really good stuff happened a few years later, but we all know that.  But, at the time, it just was not a very supported album.  And, even though it was literally one of the best albums we've ever done, and, we opened up to new songwriters and just really, really put together a really polished and good record, you know.  And, I think something that would be expected after doing two albums prior.  So, there really wasn't a hit on that album.  There was a lot of great songs, but, you know, we, we recorded two videos on it on our own and I think a lot of people may have missed that album.  But, you know, we're still very proud of it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, the videos were "The Arrival" and "Just the Way You Are," right?
Speaker 2: Were, "House Of Love" and "Just the Way We Are" [sic.].
Speaker 1: Oh, "House Of Love," okay.  All right.  Now, what did you--?
Speaker 2: I forgot to mention too that we had, we had done some touring also to, with, with [HistoryMaker] KEM and with John Legend during that second album.  I didn't mention that.  But, we had done some touring with them too.  Probably one of the other real extensive touring that we did, was we went on tour with John Legend and we did go on tour with KEM.
Speaker 1: Now, would this be in 2008 or 2009?
Speaker 2: Let's see, 'In This Life Together' came out, oh gosh, I guess that was 2008.  So, that was like the fall of 2008.  I mean, 2005, I'm sorry.  That was like the fall of 2005 and then we were on tour October and November, and then we were on tour again the following, I wanna say it was like January or February.
Story_ID: 635676
Speaker 1: Did you all have any, did you do anything during the election season of Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] in 2008 (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  At the time we had a business.  We had opened up a retail shop here in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  Right here on 45th [Street] and Baltimore [Avenue] called the Culture Shop [ph.].  And, we threw a big party the night of the election and we performed.  And, when he won it was just like pandemonium in the streets (laughter).  We had also done some other things where we had worked with a t-shirt company who had, a company called, oh gosh, now I done forgot the name of the company.  Of course, I'm forgetting everything right now.  Barack the Vote.
Speaker 1: Barack the Vote.
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).  And, there was a, they had a wonderful campaign going and we did and event with them as well.  And, but, I think it was just being a part of history, you know.  There were a lot of people who were in the city who, the night that we found out we had our very first African American president, they were in our shop that night, you know, they were there.  When they say their memory of where they were, they were there with us.  And, we performed and we sang and we just had a couple of different performances and just had a good time.  The twins [Ain Dantzler and Lanaa Dantzler] were little.  They were still, you know, they were tiny, but.
Speaker 1: Now, when did you open the business, the Cultural Shop?
Speaker 2: The Culture Shop?
Speaker 1: Um-hm?
Speaker 2: I'm not good with dates.
Speaker 1: Was this prior to the Obama campaign?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.  We had been in business for about a year.
Speaker 1: So, around 2007?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  I'm sorry.  That's wrong.  We opened the Culture Shop right--about two months after my third child [Nina Dantzler] was born.  So, we had been opened for quite some time.  The Culture Shop had been--opened up in the fall of 2004.
Speaker 1: Okay, 2004.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, what did the Culture Shop have?
Speaker 2: We sold a lot of independent designers.  Like, our big thing was, you know, we would be on the road and my husband [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler] would get clothing; t-shirts, jackets, from designers.  And, guys who were selling clothes out of the trunk of their car, on their, on their website.  Independent guys who really had great stuff, and women, who had great stuff, but they didn't have, like, that national exposure.  And, we thought that they should have a platform for this.  And, so, my husband decided to open up this shop and dedicate it to these kinds of designers and these people.  So, we opened the shop up and we carried, oh, so many designers, designers like Freek Ugly [Uglyville], Fly [Fly Supply Clothing], gosh it's a few of 'em are missing that I'm, that I'm missing.  But, it was quite a few designers that were there.  But, we also had an opportunity to get a, to get a contract with Nike [Nike, Inc.].  And, we were one of only maybe one or two independent retailers that were able to get a contract with Nike.  So, that was a big deal.  And, definitely one of only very few African Americans who had this, who had this contract.  And, we were able to sell sneakers and stuff exclusively that nobody else in the city had.
Story_ID: 635677
Speaker 1: Now, 2009 you were involved in, you started filming a web reality television show called 'Six Is It.'
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, what inspired this and what was it about?
Speaker 2: Well, after the twins [Ain Dantzler and Lanaa Dantzler], we were like, "We're not gonna have any more children," you know.  I'm trying to convince my husband [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler] to get a vasectomy and that conversation went on for some time.  And, before it could happen, we got pregnant again, and we were happy and everything was great.  But, certainly, there were a lot of challenges in terms of, at the time like I said, things had changed, the country was changing, we're going through a recession, was a tough time to add another child into the family.  And, we weren't really working a whole, whole lot.  So, we decided to document it, you know, that we had the sixth child [Deen Dantzler] on the way and that that was it.  And, also too it was documenting the waiting on his birth.  But, also too just our environment, our kids, our works, what we were going through.  We revealed things that we probably didn't think that we would have.  We talked about shows and you know, how much it took to pull the family together to do things, and how that went.  We also documented my birth and having a home birth with my son and just all the dynamics that people constantly ask us about, you know.  We were also asked that question like, "How do you guys do that?"  'Cause in the course of, you know, putting out three albums, you know, we had five children.  And, this was like amazing to people.  They couldn't understand.  "How do you sing and make records and you have five kids?"  And, then once we had the sixth on the way, we just decided, "Okay, look, we should share this because this is really an intense situation that we think people need to see."  And, it just became really profound.  But, I think it became more profound for us than it was for other people because it was just this, my husband calls it, a moving photo album.  It became this document of our lives and our children's growing up.  I look back on those episodes and it's just like, it's amazing to me.  I'm sure you can understand, if you go home and you pull out an old photo album and you start looking through the pictures, you know, it's amazing to watch it.
Speaker 1: So, this was broadcasted on your website?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We put it out on the website and it was also streamed on blackandmarriedwithkids.com.  And, Tom Joyner's website also ran it, as well as essence.com and we got a lot of support.  Tom Joyner interviewed us about it.  And, subsequently, also interviewed me about home birth which was something that was, you know, another thing that we talked about that was in conjunction with the web series.  But, the web series has been very well received, and I think it was a great way for our fans to get an inside look on us, and you know, people love it.  To this day, people keep, you know, ask us about it all the time.
Story_ID: 635678
Speaker 1: Now, what are the, I guess, you know, I guess some of this might seem obvious, but what are some, some of the struggles of trying to, you know, have a, have a stable home life, and you know, a nurturing home life and have a career in show business too?
Speaker 2: I would say the main challenge is financial.  Because it's just not a business, it's a business that feels like its feast or famine.  And, I think you can look at it that way, if you look at it that way it can be very difficult.  But, over the years, we've been blessed because we've had and carve out a way to have a nice middle ground between both.  And, so, it can be quite difficult and challenging to figure out how do you, you know, how do you apply for a home loan?  Like, how do you tell people how you make your money?  Like, when you can make a lot of money and then turn around and make (laughter) a little bit of money.  So, that was--been a challenge.  The other challenge is I think a general challenge of having many children.  Really being able to hone in on who each person is individually.  And, really give them the proper time and the proper attention and really recognizing and seeing them and knowing their nuances, that's really difficult.  And, to also do the same for your, for your mate.  So, I think our challenges are really not that different from every family, you know, I think, you know.  But, then time management as well.  I have a lot of that.  Trying to manage time and prepare for things and, you know, when I leave town, it's not just about "Oh, do you have a babysitter," it's about six outfits and six homework, I mean, well three homework assignments, and what are you guys gonna eat for dinner, and all the meals planned, and is everything done.  It's a lot of planning.  There's a lot of organization, there's a lot of things.  So, you have to be easy on yourself and not be too hard on you.  And, realize that things will slip through the cracks and being patient and all those different things.  It's, that's been the challenge for me in terms of that.  And, being a young mother, because I started my family, I was not even twenty years old yet.  Well I was twenty, I wasn't twenty-one when my son [Aquil Dantzler] was born.  So, I've been a mother almost half my life.  So, that was, you know, probably be, you know the challenge.  But, you know, it's also obvious beauty that way outweighs all the challenges.
Story_ID: 635679
Speaker 1: Now, you still live in the community.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean, as a, it's a neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I got neighbors (laughter).
Speaker 1: You have neighbors and--
Speaker 2: And, block parties, and well, block captains, and all that, yeah.  It's a Philly neighborhood where we live and we enjoy that.  One of my husband's [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler] visions for the shop when we had the, when the shop was open, because we did eventually have to close the shop, but, when the shop was opened, he wanted to make the shop in the neighborhood.  He wanted to improve the neighborhood.  He's always been a neighborhood guy, you know.  He's also the guy that people, "Hey," you know, he speaks to everybody, you know.  Everybody knows him and he's walking down the street and he, he speaks to the, to, he speaks to the neighborhood drunk the same way he speaks to the block captain, you know what I'm saying.  He speaks to those people the same.  That's the, he does, you know, it's, so, he's always been that guy.  So, he, that was his vision.  So, we wanted to stay where we were.  We wanted to live in the neighborhood and invest in that neighborhood and be a part of that, you know.  Certainly, there are some days where, you know, you wish there was a big gate (laughter) around your house, you know.  But, those days are not as often as you would think.
Speaker 1: Now, this, the neighborhood, do you still live in Cedar Park [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?  Is that the name of this neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: Now, that's the new neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: That's the new name of it.
Speaker 1: Oh, what was the old name of it?
Speaker 2: Southwest Philly [Southwest Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, somebody came up, I suppose, gentrifiers came up with the name Cedar Park.
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably.  I mean, somewhere along the line it became Cedar Park.  But, I've seen the neighborhood grow and change and, and you know, from a place where, you know, you wouldn't really wanna stand on the corner after a certain time.  And, then now, it's just really much different.  But, it's good.  It's a good thing for the neighborhood to an extent, and it's a good thing for the people who live there.  You just wanna maintain diversity and make sure that that stays there, 'cause that's the beauty of the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There's a quote in here, I think from The Philadelphia Inquirer about your car being broken into five times I think.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: I mean, my car has been broken into.  People know what car we drive, you know.  And, so, that doesn't always welcome people who care, or are grateful that you're there.  They just, you know, but my husband, though it frustrates him, he always try to, gets me to be patient about certain things like that.  Because he's always like, you know, "People in their desperation and what they don't have, you know, people steal because they don't have."  And, you know, this was the speech he gave me after my son's bike was taken off the front porch or something like that, and, you know.  And, I think, you know, living in an urban setting and, you know, you're always gonna have certain things that happen.  But, we love it here and we enjoy being a part of a historical neighborhood, number one.  And, having an older home that you have to give that care to, and it has all the character and the beauty, and the neighborhood has its story.  And, as you been there and you've been there over time and you become a staple of the community.  You become a part of its history.  And, as a family, that's who you are.  And, now, that's really what's happened.  I go into my coffee shop, into my cleaners, into my corner store (laughter), and it's all kinds of, the neighborhood grocery and all of that, and they know me and I enjoy that.  I like that.  I think that and, even with my dad [Richard Graydon] and his heart of hearts, that would make him proud because I think he would think, you know, I think he, he feels that that would be something that was be about how we were raised when we were kids, about being proud of where you're from and where you live.  And, bringing up the people around you and that kind of thing, so, you know.  That's not to say that we might not move to the suburbs one day (laughter).  But, not if I have anything to say about it.
Story_ID: 635680
Speaker 1: In 2011, Kindred the Family Soul released its fourth studio album, 'Love Has No Recession'--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --on Shanachie Entertainment [Shanachie Records].
Speaker 2: Shanachie.
Speaker 1: Shanachie.  Okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Everybody says that.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Don't worry about it.
Speaker 1: All right.  I'm--Shanachie Entertainment.  And, this is your first album away from Hidden Beach [Hidden Beach Recordings], right, since you started?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, now, why did you move away from Hidden Beach and what is Shanachie?
Speaker 2: Well, we moved away from Hidden Beach basically for, you know, the reasons that I said, you know, just having kind of minimal financial support on the albums.  And, you know, though I felt that creatively they seemed to always respect our point of view, you know.  We never really go into a lot of stuff about that.  And, they never gave us a hard time about image or any of the things that big companies really give you a big issue about.  I think their thing was just lack of financial support and really placing the album (background noise) (laughter).  Hello, I see the neighborhood's out there.  You know, lack of financial support, lack of, lack of placing the album in the best possible situation for it to do well.  And, that was pretty much why we left.  We felt, maybe we won't get a huge deal someplace else but, what we will do is be, if we have to be on a small scale, let us be on a small scale on our own terms, you know what I mean.  Instead of in a situation where we wanna do something and then it's like, "Oh, we refuse to pay for that," you know.  So, that was our thing.  Was, so, you know, it, but it was a really amicable parting of ways, truth be told.  I think there was an understanding of what the issues were and really no way to fix it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, how was this album received?
Speaker 2: Very well.  People have, I'll tell a story, and I've told this a couple of times but I'll tell it again.  We had a critic that had reviewed us several times and we always got really good reviews on our albums.  We had a critic who admittedly just wasn't into us as a group.  He was like, "Look, I don't have anything against them, it's just not my thing," you know, "They're okay.  I wasn't really into it."  And, he reviewed the album and he said, "You know, this is a really great album."  And, he said that, "It's probably the closest thing and, not that it can be compared to because nothing can, but it is the closest thing that I would be able to compare to 'What's Going On.'  In terms of the sentiment, the musicality of it and everything that it, you know, as far as its attempt to, to musically say something about what's going on in the world."  And, so, for us, that's huge to have someone, to al- to convince someone who's not been convinced prior.  But, then to also have them convinced to the point of comparing it to something that is a classic.
Story_ID: 635681
Speaker 1: So, do you plan to produce future albums yourself?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  This al- well, we'll be continuing to do Kindred [Kindred the Family Soul], you know.  Kindred is just, it is a journey that needs to be documented because this is just an opportunity for people to see the relationship, and the life, and the history, grow and blossom from one stage to the next stage, to the next stage.  And, 'Love Has No Recession' is just, it's really about that overcoming, overcoming hardship, overcoming, you know, building your relationship with each other and everyone around you to the place where superficial things do not break it.  And, that's what 'Love Has No Recession' is about.  And, that is the message that I think will always be useful for people.  So, as I said before, our journey is one that is important to continue to tell because it's just gonna be the same journey that people continuously go through.  And, we wanna be the soundtrack to that.  And, it's just a lot of music in us.  We're really creative people, and we couldn't not do music.  That's not even in the cards (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, now, what are you planning for your next album?  Do you have any plans yet?
Speaker 2: Not conceptually.  But, we've had some ideas on the table, you know.  People have asked us what we'd be interested in doing.  And, we've discussed it amongst each other, doing a double album where it would be kind of like a yin and yang thing.  Where he would do an album and I would do one.  And, it would be kind of like the OutKast album from a few years ago when they did 'The Love Below,' and, I mean, I forgot what the name of it.  'Speakerboxxx' and 'The Love Below' ['Speakerboxxx/The Love Below'].  And, so, it'll just, you know, we just are trying to, you know, go over what we would maybe do.  But, we haven't really decided.  But, you know, I think that that's a good idea.  It may be something we'll look into doing.
Story_ID: 635682
Speaker 1: Tell me about the space that's, that we're in right now.  This is part of something you're doing too, this?
Speaker 2: Right.  We started, this year we started a media company.  It's called Media Shack.  And, it really spawned out of us consistently producing our own videos (laughter).  We had produced so many of 'em that it just made sense to buy the equipment.  And, then once you buy the equipment and, you know, we, we partnered together with a, with our stylist and, and an image consultant, and a former band member who is also an editor and also shoots as well.  And, the, you know, Tommy Hooper [Thomas Hooper] who we were talking about earlier who is on the tape as a witness.  He did all of the graphics and everything for 'Love Has No Recession.'  And, so, we just kind of partnered together with people who we've been working with and who have beautiful creative minds and really involved in making this thing work and started a company.  And, it's been fantastic.  We've involved ourselves in, you know, helping to revamp the Uptown Theater here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  My husband [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler] has joined the board for that and we've been doing some work with them.  And, also with some charity organizations here in the city.  We feed the homeless.  We've also--doing music videos for other artists.  And, our--we've also produced several videos, several more videos for ourselves (laughter).  And, photo shoots and it's just been a beautiful thing to spread your wings into some other work.  But, I think it makes sense 'cause it's just been a progression and coming out of doing things and being proactive, and having an independent artist mentality.  Because that's something that spawned out of the whole, you know, decline of the music business is that the independent artist is now no longer looked at as the little guy, he's actually looked at as the smart guy.  And, the independent artist mentality is something we have pretty much always had even though we had record deals.  We always came up with our own concepts and video treatments and did those things ourselves.  And, so, we're just taking the mentality we've always had and just spreading our wings into other things.
Story_ID: 635683
Speaker 1: What's your assessment today when you look at the, the state of music today, the music in your generation, I mean, what do you consider to be the state of that music?
Speaker 2: Well, I think probably I'm biased 'cause I'm older.  So, I think once you get older, you tend to romanticize your own generation's music and demonize the music that's happening (laughter) at the current time.  I mean, you know, there was a time when people, you know, thought Motown [Motown Records] sucked.  Like, "Aw, I don't like that, you know, it's not, it's not bebop, so I don't mess with it."  So, certainly there is a disappointment to me in the, in the lack of diversity and subject matter in music today.  Especially, within black music.  I just feel so dead sometimes when I listen to it.  It just doesn't give me any life, you know.  It--there's no wide range of subjects.  It's like, okay.  I don't mind a song about sex.  Who doesn't like 'Let's Get It On,' you know what I mean?  But, do I have to listen to nine songs about sex, back to back to back to back to back (laughter)?  So, that bothers me.  But, I think out of an environment like that, always spawns some really great stuff that's happening under the surface.  And, so, that is exciting, you know.  You're seeing a lot of people do things, and experiment and spread their wings and do stuff that's really gonna be considered classic when, in thirty years, in forty years, you know what I mean.  When someone is being interviewed for HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] and they're talking about this time period, or my time period as their influence, they're gonna be talking about Bilal.  They're gonna be talking about Jill Scott.  They're gonna be talking about, hopefully, Kindred the Family Soul.  They're gonna be talking about Anthony David.  They're gonna be talking about Eric Roberson.  They're gonna be talking about Sy Smith.  They're gonna be talking about, you know, a wealth of different artist, you know what I mean, who are fantastic.  So, I have a lot of hope for what's happening because I feel like when you're backed into a corner that's when all the great stuff happens.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I'm, I'm actually hopeful, extremely hopeful.
Story_ID: 635684
Speaker 1: One of the questions we always ask is, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: What are my, my hopes and concern for the African American community?  There are so many because, there are a lot of them.  But, I think a broad kind of hope for African Americans is that we take a lot of focus and place it on kids.  And, educating them about exactly what we're doing here.  Because I think there is just a lack of appreciation and knowledge for their history and where they come from and who they really are.  And, this is just, obviously just an ongoing trauma and challenge that we've been trying to overcome since slavery, is just trying to figure out where, where we come from.  Who are we and what does that mean, and what is our place in the world?  And, how does that make us important and, you know, raising this general self-esteem of a whole race of people.  And, my hope is that we really continue to fight that fight for the building of the self-esteem.  Because I think that maybe there is a sense of relaxedness that's happened that scares me.  And, I think, we really need to be careful about how relaxed we get with that.  When I was growing up I think there really just was a sense of that urgency about kids knowing where they came from and who they were.  And, that my mom's [Susan Knox Graydon] generation really took that seriously.  Any time you can be raised by an admitted, you know, criminal (laughter), who was, you know, at, at best sometimes a womanizer but really loved his kids, you know, in terms of, in that environment and still he required you to know who invented the stoplight, and, still required you to know, who you were or where you come from, you're special, those things are important.  It--even in that environment, that I got that, that I think it's important for us to not to forget to give that to these kids 'cause they are really the key.  And, I guess, my other hope is just that we continue to be ourselves and not chase after any image of what we think is successful.  That I think one of the things that we've--ways that we've won in the past as, as an, you know, a systematically oppressed people is that we've just set the trend.  We allowed our darkest hour to be our brightest hour by just doing what came naturally.  What was beautiful about who we were and what we did and, did that to the fullest.  And, didn't try to do something that was fashioned or for us to do, or chasing something.  We just did us.  And then that, that became something really beautiful.  That became jazz.  That became hip hop.  That became the Harlem Renaissance.  That became that.  That's just my hope, is that we just be true to that.
Story_ID: 635685
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, and you're still young by the standards that we're used to--people (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --is there any major thing that you would do differently if could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: Anything I would do differently (laughter).  Well, no.  Because, I mean, that's just not my belief system, you know what I mean.  I just believe that your fate is written before birth and that that's where you're supposed to go.  And, certainly you do have, you do have a freedom to choose things and everything.  But, you make the decision you feel is best at that moment.  And, you learn the lesson you're supposed to learn.  You live the life you're supposed to live.  And, I really do believe that all things really work out for the best.  They work out for your best possible outcome.  That every moment is the best possible outcome for you in the place where you are.  This is the best possible place for you to be.
Story_ID: 635686
Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy.  My children, and I'm pretty sure that's a real common answer.  But, it's just the truth.  My children are my legacy.  My children know what's written in between my lyrics.  My children know everything about me and can learn from the full scope of me and not just a certain point of view.  'Cause I believe my music is my legacy, but, I think my children are my true legacy because see earlier you asked me, "Thinking about your parents' personality and their traits, who are you in that scope of things?"  And, it made me think about everything about them, good and bad.  So, my children know everything.  They see the things I don't want them to see.  They learn the lessons that I don't think I'm teaching.  They learn all of that.  And, they get to see me at the height of my creativity.  They get to see me at that as well.  So, I really am looking forward to seeing what kind of people they turn out to be, and what kind of lessons they teach.  So, I really think that is really the legacy.  What I leave behind, what will last generation upon generation.  I said my favorite song of ours is 'House of Love.'  And, the lyrics in that song go (singing), "I used to think of all the things we've overcome as just our history.  But, now I know that all the things we've built together will be our legacy.  The world will know that we were here.  Our intentions stay sincere.  Our purpose and heart were clear.  Our children will have children of their own, and our love will live on for generations to come."  So, I think that is--really sums up what I think about that.
Story_ID: 635687
Speaker 1: Tell us about your children.  Now before we started this interview, you were giving me an analysis of your son's basketball (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --that demonstrated a depth of knowledge about something that he was involved in and I mean, so, just tell me about your children.
Speaker 2: My children are really just the funniest people I have ever met.  They are so funny.  And, I love it because I'm a really dramatic person and I have these really dramatic children.  And they're just over the top in their feelings and emotions, and they can express themselves really well.  And, they use big words in the right context.  And, they always freak me out and make me laugh and they are great.  I mean, they drive me insane.  But, they're awesome.  My ol- my oldest, my first child [Aquil Dantzler] is just very emotionally mature person.  I, I love him because he just represents the old soul in me and his dad [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler].  People said that about us when we were kids, and he's the same type of child.  People say he's an old soul.  But, I love it that he still wants to be a kid, and he reaches out and lets me know that, in healthy ways and sometimes in ways that say, "I'm a kid," (gesture), "pay me some attention."  And, I love that about him that he is emotion- in touch with his emotions in that way, you know.  But, my daughter [Nina Dantzler] is just like her dad, literally.  Like I said, drop her in the, in the desert with a rubber band and two matchsticks and she's good to go.  I really believe this kid can fend for herself in any situation, you know.  But, I see in the, my daughter who is the middle child is very sensitive and she is a singer.  One thing about singers, they sing.  If somebody tells you they sing and they never sing, they can't sing (laughter).  Singers sing all the time.  And, this girl sings all the time.  She sings all the time.  But, not to be outdone by the twins [Ain Dantzler and Lanaa Dantzler] 'cause I'm gonna tell you right now.  The oldest twin, this child is, she performs nonstop, and not just singing but dancing.  And, she wants to talk to you and she communicates and she remembers things and she's just amazing.  I think, she's so amazing that it doesn't even feel bad to say she's amazing around the other children because they see she's amazing.  And, her twin is just as amazing but she's quiet and introspective and looks, and finds, and sees everything.  She's totally into what people are doing.  She wants to observe you completely.  Sometimes before she ever speaks.  She won't even speak to you 'til after she's read your whole record.  And, then the baby [Deen Dantzler], he is so loved.  He has the personality of a person who has no insecurities because his secureness is so circled.  Because there's seven of us around him all the time, you know, giving him attention, love, push, teaching him, guiding him.  He just is the happiest baby because he lives in a bubble of security.  He is--and, so, that is like, you almost envy this kid.  Like, wow, this is what it feels like, that's what it looks like to feel fully secure and that you are loved.  Not that the other kids don't get it but you hear what I'm saying.  It's so intense from everyone else.  So, the children--but, I do think my children, the one thing that they've lacked from us, based on specifically us being artists, is that they have a bit of separation anxiety.  They love us so much, they wanna be around us so much that when we're not there, I think even though they're comfortable with, that this is our lifestyle and this is our family, I do think they get a little anxiety when we're away, when we're not right at arm's length.  And, I pray that that will not be something that will cause them harm later in life.  But, they're amazing and they are certainly the children that we, the two of us should have made.  To think about who we are, they are a total representation of, of us, from the rooter to the tooter.
Story_ID: 635688
Speaker 1: There's a story about your wedding rings, I think, that speak to maybe how you live your life, and so, can you tell that story?
Speaker 2: When we got married, when we decided to get married, we didn't have any money, you know.  We were both doing music and so that was just that.  But, we wanted to get married and we didn't wanna wait a long time.  And, so, we went into a silver shop and that sold all kinds of really nice silver jewelry.  And, I think we spent about twelve bucks [dollars] a piece on matching wedding bands.  And, you know, I wore them for a long time until my husband [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler] replaced mine later on with something I guess more extravagant but, and also I couldn't wear them 'cause my fingers got fat when I got pregnant (laughter).  So, I had to wear it around my neck.  But, you know, we just wanted to be together, you know what I mean.  It wasn't about two months' salary or a diamond or what cut it was or anything like that.  We just wanted to be married.  And, so, we just wanted something to represent that we were a union, that we were married.  And, that was, that was all we really cared about.  We didn't spend much money on our wedding or anything like that.  It wasn't like we didn't know a thousand people, 'cause we did.  We just felt it was more important to make that commitment.  And, that was, you know, that was pretty much it (laughter).  I think I'm remembering it properly.  But, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to raise before I ask my last scripted question?
Speaker 2: No.  I don't think so.  I think you asked a lot of good stuff (laughter).  I mean, yeah, I mean, I think I'm good to go.
Story_ID: 635689
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.  I just wanna be remembered with a smile.  Like when people think about me, I want them to get that little smile on the inside.  You know, when people think about a person and it's just like wow.  That person made you happy, you know.  That person was kind to you, was good to you.  And, I was saying to you earlier that when we went to HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] event for--with [HistoryMaker] Valerie Simpson in tribute to Nick Ashford ['An Evening with Valerie Simpson in Honor of Nick Ashford'], how it was just a beautiful thing to see people, so many people from so many different walks of life have an intensely beautiful connection with you.  And, that says a lot about you as a person.  That people have, connect with you easily, and that is was beautiful, and it was beautiful enough to remember.  And, that that was what they remember most about you.  That's really important to me; connecting with people and having people remember me in a kind way.  And, a person who took the time to look you in your eye and talk to you and encourage you or take your conversation or listen to your music or be concerned about you.  That's extremely important to me.  And that's how I wanna be remembered.  I wanna be remembered as a good mother.  I want my children to remember those things, to remember what I smelled like.  And, (laughter) remember what I cooked or what, or something encouraging that I said.  Or, that they're about to do a bad thing and that something I said keeps them from doing it; makes them do the right thing.  So, I think that's how I wanna be remembered.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: You're about to make me cry talking about my kids (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, that gets me too.
