Story_ID: 580058
Speaker 1: Okay this is a photograph of my husband Russell Gilliam with Mayor Harold Washington taken some time probably between '85 [1985] and '87 [1987] and it's just, it's a good picture of both them, but it's a particularly good picture of Harold.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready?
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is a picture taken at a going away party that my husband arranged for me in 1989 when I was leaving the City of Chicago [Illinois].  It's my husband, me, Mayor Daley [Richard M. Daley] and my parents, Arthur [Arthur Gist] and Vivian Gist [Vivian Montgomery Gist], both of whom are now deceased and it was a really happy occasion at The Field Museum [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ready.
Speaker 1: That's me with Mayor Eugene Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] on the rostrum of the city council [Chicago City Council], this would have been sometime between '87 [1987] and '89 [1989] and at a city council meeting.  At the time I was chief of staff.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is me with Mayor Harold Washington sometime between 1984 and '87 [1987] on the rostrum of the city council chambers.  At the time I was budget director and we must've been going through some fairly pleasant experience since we're both smiling.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready?
Speaker 1: That's me with Mayor Michael Bilandic, it would've been back in 19--probably '78 [1978] when I was appointed acting commissioner of what became the Department of Consumer Services, [City of Chicago Department of Business Affairs and Consumer Protection] an interesting period.
Story_ID: 580059
Speaker 1: We're gonna start by slating it.  My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer, and I want you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Including your middle name.
Speaker 2: Okay, I am [HistoryMaker] Sharon Gist Gilliam, G-I-L-L-I-A-M.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: We're going to have to reveal that huh? (Laughter) I was born August 24, 1943, leading edge of the Baby Boomers (laughter).
Speaker 1: And today's date, our location and your profession or occupation?
Speaker 2: Okay, today's date is, what is today's date?
Speaker 1: It's March 8th isn't it?  Isn't it March 8th?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, March 8th, 2006, we're taping this at the headquarters of the Chicago Housing Authority in our offices where I am the chair of the board.
Speaker 2: And your occupation?
Speaker 1: My occupation is supposedly (laughter) a principal in a consulting firm, UCG Associates [UCG Associates, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] where I lead the public sector practice.  I spend precious little time doing that though the last ten years, no fifteen--I guess fifteen years I've been in general management consulting leading a public sector practice.
Story_ID: 580060
Speaker 1: And I wanna start out, this is just really intended to be somewhat of a conversation.  We do what are called life oral histories.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I wanna--I'm gonna start out by asking five People magazine-ish questions, just short answers; your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food either ice cream or mash potatoes (laughter), nothing healthy.
Speaker 1: Your favorite, (laughter) that's a first that I've heard, okay your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring, I'm a gardener so I love spring.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably pinks and roses, pinks with a bluish tinge.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: I really don't have a favorite vacation place.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: There are those who would say that probably my favorite saying and one that I use all the time is and this too shall pass (laughter).
Story_ID: 580061
Speaker 1: Okay we're gonna get started and I want to have you start out by giving me your mother's name and what you know about her background and her growing up?
Speaker 2: Okay, my mom who died in 2003, in November 2003 was Vivian Emily Montgomery Gist [Vivian Montgomery Gist].  She was born in March 4, 1918 here in Chicago [Illinois] at the old St. Luke's Hospital on about 14th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue] over there.  Ultimately it merged with Rush [Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] on the West Side and became part of that, but that's where she was born, grew up in what is today known as Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois], which at the time was nothing more than the Black Belt (laughter) and went to public schools in, in that whole area.  I think she went to Farren [John Farren Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and a couple of other schools.  Her mother Sophie Montgomery did day work; that is she cleaned people's houses and her father, John Montgomery did any number of things.  He didn't have, that I ever remember, a real steady job.  He did--he cut hair, so he did barbering, he did plastering so that he would you know go around and pick up jobs doing that, so those are the kinds of jobs--she was an only child so I didn't have a bunch of aunts and uncles and what not on her side.
Speaker 1: Can you spell her middle name, the first, you said it was.
Speaker 2: Vivian Emily, E-M-I-L-Y (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, it's Emily, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Vivian Emily Montgomery.
Story_ID: 580062
Speaker 1: Now your [maternal] grandparents do you know how they ca- they actually migrated here right?  Or did they--were they born here?
Speaker 2: Well no, my grand--my mother's mother [Sophie Montgomery], my maternal grandmother was actually born in Kentucky and her father, they referred to it as he ran on the road that is he worked for the railroads, and I get the impression because he worked for the railroads as a cook and this is before the era of the Pullman porter, and he--I get the impression though nobody ever said it and it would've been my grandmother who would've had to say it and she never did.  I get the impression that he passed and while my grandmother was born in Kentucky they lived--they moved to Minneapolis [Minnesota] which was evidentially the end of the line of this railroad and then ultimately because this was a railroad center they moved to Chicago [Illinois], and there are stories and, but no extant photographs that I've seen that my grandmother's brother which would've been my mother's uncle looked white and he died in what, I guess World War II [WWII], but you know I get the impression that he was able to work on the railroad as a cook and what not by simply passing and was probably half a quarter white or whatever, but he looked white enough.
Speaker 1: Was your grandmother brown skinned?
Speaker 2: No, she's very fair skinned.
Speaker 1: So they both were fair, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah she was fair skinned though she was obviously black and my mother [Vivian Montgomery Gist] was very fair and but as a child evidentially you know it was somewhat confusing.  She had long straight as a child red hair and you know it's--so who knows (laughter) really back then what was going on and since there aren't any aged aunts and uncles to talk about it, my mom's gone.  My grandmother you know died in the '70s [1970s] so.
Story_ID: 580063
Speaker 1: Do you remember any stories that your grandparents shared with you, either you know grandfather or grandmother that's--?
Speaker 2: Well my mother's father [John Montgomery] he was born down in the Mississippi Delta.  I think the place was Itta Bena, Mississippi or, or somewhere down there and now his was probably the more--in a way the more interesting family.  His father was you know by family history this big black man who was married to this little woman who reportedly was, if not Indian, half--American Indian, Native American and they had--there were like thirteen children in the family after she had the thirteenth child, you know I say she realized (laughter) she had to take care of all these kids, up and died you know (laughter) because I mean the thought of taking of thirteen kids is enough to kill you (laughter).  So she died, but the amazing thing was back--so my grandfather would've been born in the late 1890s I suppose so his father would've been born what in the 1870s possibly, but he owned his own land in Mississippi and they farmed, they grew whatever you grow in Mississippi, that's, that's what they did and he owned his own land and he believed in education for girls, so my father's--or my grandfather's sisters were educated for the time.  Now for the time they went through high school down there in Mississippi.  They went through high school and they became grammar school teachers in these little all-black schools since a teacher in an all-black school in these rural communities you know typically had nothing more than a high school education, and the notion that they might have gone to college that was probably so foreign to those people.  I mean it couldn't of even been imagined but that was the amazing thing.
Speaker 1: Now was this, first of all [HistoryMaker] B.B. King is from Itta Bena, Itta Bena, Mississippi.  The other thing is--are you saying that this grandfather?
Speaker 2: It would've been my great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Your great--so that is the--that's the grandfather who was, who could've of passed?
Speaker 2: No, no (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) His father, no?
Speaker 2: This is on the other side.
Speaker 1: On, on the other side okay, all right, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: No, no, but no those people it is generally talked about in the family and they did, they tended to look more like American Indians.  Now who knows (laughter), but they?
Speaker 1: Which side, now I'm--?
Speaker 2: This is my mother's father's people.
Speaker 1: Mother's father's okay, and before (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the Montgomerys.
Speaker 1: --the other was the mother's mother's?
Speaker 2: Mother's mother [Sophie Montgomery], yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, okay.
Story_ID: 580064
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Vivian Montgomery Gist] also share any stories of her growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah she, she grew up as I said in Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois] during the nineteen teens [1910s], '20s [1920s] and then the Depression [Great Depression] so I have heard, you know we heard endless stories about the Depression and how tough it was.  I mean you know the whole country was poor but if you were black you were whatever is more poor than poor just trying to scrape by and struggle by and so she you know talked about that.  She should have gone to Wendell Phillips High School [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], but my grandmother [Sophie Montgomery] was of the opinion, which was that neither Wendell Philips nor DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] were good enough and she determined that a better educational opportunity was Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois].  My mother was in high school from 1932 to 1936 at that time Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] was 95 percent white, and there was--I'm not sure there was this woman, Ms. Mattie Purnell [ph.] which we referred to as an aunt, but if she was--I--she wasn't an aunt she was who knows, you know a very close friend of my father's--of my grandfather's [John Montgomery] family.  Well she lived in the Englewood district and my maternal grandmother who was all of about five foot tall and also about five foot wide (laugher), but was known to be a force to be reckoned with, took my mother by the scruff of the neck and marched her up to Englewood High School with you know paperwork that had obviously was not entirely legitimate (laughter) and enrolled her in Englewood High School where she would have an opportunity to get a--according to my grandmother, a better education and you know she was clearly told that under no circumstances was she to reveal where she actually lived (laughter) which was outside of this district and my mother talks about--I mean it was the Depression.  My mother talks about walking 'cause she didn't have bus fare from wherever they lived down in the forty-hundreds over to Englewood in the sixty-hundreds, you know west of what is today the Dan Ryan [Dan Ryan Expressway] but of course at the time there was no Dan Ryan, but walking back and forth to school with her at the time best friend who became my Godmother Flossie Jett.  They would walk that twenty or twenty-five blocks to school, but hell they were teenagers (laughter) you know and back.
Speaker 1: So there were, the two black kids went together, two, she and her friend?
Speaker 2: She and her friend Flossie, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, did she talk about any experiences there at?
Speaker 2: She never seemed, she never talked about having had you know bad racial experiences or anything and she evidentially had fond memories because she had a yearbook and with pictures of various people and from time-to-time she'd go through--you got a sense of how devastating World War II [WWII] was though because she would go through and pick out the guys, "Oh you know, he died you know in the Pacific Theater, he died in the European Theater, he died--," you know all these young men who of course you know everybody got drafted and they all went off and a lot of them didn't come back.
Speaker 1: Now do you know what street she lived on in Englewood, your mother growing up?
Speaker 2: She lived in Bronzeville.
Speaker 1: I mean in Bronzeville, I'm sorry Bronzeville I didn't mean Englewood, sorry (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, that's fine.
Story_ID: 580065
Speaker 1: Now your father give his name and can you, what can you--?
Speaker 2: My father was Arthur Cleophus Gist [Arthur Gist], his--he was one of five boys and a girl.  He's the youngest and it was a family that had--the mother evidentially had a penchant for these fanciful names (laughter) 'cause an older brother was Olophius Gerald [Olophius Gist] known as O.G. always.  Then was the brother just older than my father. His name much to his chagrin was Prince Willie Gist [ph.].  Well as soon as he was of age (laughter) he changed his name to William Edward [William Gist] and the whole family called him Willie, they just called Willie Me [ph.] but they had, they (laughter) then there was Lloyd Bertrand [Lloyd Gist] and actually my middle name, my given middle name is Bertrand, Sharon Bertrand Gist [HistoryMaker Sharon Gist Gilliam] which I absolutely hated because as a kid and a girl you know who ever heard of a Bertrand you know and it--I was nearly grown and you know and I--and I came to like it 'cause it was different and the only other Bertrand I was aware of was Bertrand Russell, you know an English writer but (laughter), they, so there were five--he was born in Dallas, Texas.  They lived on Pearl Street there, it is an area of Dallas that is now part of the greater downtown, but at the time.  His father was John Gist, his mother [Annie Gist] died when was an early--when he was in his early teens and there had been a girl, five boys and one girl, but the girl died in the flu epidemic of 1919 or 1918 that worldwide pandemic, she died in that so they, they really didn't have a sister growing up.  It was these five boys and they--only one of them, Walter [Walter Gist], remained in Texas.  The rest of them, my dad and Bill came here [Chicago, Illinois], O.G. went first to Denver [Colorado] and then moved here and Lloyd, God knows why went to Buffalo, New York and, and lived there so you know they, they scattered around this country.  All--for some reason a number--O.G. was an accountant and one, I believe among the first CPAs [certified public accountant] in Illinois, but he was in county--he worked for the feds for years.  Bill had an accounting background but he went to work--he also went to work for the feds.  First the Social Security Administration then the FHA, the Federal Housing Administration which is a forerunner of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] fifty-three when he died, but he was the assistant regional administrator of HUD for Region Five.  Uncle Bill. And I still to this day, not so much now but certainly ten years ago as I would meet people in my work at HUD, they'd see my last name, and, "You related to Bill?" Because it was unusual at the time for someone black to move that far in the federal administration, but Bill was really smart and the, the memory though that I have of Bill, he chain--it's no wonder that he died.  He chain smoked unfiltered cigarettes, I mean chain smoked them.  He was one of those light up one cigarette from the next.
Story_ID: 580066
Speaker 1: And my father [Arthur Gist] was a small businessman.  He owned first grocery stores, then grocery packaged liquor then a tavern and because he had a--he too had an accounting background.  He went, he didn't finish college but he went, majored in accounting.  So he always kept his own books and you know he's beyond the long arm of the IRS [Internal Revenue Service] now and of course as any good small businessman in a cash business, he ran two sets of books you know (laughter).  So I grew up with the notion of two sets of books and you know you, you always had--what do you call it at the bank?  A safety deposit box, you know where you, where you kept you know the important papers and some cash you know (laughter).  This is how you did things, but Uncle Bill [William Gist] would always come over.  My dad always did his taxes at the last minute back when you--taxes were on March 15th as opposed to April 15th now with the six-month extension to get you to August.  Our entire--for the entire month of February our entire--the dining room table was covered with all of these invoices and papers, and I mean we could not eat dinner at the dining room table because it was covered with all of this paper, adding machines, tapes from the adding machines and you know my dad would get all this stuff together and what not and what not and then Bill would come over and for the final cooking of the books (laughter) so you could get these tax returns together in such a way (laughter) that whatever this income had, that had been skimmed could be you know successfully hidden (laughter), but hey you know better my dad should have the money and put these three kids through college then the feds have it and go waste it on some nonsense (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's cute, now did your--so you're saying your father he came here [Chicago, Illinois] at what age then?
Speaker 1: He came here in probably '36 [1936], '37 [1937], he came here to go to college.
Story_ID: 580067
Speaker 1: My mother [Vivian Montgomery Gist] got through Englewood [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] , graduated, was determined to go to college but of course my grandmother [Sophie Montgomery] you know she was doing day work then, she didn't have money for college tuition and all of that stuff.  So my mother worked part time and scraped together the money for tuition.  She went to Lewis Institute [Chicago, Illinois].  Lewis Institute was one of the forerunners of the Illinois Institute of Technology [Chicago, Illinois].  So she went to Lewis Institute and she was majoring in something totally useless--sociology.  My dad [Arthur Gist] came here, he was living with Bill [William Gist] also down in Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois] living with Bill and his then first wife and he went to YMCA Central College [Central YMCA Community College, Chicago, Illinois].  There was a Y [Young Men's Christian Association] college at the time and he was majoring in accounting.  There was this whole--at the time from what I can gather, this whole sort of South Side [Chicago, Illinois], young scene of college people and that's how my parents met, and my mother who was always terrible in math and what not met my dad, she was trying to get through a statistics course which was utterly beyond her (laughter) and he was helping her try and get through this statistics course you know and 'cause she didn't have a clue and he was always good with numbers, math, you know statistics all that--it was you know it was easy for him so he was helping her through that and they, they started dating I guess in around 1937, '8 [1938] somewhere in there.  My mother really liked the whole college life, the sorority scene all of that, but she couldn't afford it.  She couldn't afford the clothes that you needed to be a part of that but she loved it.  My dad, however, pledged Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] so 'cause his brother Bill was a Kappa so she took part in that whole social scene you know and--I grew up with the idea you know it's so different from the kids I see as a part of what I do now, 'cause from the time we were in the cradle my mother was saying, "Oh yes, and you'll go to college and you will pledge AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]," (laughter) I mean you know it was like your goal in life, and then you'll get a you know a nice profession you know teaching or whatever.  It, it--there wasn't the idea of holding out that you'll be a doctor or a lawyer, it was--we were very much children of the '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s]. You'll be a teacher and maybe go on and be a principal or you'll be a social worker and go on and run an agency or you know one of that sort of women's professions, not much talk about being a nurse you know, we, we weren't, very much related to that and certainly no talk of being a doctor or a lawyer or you know a rocket scientist, but the thing was you will go to college and you will pledge AKA (laughter) you know, I thought those things went together, everybody went to college and pledged AKA (laughter).
Story_ID: 580068
Speaker 1: The one question I have though about your father's [Arthur Gist] side of the family, since there were all these accountant types or math types was that a--was his father [John Gist] like that or do you know what?
Speaker 2: No, his father was a small (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Business--
Speaker 2: His father was an entrepreneur, he was a small businessman.  His father--and he talks about it all the time.  His father owned, as far as I can tell it would've been like a restaurant and what not in, you know a neighborhood restaurant but his father also built stuff.  He talks about the fact that his father with no blueprints, no plans built a two-story house, a two-story house, plumbed it, wired it, did all of that himself and of course made the boys help, (laughter) 'cause I mean you got five boys they're gonna help, and you know my father always told a story about how lazy Bill [William Gist] was.  He would scoot off and not do anything you know, so Bill was sort of destined to be the smart bureaucrat (laughter) you know, but that's what he--his father was entrepreneurial as was my dad you know, so that and there was, he talks about that whole era of people.  They had a cousin who was referred to as Doc Howell [ph.], he was a doctor.  There was another cousin who was an undertaker, you know and operated a funeral home and in fact his oldest brother, yeah O.G. [Olophius Gist] trained in the undertaking industry and you know I don't know if he ever became a licensed undertaker or whatever you call them, but that's what he originally trained in with the idea that he would remain in Dallas [Texas] and go into business with this cousin who ran a fairly large and successful undertaking operation.  So you know there--they were, but I have come to believe, I don't know if there's any objective data about this, black Texans are a somewhat different breed than black folks from say the, the Deep South and farther east, and they--the ones I have met over the years, the stories I've heard, they were just different.  I think they were more aggressive, they were more entrepreneurial, and it may be because they're descendants of people who struck out from somewhere going into the great unknown, I mean you know you're talking about Texas in the tracking off to Texas at the turn of the century or in the early teens.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Had to have been more than a notion (laughter) you know.  Who knows what's out there you know you still had Mexican Americans and Native Americans and very little development.  I mean they were just a different breed of people with a sort of a different attitude about things.
Speaker 1: I think you know actually you're right you know [HistoryMaker] Etta Moten Barnett's family was from Texas and they had--owned a lot of land.  I've heard also the thing of people owning a lot of land there too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well his, his family I mean they didn't know from renting, they always owned land, owned a house, they may have built it themselves (laughter) but they, they owned it and he owned businesses and what not and, and that sort of came down through the family I mean everybody believed in you know you go to school, you get yourself a career, you buy and own a house you know.  You have a couple of kids, you put them through school, certainly through college, you know it's just part of the family ethic.
Story_ID: 580069
Speaker 1: Now what of your parents, who, who do you--what do you have of each of them, I mean who do you resemble the most or what do you have of each of them, what, what traits?
Speaker 2: Probably I am most like my dad [Arthur Gist], I tend not to be nearly as gregarious, my mother [Vivian Montgomery Gist] was you know very outgoing and fun and all of that stuff.  I, I tend to be organized and fairly you know straight forward about, about things yeah.  I'm most like my dad.
Story_ID: 580070
Speaker 1: Do you remember your earliest memory of growing up, do you have an earliest memory?
Speaker 2: An earliest memory?  Well, probably you know I remember--I probably don't remember much beyond let's say about being five years old.  We lived in West Chesterfield [Chicago, Illinois], 92nd [Street] and Prairie [Avenue] and certainly I remember that playing in the big back yard and running up and down within reason--the street you know (laughter) since we were not allowed to cross the street (laughter) you know my world went from 91st [Street] or no from 92nd to 93rd [Street] on the west side of Prairie (laughter).  I could go across the street and visit Sheila Simmons [ph.] if I got permission.  She was directly across the street (laughter) and I went to, originally to Burnside School [Burnside Elementary School; Burnside Scholastic Academy, Chicago, Illinois] and I am just amazed that, that place is still open.  Burnside was old when I went there (laughter) I--it was one of these Chicago Public Schools built in the late 1800s.  I mean the place was ancient when I was there sixty years ago (laughter), but I--and we walked to school.  I mean you didn't have all this busing then so we would walk from 92nd and Prairie to what it is 91st and Langley [Avenue] you know and we had to cross what was then South Parkway, King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] but trundle on over to the--we did, walked to school and walked back.
Story_ID: 580071
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that your neighborhood and do you remember any of the neighbors in the neighborhood (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh sure.
Speaker 1: Okay can you talk about them?
Speaker 2: Well, West Chesterfield [Chicago, Illinois], and I didn't realize this until recently when I was reading a book on the history of public housing.  The area that I lived in it's a whole series of developments that starts on--there's Indiana [Avenue], Prairie [Avenue], Calumet [Avenue], so all of these houses were actually built by this--what was then the Chicago Housing Authority but not as public housing.  The housing was built--well my family moved in, in September of '45 [1945].  It--they started planning and building it in probably '42 [1942], '43 [1943] because there was an extreme shortage of housing during the Second World War [World War II, WWII], and you had all of those plants south and southeast but there was no housing for the workers to live in.  So the feds underwrote the building of all of this single-family housing.  They were really built as duplexes where we lived, you know two houses bundled together.  All of the single-family housing to house war workers but the federal government being the federal government and it's always realizing what needed to be done sort of late.  They got the housing built but of course by the time they got it built and it started being occupied the war was over.  Nonetheless, we managed to get in.  Now this is where you know--this after all is Chicago [Illinois].  This is where Uncle Bill [William Gist] came in.  Remember Uncle Bill works for the FHA, the Federal Housing Administration.  I mean the demand for housing was unreal.  My parents [Vivian Montgomery Gist and Arthur Gist], they, they were both working, they can afford an apartment.  There was no apartment to be found.  They were living with my grandmother [Sophie Montgomery] who lived at 5406 South Wabash [Avenue].  You know young marrieds living with the mother-in-law and my grandfather [John Montgomery], you know which was not a happy situation.  I was born in '43 [1943], so they were young marrieds with a baby living with my grandmother, you know and my mother was like on my father and she called him Gist.  "Gist you have got to find me a place of my own; Gist you gotta find me a place of my own."  So he--they, they somehow they found out about this housing development and it was being built by the feds or financed by the feds.  What do you do if you're a Chicagoan you get you a hook up, you go to your clout (laughter).  In this case Uncle Bill was the clout so they went to Uncle Bill and my dad got himself on the list, 'cause you always have to go through the appropriate paperwork and get on the list, and Bill got them to the top of the list (laughter).  So they got this, you know my mother was thrilled.  I mean in 1945 to have a single-family home out in--but at the time you were like in the country out there.  There was this development and pretty much all around it was prairie.  I mean as a kid I remember we would you know when we got permission to get off the block if you went to like 94th Street you could run around in these huge never developed vacant lots and look for snakes you know (laughter) which we did, so that we could scream and run when we found them, but I mean that's what--there was nothing out there, but that's where I lived--
Story_ID: 580072
Speaker 1: Well let me ask you, at that time who, who was in charge of public housing?  I know--I mean was it Robert Taylor [Robert Rochon Taylor] at that time or is that later?  Was it in the '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: Robert, yeah it would've been Robert Taylor would've been chairman of the board, [HistoryMaker] Valerie Jarrett's grandfather.  He would've been chairman of the board; Elizabeth Wood who was called the secretary [sic. executive secretary] but it's, it would--that's comparable to today's CEO.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: They were the ones running the Housing Authority [Chicago Housing Authority], but that housing was built and then as I say you know one of the few good things the feds ever did.  They built that housing in '50 [1950], '45 [1945] or it was '45 [1945].  In '49 [1949] they sold it with the people who were living in it renting had first right-of-refusal.  They sold those houses at the time for five thousand dollars and with a thirty-year mortgage, and you know my dad [Arthur Gist] and mom [Vivian Montgomery Gist] and most of our neighbors, I mean all of the people out there had been there and they tended, they had been in war industries but they tended to then go into--lots of people worked for the post office you know back in the days when you needed tons of people to sort the mail.  There were a lot of postal workers and those kinds of folks and they sold these houses for five thousand dollars with a thirty-year mortgage.  Your monthly note was forty-seven fifty, forty-seven dollars and fifty cents (laughter) that was your monthly note, isn't that amazing.
Speaker 1: Now was that, was public housing then a combination--you're saying it was a combination of single-family?
Speaker 2: Well this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was before the--
Speaker 2: This was high-rises and stuff and this, this was really not a part of the, the push to build you know Madden Park [Madden Park Homes, Chicago, Illinois], Darrow [Clarence Darrow Homes, Chicago, Illinois], Wells [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois] and all of that stuff which was really a slum clearance program.  This was building housing for war workers because I guess they had no idea how long the war [World War II, WWII] would go on and you had--remember you don't have any expressways then so if you've got to go and work at the steel mills--over east there was still steel mills and all of the plants out there, because remember all of the plants that are out southeast today producing cars and light trucks and SUVs, those had all been converted to producing war material.  How in the heck, and people didn't typically own cars then, you know it wasn't two cars in every family.  How in the world do you get out there from the central city and they needed to build housing closer to where the work was and where there was land, but you had housing you know this was built during the war when there was, what do you call it--materials weren't available.  So that housing tended to have no closet doors, you had really thin little baseboards, and it was built out of concrete.  Those places will be standing (laughter), I mean they were solid concrete you know with brick outside but those places are absolutely sturdy, not fancy you know, two bedroom, one bath, two stories, living room, dining room, full basement, coal furnaces, I mean just amazing but, but you know my mother was thrilled.  I mean here she had a house of her own with a big backyard, a front yard--that block had these--it was really sad.  They had these beautiful elm trees you know.  I remember as a kid her watering that tree (laughter) and ultimately those elms grew and they formed a canopy over the street and then they were attacked by Dutch elm disease and they all came down so now they have ginkgo trees, but you know and these huge backyards 'cause they didn't have garages and I think those lots, it's a 125 foot lot but I think those lots are extra deep.  So you had these huge backyards and because you had rationing, rationing is what I was thinking of, you really--people had gone through rationing where you really couldn't get all kinds of things so everybody out there, you had all this backyard space, heck you didn't have patios and all that nonsense, they put in gardens you know (laughter).  We had--we and all of our neighbors had a major garden.  I mean corn, tomatoes, string beans, okra, (laughter) green peppers all.  You had this major garden and a lot of the women didn't work you know they were stay-at-home moms 'cause they had all these--the two and three kids running around you know so they farmed (laughter), but I remember, I remember working in the yard you know my mother would let us go out there and dig with her and then she--at the end of the season she would put up preserves you know and because there were other people who had say a peach tree or an apple tree or--we had one neighbor that had a grape arbor and all of this, so she would put up all these preserves and make something called chow chow, which was, it's a relish which I have no idea how to make.
Story_ID: 580073
Speaker 1: Since we're talking along those lines what other sights, smells and sounds remind you of your childhood growing up there?  Sights?
Speaker 2: Sights?  Anytime that I see fireflies, lightning--we called them lightning bugs 'cause you know we were out in the near country you know.  Get a jar, punch holes in the top, run around until it got dark, really dark and we'd catch lightning bugs, so I think of that whenever I see lightning--fireflies, lightning bugs.  You don't even see them very much anymore.
Speaker 1: Right, smells?
Speaker 2: Smells, I don't know--associate any--well maybe apple pie.  Not that my mother [Vivian Montgomery Gist] made apple pie, we were poor and dried apples cost too much (unclear).  My mother made apple pie from apple sauce.  You could go to the High-Low [High-Low Foods]; that was a chain of stores at the time. Really it's cheap grocery stores.  You could go to High-Low and you could get a big jar of apple sauce for ten cents and unlike me who if I ever make a pie go and go buy the pie crust you know, I mean I haven't got a clue how you start making a pie crust from whatever you make it from (laughter), you--she'd make a pie crust, she'd fill it with this apple sauce and mix in butter or margarine and you know sugar and whatnot and bake it and I grew up thinking that was apple pie (laughter).  What did I know you know?  Kids will eat anything, you just tell 'em (laughter).
Speaker 1: Any sounds too?
Speaker 2: Sounds, probably not so much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 580074
Speaker 1: You went to Burnside Elementary [Burnside Elementary School; Burnside Scholastic Academy, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I went to Burnside Elementary until I was in middle of the fourth grade, 1953.  My dad [Arthur Gist] did factory work largely.  He worked at Ford Motor [Ford Motor Company] and any number of other places, but in say '48 [1948] or '9 [1949] he bought a store you know, a grocery store, 708 East 37th Street.  I will remember that as long as I live.  The buildings and stuff are no longer there.  He bought a grocery store from my godfather, Ben Jett.  Remember Flossie [Flossie Jett]?  She married Ben Jett.  Ben had gone into the grocery business before the war [World War II, WWII].  He did extremely well in the local grocery business during the war years when there was rationing because I think he probably skirted around the edges of the rationing and my father endlessly told stories of Ben selling horse meat as beef which was evidentially common during the war years you know 'cause beef was rationed you know, beef got sent to the troops, but horse meat was available and you know the more adventurous butchers and grocers cut it into cuts that looked like beef and sold it as beef with the population being none the wiser (laughter).  Anyway, Uncle Ben did extremely well and convinced my father that you know the way to go was to own a grocery store.  My dad bought the store and ran the grocery but what you know what my dad didn't realize was that the local grocer, you know time was coming to an end because you had the beginning of the growth of supermarkets who were gonna drive the local grocers out of business.  Nonetheless, that's, that's what he went into so.
Speaker 1: And he ran that grocery store how long?
Speaker 2: He ran that store probably until from the time he bought it in '47 [1947], '48 [1948] whenever it was until about '50 [1950], maybe '51 [1951] or '51 [1952].
Speaker 1: And then you moved--then that's--?
Speaker 2: We moved to the--my--he was out of the business, saved up money, was convinced that groceries was still the way to go.  All the while he was working, my mother [Vivian Montgomery Gist] would run the store during the day while he worked and he located a store at 13th [Street] and Springfield [Avenue] on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] and because there was--he kept his regular day job.  My mother--he would set the store up, my mother would run it then he'd come and run it.  So given no expressways at the time they were just building the what's 290 today [Interstate 290], there was no Dan Ryan [Dan Ryan Expressway] so there was no way to get from home to work to the store and all that around so that we moved to 13th and Springfield.  He was able to open the store, he didn't have money for no rent.  We lived in the basement behind the store.  We lived there for about a year, year and a half.  We lived in the basement behind the store.  He rigged up a shower down there.  We were in one, you can't call it a room, one big open area with the beds you know a sink, and that, that's what we did for about a year, a year and a half.  On Sundays he would take us over to my [maternal] grandmother's [Sophie Montgomery] and she would take us to church and we'd have sort of a proper bath (laughter) and what not and then we'd come home Sunday night, but that, that's you know, my, both my parents and three kids in a room about the size of this or an area about the size of this in a basement behind the store, then when we had a little more money we were able to get an apartment upstairs in the same building and so we moved up there.
Story_ID: 580075
Speaker 1: The, the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] was changing.  It was, it was--the West Side at the time was Jewish, that's that whole area; Lawndale [Chicago, Illinois] was a Jewish community and as blacks started moving in, the Jewish inhabitants left largely heading for the north suburbs, but in, in any event they left and I went to the Bryant School [William Cullen Bryant School, Chicago, Illinois] when we went over there.  Thank God that the supermarkets had not moved to the West Side so the store was very--and my dad [Albert Gist] was good, the store was very successful, he made money.  Opened a second store at 16th [Street] and Springfield [Avenue], that store did well and then we moved again to 1250 South Keeler [Avenue] to a bigger apartment and then with both the stores going well at some point he decided well grocery stores weren't going to make it long term you know because of the supermarkets, but what was gonna make it long term as far as he could see was booze you know (laughter) because the stores that he opened he tended to have packaged liquor and he, he found and bought a tavern at the corner of Roosevelt Road and Karlov [Avenue], went into the tavern business.  That was a money maker, taverns made money so he had that and ultimately he bought the building that the tavern was in so I mean you've controlled your costs you know right (laughter).  You don't have rent as overhead, you're buying the building, you've got an asset, an appreciating asset and at the same time he continued to own groceries and packaged liquor.
Story_ID: 580076
Speaker 1: You know and I grew up working in a grocery store you know, as a little kid you stocked the lower shelves.  Back in the day when there, when soda pop was sold in bottles all those bottles had to be sorted when they came, when people brought them back for their deposits.  Well as a little kid that was one of your first jobs, was sorting pop bottles into the correct shelves.  You know the Coke [Coca-Cola] bottles gotta go on the Coke shelves so they can go back with the Coke man and the Pepsi [Pepsi-Cola; Pepsi] and all of that so you know as kids that's what we did until you got tall enough to reach the counter and then you could add stuff up on the adding machine and learn to use the cash register and you know, so there was any number of little activities to keep us, and we didn't know, me and my sisters [Myra Gist and Vivian Gist Spencer], we didn't know from hanging out.  You know there was work to be done (laughter) in the businesses and all of us at one time or another worked in one or another of those businesses.  Now once they went into the tavern business you couldn't work there 'cause you were too young you know under the liquor licensing laws so but most of the time growing up he always had a grocery and package liquor where you could work and--I mean it was good experience because I mean because you were family.  Yeah you may have been a teenager but if he or my mother [Vivian Montgomery Gist] weren't there you may have been fifteen years old, sixteen years old, you were in charge, responsible and accountable for that store.  You supervised whatever employee who was there, you may have been fifteen and they were forty-five but I mean it was up to you to see that they were there, they were doing what they were supposed to be doing.  You were the one who took in any deliveries, reviewed those invoices and paid the delivery person.
Story_ID: 580077
Speaker 1: So let's talk about the difference when you moved you know from 92nd [Street] and Prairie [Avenue].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause it was you know from almost a rural environment to the city [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Well 92nd and Prairie was like a rural environment and of course the neighborhood where I lived was all black, I mean there was no nobody--but the school I went to, the attendance area for that was on the east side of King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive], then it was South Park [South Parkway].  That area was almost all at the time Eastern European refugees or immigrants who had fled those parts of Eastern Europe that were being taken over by the Communists at the end of World War II [WWII].  They were referred to as displaced persons or DPs.  As a child I thought that all white people were displaced persons and because we heard so much about them in school and they would come in their national dress their Hungarian outfits and this and do their little dances and what--but you know and they'd get--my mother [Vivian Montgomery Gist], my parents would talk about 'em at home and my mother particularly.  "You know these poor people, you know the Communists--first it was the Germans and then the Communists and took over their countries and they fled with nothing but the clothes on their backs."  So you know I grew up--I was growing up feeling sorry for white folks (laughter).  What did I know, they were displaced persons who had fled one step ahead of the Communists, who of course you know were the biggest boogie man in the world; with nothing but the clothes on their backs and they didn't have any food.  Maybe their parents or grandparents or whatever had been killed you know.  These to me were people to be pitied (laughter), poor souls and then we moved to the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] which was a totally new experience because I was use to--the folks I was used to were largely Roman Catholic, and they were these displaced persons.  Okay, move to the West Side a whole new group of people I knew nothing about.  All these kids were Jewish; they had been here for a couple of generations at least.  They celebrated all these holidays I didn't know anything about (laughter) you know and it was just and I realized well you know I came to realize that no, there are white people who've been here all along and they're Jewish (laughter) and there are these displaced people from Eastern Europe but you know that, that was a real sort of revelation and you know all these Jewish kids and learning a whole new set of holidays and, and you learned it 'cause so many kids were out of school at, at--during December.  You know we'd have a bulletin board for Christmas and a bulletin board for Hanukah.  You know I learned what a dreidel was and all of that (laughter), at Easter we'd have a bulletin board for Easter and a bulletin board for Passover so it's you know.
Story_ID: 580078
Speaker 1: Culturally it was good because you know after I went through that then I went on to a Catholic high school on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], St. Mary [St. Mary High School] and I went to school now with long-time Europeans because they tended to come from Pilsen [Chicago, Illinois] which was an Eastern European settlement.  There a few Hispanics but they would have been Mexican Americans also from Pilsen and a large number of Italians because they'd come from the near West Side and you know Irish and what not, so and my family is arguably I suppose Methodist so you know the--it, mine was not a particularly religious family.  My [maternal] grandmother [Sophie Montgomery] would drag us to church you know.  My dad [Arthur Gist] never went to church and my grand--my maternal grandfather [John Montgomery] was certainly not religious, in fact he was--made disparaging remarks (laughter) about preachers referring to them.  I always--I thought as a little kid that jack leg went with the term preacher, 'cause that what, that's how he referred to them, that jack leg preacher, (laughter) and I thought it all went together (laughter), but I went on to a Catholic high school so.
Speaker 2: So was Burnside [Burnside Elementary School; Burnside Scholastic Academy, Chicago, Illinois] too then the schooling to?
Speaker 1: Burnside to Bryant [William Cullen Bryant School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Bryant and then?
Speaker 1: Which was a public school?
Speaker 2: And how old were you when you went to--because you were--was.
Speaker 1: I was nine, I was in fourth grade.
Speaker 2: You were--fourth grade, and then you went from Bryant, that was still an elementary school though right?
Speaker 1: Bryant Elementary, yes it was just a straight neighborhood elementary school.
Speaker 2: Okay and then Bryant to?
Speaker 1: St. Mary High School.
Speaker 2: Oh, you went, oh okay so Bryant went up to eighth grade?
Speaker 1: Yep, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: It wasn't a lower grade center or whatever, I don't even know if exists now.
Speaker 2: Okay so was Bryant ethically mixed, I mean I know your neighborhood was so it was--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --it was mainly Jewish and black are you saying and a little Polish?
Speaker 1: It was Jewish and black and, and changing evermore black the whole four years that I was there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And there was a scattering of other folks including some Appalachian whites who we referred to and of course as of course hillbillies not knowing any better (laughter).  There were few Appalachian--where they came from, why they were there is beyond me but they were there.
Speaker 2: And were you--now what year is this?  This is 19--?
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-three [1953] to '57 [1957] I was--
Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957] okay, 1957.
Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957] to '61 [1961] I was at St. Mary High School which is--it no longer exists either on Grenshaw [Street] and Hoyne [Avenue] in the middle of the Italian area.
Story_ID: 580079
Speaker 1: Now what are you as a person--like as a person at this time you know that you're entering in high school, what, what do you--
Speaker 2: You know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) what are your interests and--?
Speaker 2: I would've been thought of as the nerdy kid.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I liked to read, I didn't have you know a whole host of friends, I had a few and of course nobody from my grammar school [William Cullen Bryant Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] went to my high school.  So once I got to high school I had to make all new friends.
Speaker 1: Now how did--was it determined that you were going to St. Mary's [St. Mary High School, Chicago, Illinois] then, how was that?
Speaker 2: It's it, it's interesting (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Especially if your family was Methodist?
Speaker 2: Right, I, I was very, I was good in school, 'cause you know I was nerdy so that you know I was reading at the twelfth grade level by the time I was like in seventh grade and I--in seventh grade I had one of the quintessential old time Chicago [Illinois] school teachers.  She was Irish; she was what was called at the time a spinster who had been in the system probably 25, 30, 35 years, bound and determined that all these little children of whatever color you know, whatever background were going to learn (laughter).  I mean you know these women, they're the same women who educated my mother [Vivian Montgomery Gist] you know.  These were women who except for the fact that they hadn't taken the vows were not unlike nuns you know they took teaching seriously.  They got a room full of thirty-five kids, everybody was going to read, everybody was going to write, everybody was going to behave.  She recognized that I was an--a very good student.  I lived in the Marshall High School [John Marshall Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois] attendance district and back in those days you couldn't go outside of your district to school.  You know you lived in attendance district, that's where you went to school, it wasn't all this busing and magnets schools and what not, and Marshall at the time was academically suspect.  Now we're talking 1957 you know.  I am always reminded that the Chicago Public Schools did not just become you know less than academically wonderful.  This goes back a long time.  Ms. McBride, Marguerite McBride called my mother up to school, said I wasn't in trouble she wanted to talk to her and said, "Look you know you've got a bright girl who will do well.  She doesn't always apply herself but she will go well.  She doesn't need to go over to Marshall.  This is where she needs to go to school." She said, "I have a place for her to go, St. Mary High School. They'll challenge her, she'll do well, she'll get a good education, she can go on to college," and you know it was you know something of a small stretch but affordable for my parents who by now had a successful business, so and she said this: "You go over. You see the nuns, get the dates when they're gonna give the entrance exams and all that," so my mother marched I mean right on off, and I'm sure it--the fact that it was all girls, you would wear uniforms, you would get there at 8:00 a.m. in the morning.  They would lock those doors (laughter) and that's where you were gonna be (laughter).  That probably you know (laughter) had its attractions, I mean there was no notion of going off campus for lunch and all of this you know.  My parents didn't know from or believe in all this freedom (laughter) I mean no.  We know where you are 24/7 and for most of that you need to be engaged in something productive.
Story_ID: 580080
Speaker 1: Now how far was St. Mary's [St. Mary High School, Chicago, Illinois] though from where you lived?
Speaker 2: A bus ride.
Speaker 1: A bus ride okay, okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. St. Mary's was at Hinshaw--Grenshaw [Street] and Hoyne [Aveune].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And I lived--by this time we had moved to 21st Place and Karlov [Avenue].  You know we bought and lived there, so actually I'd walk a block, get on the Ogden Avenue bus and take the Ogden Avenue bus which ran on an angle and get off at--or as I made friends there was a whole--I had a group of friends who lived in Pilsen [Chicago, Illinois].  So I'd walk over to Pulaski Road get on the train, what's now called the Blue Line. It was the Douglas B [Douglas branch], ride to the 18th Street stop, get off, wait for my friends to come up, wait all--'cause you could get back on and off the train without paying another fare right, and we'd all get on the train and ride together and walk from--you'd go to the stop that's over by the hospital, Rush Presbyterian Hospital [Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center; Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] get off and walk to school together, making noise and what not (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, so did you--what about those high school years?  Are there things that are important about that time--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah I mean one, I made lifelong friends.  There are a group of us, we went all the way through high school together then all the way through Mundelein College [Chicago, Illinois] together and we still get together today.  We go to the reunions, we call each other up you know.  So you know I made life-long friends there.  I got an extremely good education.  I got--I think much of my success in city government was the fact that I say--my class was what maybe 150, 175 girls.  There were maybe five blacks.  At the time St. Mary had a very small black population one, because it's just not that many black Catholics, but and then in the area that we pulled from so much of--I think my success in dealing in the City of Chicago [Illinois] government is I understood the people, 'cause I'd gone to school with them.  I understood that Catholic, immigrant, ethnic sort of mindset--'cause I'd gone to school with these girls.  I met their parents; I went to their houses you know.  I had homemade klopsiki you know, Susan's [ph.] mother made that, Lillian's [ph.] mother made homemade pizza and (laughter) you know you really do have to be exposed to people in some sort of a day-to-day setting so that you kind of understand where they're coming from.
Speaker 1: Do you think that that was unusual given the time? I mean you're living in a black--you were living essentially in a black community, but you.
Speaker 2: Well I was living in a changing community [Lawndale, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Changing black community, okay right, right.
Speaker 2: 'Cause when we got there it was.
Speaker 1: It hadn't changed yet?
Speaker 2: Right when we got there it was largely Jewish.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But in time it changed so that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 2: --it was all black.
Speaker 1: Right, right so when you talked to you know other African Americans your age, do you think you had a much different experience (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think I probably did.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.
Speaker 1: Now were there favorite teachers or people that influenced you, were you--you know I'm just?
Speaker 2: The only teacher I really remember from grade school is Ms. McBride, Marguerite McBride.  High school you know I came through Catholic schools during the last of the time when they were, the Catholic schools of old and where the classrooms were staffed largely by religious.  There were still nuns you know (laughter) and I had a few lay teachers, but largely there were nuns, you know and some of 'em I remember.  There was you know, Sister Mary Kenneth [ph.] who I had for geometry which I was so poor at that she all but said, "Look Sharon [HistoryMaker Sharon Gist Gilliam], (laughter) please don't even think about taking advanced algebra and trigonometry," (laughter).  Well she lost me the day she said, "See this imaginary line coming to this imaginary point."  Well, you know I have no imagination so geometry--I never did you know, I couldn't see what I was gonna need it for and I never could imagine these lines and planes and what--it was hopeless and you know, but I was good thank God in English and anything that had to do with reading and kind of retaining stuff and I had history--I liked history 'cause to me it was like a story, I mean you know, a soap opera over time (laughter) with the greatest of characters, so I went on to college as a history major 'cause I really liked it.
Story_ID: 580081
Speaker 1: So now how was the decision to go to Mundelein [Mundelein College, Chicago, Illinois], that's I mean that's another you know question?
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it--was there a path from St Mary's [St. Mary High School, Chicago, Illinois] to Mundelein? Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Oh sure the same order of nuns, the Sisters of Charity of the Blessed Virgin Mary, the BVMs who the grade school kids referred to as the black veiled monsters, but (laughter) the BVMS ran St.--Mundelein so of course they came and recruited.  There was some recruiting by DePaul [DePaul University, Chicago, Illinois] Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] basically the Catholic schools recruited the feeder high schools.  My mother, my parents [Vivian Montgomery Gist and Arthur Gist] wanted me to go to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] because they held us up, and I had an aunt who--my Aunt Dorothy [ph.] worked there and you know I will remember going out to spend the day with Aunt Dorothy to see the campus.  I had on a hat, a hat mind you, I was made to buy.  It was a--like this little hat.  I had on a hat and gloves and little short heels and what not to spend the day with Aunt Dorothy.  Aunt Dorothy was very correct, very correct (laughter) so I went and I took the entrance exam for U of C [University of Chicago] but you know there I did horribly in math of course and they said that you know if I was going to darken their door I would have to spend a summer in effect taking remedial math of some sort (laughter).  However, Mundelein which I also applied to along with a number of my friends had a much more relaxed attitude you know.  It was like, oh, you passed with flying colors, you know.  They had girls who were juniors and seniors who were big sisters to the incoming freshmen, so here--this is your big sister's name and you were invited during the summer before entering freshman year, you know you were invited to teas, we were not you know, we weren't quite my Aunt Dorothy (laughter), but we were correct too you know and you'd put on your little tea outfit you know.  The first time I had ever seen anyone who actually who lived on the lakefront, I went to one of these teas of a big sister who must've lived like in those apartment buildings that are east of South Shore Drive.  I mean they were literally on the lakefront, I had never, ever been in them and another tea was out in--oh, what is that?  Hinsdale [Illinois], now I had been out Route 66 'cause my father was one to take us on vacations driving and we were driving to see the relatives in Oklahoma and Texas and Arizona, so the way to do that before all these interstates was to get on 66 and head west, but you know I saw this you know suburban home in Hinsdale and it was like, wow, people live like this out there (laughter), this is totally different from anything I know.
Story_ID: 580082
Speaker 1: Now who was the Mundelein College [Chicago, Illinois]--'cause this is 1961 that you're entering you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was there '61 [1961] to '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: So what was it like, I mean how large was the student population?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: How many blacks and--
Speaker 2: Mundelein of course is now a part of Loyola University [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  There were probably about 1200 girls there, a couple hundred--well it had--the later, the senior classes, the junior and senior classes were 2 to 250.  The incoming freshman class probably about four hundred.  It may have been 5 percent black, maybe.  My class, I think there were five blacks in my class of a hundred and whatever finally graduated.  Me, Pam Payne [ph.], June Carter [ph.], what's her name who was actually, she wasn't an American black she was, Gladys [Gladys Paul (ph.)], she was an immigrant from somewhere in the Caribbean and one other girl.
Speaker 1: Now at that time are you gathering as a group do--you know each other?  You get to know each other immediately the black students, sort of, not really?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause we were all--we all came from different places and a lot of kids, a lot of girls at Mundelein came with you know--like there was a group of us from St. Mary [St. Mary High School, Chicago, Illinois], we were a clique and there was a group from you know Longwood [Longwood Academy, Chicago, Illinois], there was a group from you know all of the different girls' high schools.  So the other girls, you know except for, for Gladys Paul who was an immigrant from wherever she's from, somewhere in the Caribbean as I said.  You know there were little groups and as you went along you tended to know people in your major.  Like I knew June Carter because she was a history major, Pam Payne though was--I think she was a chem [chemistry] major.  So I rarely saw the kids in science because they always had these labs (laughter) they were in you know when I was hanging out in the smoker, playing pinochle or playing bridge and simultaneously working on my Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] (laughter) paper.  You know they were in some lab trying to get these, these assignments done.  So and I mean there weren't, there wasn't critical mass to have some sort of a black student union or some such thing, there wasn't enough of us.
Speaker 1: Now are you, now is, is Mundelein at that point where the Loyola is now--I mean where Loyola is now?  I'm just trying.
Speaker 2: Mundelein is where Mundelein is now.
Speaker 1: Wait, okay.
Speaker 2: That building as you ground around Sheridan Road.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay, it's called the skyscraper building [Mundelein College Skyscraper, Chicago, Illinois] that was there then, it was built during the Depression [Great Depression].
Speaker 1: How did that experience change you?  What, what you know what sort of formed you during that period of time?  Were there--you know I'm just--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know what was influencing you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you're a young adult, I mean you're entering into being a young adult?
Speaker 2: Right, you're right.  I--for me there was not a great deal of change I think, because it was very much a continuation of what my high school experience had been and Mundelein was largely--they, they had a resident portion but even at that, most of the girls there were from Chicago [Illinois] and the near-in suburbs.  We didn't have large numbers of people from out of the state, out of the country--
Story_ID: 580083
Speaker 1: You were living at home.  Are--were you living at home?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I lived at home.
Speaker 1: Okay, so okay so you--now your father [Arthur Gist] did he continue--he was still you know in the tavern business?
Speaker 2: He was still in the tavern business.
Speaker 1: Were you working in the business at all, were you working--were the grocery stores still, still there?
Speaker 2: He still had the, the grocery and packaged liquor and he had the tavern.  However, when I was--I guess it was my senior year in high school [St. Mary High School, Chicago, Illinois] I decided, hey--or maybe it was my junior year.  We didn't get a salary working for my dad; you got an allowance you know which I thought was severely underpaid.  So what I did is I found out in order to get a job you needed a social security card you know.  This is before you got social security cards for kids when they were born.  So I looked in the telephone book, found the location of the Social Security Administration offices, went and got on a bus, traipsed over there, made out their paperwork, put in for a social security card, got myself a social security card.  Once that came I went through the newspapers, through the employment ads, found ads that looked like they might you know hire someone who had no experience doing anything too much and went traipsing around looking for a job.  I found a job as a cashier at a place called Blue Ribbon Supermarket on Roosevelt Road near Kedzie [Avenue].  I went, applied and of course I had experience at that 'cause I'd been working at my dad's store.  I lied and told them that I wasn't going back to school. By this time I was in college [Mundelein College, Chicago, Illinois] you know that I was available for full time work so I proceeded to go to work there as a cashier, and actually make real money.  Real money at the time was minimum wage which was $1.25 an hour (laughter).  So I did that, you know I did that at the beginning of the summer.  So I got this job, okay making actual money and I was in good shape at that until one of the drivers, I think it was for a bread company came through and told the guy I worked for: "Hey, do you know who she is? That's Arthur Gist's daughter.  That girl's in college and she's going back," (laughter) you know, 'cause I'd lied and said yeah I was.  I had been in college but I wasn't going back.
Story_ID: 580084
Speaker 1: So you're studying history [at Mundelein College, Chicago, Illinois], was there a favorite part of history that you liked or--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah I, I really liked the Renaissance period, medieval renaissance. You know I often say if it happened after 1878 I am not interested in it you know.  That was the period of history I really liked.
Speaker 1: And so are you thinking or you know that you are gonna be a teacher 'cause you're?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Which is--okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I mean what else--I, I didn't know enough to aspire to be the next [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin (laughter), so what, I, you know, I would teach high school history and perhaps once in the system would move on to someday be a school principal or some such and so I majored in history, minored in English and secondary ed [secondary education], took the certification exam, so applied to the Chicago Public Schools and even at the time that I was applying which would've been the springtime of '65 [1965] there was all--there was a shortage of teachers but the shortage was in the elementary grades and then in high school in math, and science.  There was always more history teachers than they really, really needed.  So, in some ways that was good because you didn't have day-to-day subs teaching history.  You were able to certificated teachers for history.  You ended up with day-to-day subs in English because they needed so many of them 'cause everybody had to take four years of English and of course you ended up with people who were really unqualified to teach math and science because you know those people can get other jobs.
Speaker 1: So tell me what was the process--so you, the process for becoming a teacher.  So you graduated, you had to take a certification, right?
Speaker 2: Right, well the process at the time back then--at the time the Chicago Board of Education ran its own certification program.  It was not a state certification program like it is today.  What you did is you--whatever your major field was during your senior year if you were wanting to go on to teach in the Chicago Public Schools you signed up for the certification exams.  They were given on some Saturday at one of the big high schools.  I think I took my certification exam up at Lane [Albert Grannis Lane Technical High School; Lane Technical College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois].  You took the certification exam, you made application down at the board headquarters, they were at 228 North LaSalle [Street] then to teach and you waited to get an assignment.  Now this was the days before deseg [desegregation] and of that stuff.  So you got assigned where you got assigned.  You could try and you know give them some options, you know I lived on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] so I preferred to go to a West Side school.  At the time I didn't have a car, I didn't drive.  I was gonna have to get there on a bus and I got assigned to Farragut High School [Farragut Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois] which was very convenient for me.  I'd walk up to Cermak Road get on a bus, I was at school in ten, fifteen minutes.
Speaker 1: Now what grade were you teaching when you started (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I taught high school history.
Speaker 1: School--okay, high school.  Okay so how--did you like the experience, did you like it?  Did it take to you or did you take to it or was it different than what you thought?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't different than what I thought.  I had student taught you know part of your secondary ed curriculum was a semester of student teaching, and I had student taught at Marshall High School [John Marshall Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois] on the West Side.  So I had some idea of what I was getting into you know (laughter).  I did not dislike teaching, I was probably, and--I was probably one of the few people in the education side who didn't endlessly bitch and moan about the paperwork.  Probably some early indication that I was destined to be a bureaucrat (laughter) you know.  I didn't mind all of the paperwork.  Everybody else you know they'd go in the teachers' lounge, they're just constantly moaning about--and not to me.  Grades and reports and forms and all that stuff I'm fine you know.
Story_ID: 580085
Speaker 1: So now what was the population?  There had been tremendous change in Chicago [Illinois] you know by the time you're entering it?  I'm talking about in terms of the population, remember when you said you moved into the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] neighborhood it was changing--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --so by this time can you describe your?
Speaker 2: By this time the whole West Side, of course was black.  We moved from--
Speaker 1: And that's in--when you talk, when we think about it you--you--it was what year, a period of years it was a little over twelve years and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah that--the area had totally changed.  We moved from 1250 South Keeler [Avenue] to 4056 West 21st Place, 21st Place and Karlov [Avenue].  My dad [Arthur Gist] bought a two-flat because you always have income property [sic. taxes] (laughter) you know so he bought a two-flat.  We lived on the first floor, rented out the second floor and that's where we lived.  Now that area, that far south, that had been largely Eastern European, as opposed to Jewish and you know that changed over as well and became all black.  When I taught at Farragut High School [Farragut Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois]--today if Farragut is still open it's largely Latino but at the time it was largely black with a few Latinos and what few remaining whites there were, but it was largely black and I was only at Farragut a year.  I--then I moved to the family--we put--my dad put out the renters 'cause the house we--he owned at 9210 South Prairie [Avenue], he simply rented out all those years we were on the West Side.  So now that I was out of school, my sister Myra [Myra Gist] was training to be a radiologic technologist, otherwise known as an x-ray tech over at Cook County Hospital [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois].  We decided you know we wanted to get out of the house, move in together--well why would you send your kids off to rent someplace when you own a place that they can move into?  So the deal was cut, we would move into the house in West Chesterfield [Chicago, Illinois].  All we had to do was keep up the maintenance and the taxes but you had you, no rent or mortgage.  So Myra and I moved there and I put in for a transfer 'cause I knew I didn't wanna go to the West Side, and I transferred--I got a transfer to Harlan High School [John Marshall Harlan High School; Harlan Community Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  So I went to teach at Harlan.  I took driving lessons learned to drive and bought myself a little car and.
Speaker 1: Now Harlan was, is located where, it's?
Speaker 2: It's 97th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue].
Speaker 1: And Michigan, okay.
Speaker 2: So it was you know right you know, it was within walking distance of my house and in fact for the first six months or so I was there I did walk.
Story_ID: 580086
Speaker 1: Now why did you decide to leave teaching, that's what I'm wondering, you taught for like three years?
Speaker 2: Yeah I taught until semester break '67 [1967].  Largely you couldn't make any money.
Speaker 1: How much were you making at the time?
Speaker 2: I remind--when I started teaching you made $535 a month for ten months, $535 a month for ten months.  You were laid off over the summer, you did not get paid for Christmas, the week at Christmas break and you did not get paid for clean-up week, spring break week.  We consistently made less than sanitation laborers.
Speaker 1: Now.
Speaker 2: And God knows less than firefighters and none of them required college degrees.
Speaker 1: Now the other question I have for you is that this is past the time that blacks were--had to remain subs, right?  You were able to become?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah I was certified.
Speaker 1: Yeah because, okay, okay 'cause there was time when no one could get you know certified.
Speaker 2: Oh really?
Speaker 1: Yeah it was.
Speaker 2: See I didn't even know that existed.
Speaker 1: Now, so you, so you say this is it, you know I, I'm don't feel--I like it but it's okay and?
Speaker 2: Well yeah I liked it, it was okay you know the, the assistant principal we had at the time got on my nerves, but mostly it was, it was an economic issue.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I--there was a teacher there whose name I can't remember anymore.  She was an English teacher, her husband worked in the poverty program.  In Chicago [Illinois] it was CC--, the Chicago Committee on Urban Opportunity [CCUO], and she was in the teachers' lounge talking about, and this was just the start of the program, you know like '67 [1967] or so.  She said her husband, they were looking for African Americans, of course they called us, they didn't even call us black then, I guess Negroes with degrees to work in these programs, Ray Hardin [ph.] was his name, her name was whatever Hardin, and she was talking about it in the teachers' lounge and I said, "Well where do you apply, how do you get these jobs you know?"  And she said, we'll send--she gave me her husband's name, I called him, I sent him a resume once I figured out how you make out a resume (laughter), went out and interviewed and got a job in the poverty program.  I was at--I guess I was twenty-four or twenty-five then whatever I was, I was an urban life advisor yes, out at the Garfield--well it was originally called the Garfield Urban Progress Center [Chicago, Illinois]--you--at 9 South Kedzie [Avenue] and I was going to advise the poor and downtrodden on their life and how to get it together (laughter).
Story_ID: 580087
Speaker 1: Good Lord but what we did as an urban life advisor, what I did was interviewed folks who were having trouble--whatever their life troubles were which typically at the time--there were--at one point I thought that surely the entire State of Mississippi had been depopulated, because all of those people were on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], half of them living in their cars and looking for work (laughter), but you could come to an urban progress center and you could apply--they were co-located there, CCDPA, the old Cook County Department of Public Aid, which--whose job has now been taken over by the Illinois Department of Public Aid [Illinois Department of Healthcare and Family Services].  You had--the job training folks were there, they were all here in this one building.  So you could come in and make application for all of these services, you know it's--current people talk about oh, let's do these multiservice centers and there are no new ideas, you know.  Been there, done that so people came in and they saw us urban life advisors when they had various and sundry problems.  They couldn't get their kids in a school, they needed to know where to get this, that or other kind of help, you know we had our handy Blue Book [Social Service Directory] there, which was put out by the Welfare Council of Metropolitan Chicago which listed every single social service known to man, because remember there is no Internet yet (laughter), so you, you actually had directories and things, and you dealt with CCDPA, the--because that was back in the day when people actually had a social worker, a case worker who figured out their grant amount based on you know what their rent was, the number of kids they had, a whole bunch of other things.  So you were forever having to deal with CCDPA to advocate on behalf of these people and try and straighten out stuff that case workers had either had not done or screwed up, help people get food stamps, deal with the CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] you know I mean there-- it was actually possible then to get housing, deal with that and what we were is--even though we didn't necessarily have a social services background, what you had were people with college degrees, who could go through all these directories and figure out how to get through the bureaucracy.  I mean that's what we could do and that's what we did and you know.  I happened to share an office with a girl, Karen Ivy [ph.] who had worked for CCDPA and she, she taught me you know (laughter) really how you dealt with and got through that bureaucracy to try and help people get you know what at the time you believed they were entitled to.  Remember this is the '60s [1960s], we're children of the '60s [1960s] with the mentality that folks here, the government, folks are entitled to all of this service and somebody ought to beat on the head of the government and make them provide it, you know (laughter), give these people their food stamps.
Story_ID: 580088
Speaker 1: So you started--'cause it, it says here you started as a social planner and then a plan--you became a planner but.
Speaker 2: That was at Model Cities.
Speaker 1: Okay so you went--so CCPDA [sic. Cook County Department of Public Aid (CCDPA)]?
Speaker 2: CC--I was at CCUO [Chicago Committee on Urban Opportunity].
Speaker 1: CCUO, that's right.
Speaker 2: I was only there.
Speaker 1: What is CCUO?
Speaker 2: Chicago Committee on Urban Opportunity.
Speaker 1: Who was head of that?
Speaker 2: It was Deaton Brooks, Dr. Deaton Brooks.  That was the city's poverty program under OEL [sic. OEO], the Office of Economic Opportunity, the poverty program started by Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson].  The city's manifestation of that was the Chicago Committee on Urban Opportunity or CCUO.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And what you had in a number of neighborhoods, you had something called urban progress centers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now that you were in the urbs you were going to make progress.  I was (laughter) at the one, the Garfield Urban Progress Center [Chicago, Illinois].  There was also a West Garfield Urban Progress Center [Chicago, Illinois], there was Englewood, Near South, Uptown, Pilsen at 18th [Street] and Halsted [Street], Woodlawn UPC [Woodlawn Urban Progress Center, Chicago, Illinois], they were all around.  A whole host of folks came outta that program.
Story_ID: 580089
Speaker 1: How do you get on with Model Cities, was (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay I was, I was at CCUO [Chicago Committee on Urban Opportunity] from say the beginning of '68 [1968], I was out there during the '68 [1968] riots.  I'm at 9 South Kedzie [Avenue].  I am a block north and across the street from Marshall High School [John Marshall Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois].  I watched all those kids stream out of Marshall High School and start walking and then going west and I watched the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] go--I mean the fires were all around us yeah.  I will never forget you know I, I think had an appreciation for firefighters all the way through my service with the--later service with the City of Chicago [Illinois] 'cause the building to our east was in danger of going up in flames, 'cause everything around us was burning you know it was, it was eerie, something like that is like watching a movie or television.  You don't really feel that you're in it, but be that as it may.  The building was in danger of going up in flames 'cause everything around it was burning and these firefighters hauled this hose up on the roof of this--it must've been a three-story building but it was shorter than our three-story building and they were there in their turnout gear holding these huge hoses and wetting down that building and the ones next to it for hours no end, sitting in this cold water keeping these buildings wet so they didn't burn, hour after hour after hour you know (laughter).  I guess from then on as crazy as Local 2 [Chicago Firefighters Union Local 2] acted from time-to-time, I would remember those firefighters. It was something to see.
Story_ID: 580090
Speaker 1: But be that as it may, we went through that, then I got--the thing was I was just totally ignorant.  That was a city job that I'd gotten on the up-and-up, right (laughter) you know I didn't have a sponsor, I didn't have anything.  I had made application, I'd gotten selected and I had this position [with the Chicago Committee on Urban Opportunity].  I made more money that I'd made teaching and you know I was a fairly happy camper.  Then they gave me like an acting promotion to an urban life advisor II or whatever the heck it was, but they wouldn't give me the money, you know I just had the title but not the additional pay and you know I talked to my immediate supervisor about it.  Well nobody told me I needed to go see my committeeman and get a letter.  I didn't know, the people I was working with were like me young and dumb you know I got pissed.  I got upset. You know I'm doing all this extra work and they won't pay me for it.  Hey, I don't need this, so I started looking for another job and I really couldn't find anything different so I went back to the school system.  I know where I can go, I can go back to the school system.  I'm certified, I'm certificated, I was able to get right back to Harlan [John Marshall Harlan High School; Harlan Community Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] where I had left and I said I know how I can more money.  At the time the Chicago Public Schools ran night schools for adults, you know something probably most people don't remember but they did.  They ran night schools for adults using their regular high school buildings and the work force for night schools was people who were teachers, assistant principals and principals in the day schools.  So an assistant principal at Harlan was an assistant principal at Hyde Park night school [Hyde Park, Chicago, Illinois].  So I said, hey you got any openings (laughter) and I windup myself a night school gig.  So I taught day school and I taught night school, and between the two of them, you know, I made enough money.
Story_ID: 580091
Speaker 1: And then how did Model Cities come then?
Speaker 2: They recruited me.
Speaker 1: They recruited, okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause now I had met all these people, a number of the people who were with CCUO [Chicago Committee on Urban Opportunity] went to Model Cities in the first planning year.  That was run by Erwin France.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they--a number of people went there.  They were looking to fill out the staff and somebody you know remembered me and they, they called and said would I be interested.
Speaker 1: Now did you know much about Erwin France prior to that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't Erwin France existed, you know what did I know?  I'd been in the school system.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: You know I didn't know Erwin.
Speaker 1: So tell me what you're doing 'cause there--a lot of money went into to Model Cities, right and the concept was to support--this is the whole thing you say of the great government, you know to support the--?
Speaker 2: Right, well the, the concept of Model Cities was that rather than spreading money widely you know and the way the poverty program had, you know I mean the poverty program just distributed money all over the country you know.  The idea for Model Cities was if you concentrated government funding you could make a difference and a change.  So you only had four model areas, money was concentrated in Uptown [Chicago, Illinois], Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois], Near South [Chicago, Illinois] and Lawndale [Chicago, Illinois] okay?  So you have four model areas where you were gonna do this concentrated social services--you could do housing but you couldn't use Model Cities' funds to construct housing.  So you could rehab it, but you couldn't construct it 'cause it would've you know eaten up all the money immediately, and any number of other things and rather than running programs directly, what Model Cities did was funded existing entities to enrich services if you will.  So we funded the Chicago Public Schools for additional Title 48 [ph.] day care services and other kinds of services.  We funded you know the health department [Chicago Department of Health; Chicago Department of Public Health] for a number of health--the community health centers exist today, the Uptown health center [Uptown Neighborhood Health Center, Chicago, Illinois] was built with Model Cities funds, so we funded a number of programs in the health department.  We funded programs, the fire department [Chicago Fire Department], the first EMS in the city was funded by Model Cities.
Speaker 1: When you say EMS is Emergency (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Emergency Medical Services.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was interesting, that was a program to take advantage of returning Vietnam War vets [Vietnam War] who had been medics in the [U.S. military] service.
Speaker 1: And employ them?
Speaker 2: Employ them because they were trained.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is--we're talking the '60s [1960s], you don't have all these programs to train emergency medical technicians, EMT-2s and paramedics.  What you had previously had was the Cadillac ambulances staffed by you know firefighters who couldn't perform fire serve--fighting duties and you know they worked basically they could pick you up, maybe do some basic first aid and transport.  You know this notion that you were gonna get a paramedic who was gonna start telemetry and IVs and all of that, I mean that is a very recent, but at any rate that was one of the programs and dealing with the fire department as just mindboggling, but.
Speaker 1: Now you, what area were you assigned to work?
Speaker 2: I was, that's when I became a social planner, one.  I was in the planning division [City of Chicago Department of Planning and Development].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So in the planning division what we did was we prepared the annual application to the feds and all the amendments thereto and we reviewed, evaluated proposals that came into us from all the agencies that wanted us to fund their programs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you know reviewed those and hammered on these various agencies to shore up the numbers, bring down the costs, the usual.
Story_ID: 580092
Speaker 1: So that's where your budgetary--you start doing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's where I started learning budgets.
Speaker 1: --but that's where you start doing but budgets, budgets there?  Okay.  Now how did you get on with the city [Chicago, Illinois] then, how did that--'cause you went from Model Cities to the city, how did?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to the city budget office [City of Chicago Office of Budget and Management].
Speaker 1: Right, how did that happen?  I mean so you had figured out the system by them?
Speaker 2: No I, I hadn't figured out the system.  The--Model Cities--Erwin [Erwin France] was very careful to constantly invoke the Hatch Act [Hatch Act of 1939] because we were federally paid so under the Hatch Act you can't have you know theoretically you can't have political influence, and Erwin for his own purposes of course because he didn't want to be taking every single committeeman and alderman's cast off, you know he cloaked himself and the entire agency in the Hatch Act and said he couldn't do political hiring and you know.  So you know I got on there, you know, legitimately (laughter) I didn't, but we were paid at Model Cities.  We were paid in comparable grades higher than people I the rest of the city government.  On the theory that we, the agency was subject to annual appropriations and probably three-to-five year authorizations unlike a regular city job particularly one with civil service protection, once you got on you were there until you died or retired (laughter), you know.  We were theoretically at risk so we got paid a little more.  Well of course for the real city hall that upset them so they sent the--teams from the old department of personnel [City of Chicago Department of Human Resources] and the budget office [City of Chicago Office of Budget and Management] to do desk audits you know.  It was--why are these people making more money than our (laughter) long serving precinct captains, this doesn't make sense?
Story_ID: 580093
Speaker 1: You were talking about Erwin France, you were saying that you know that he came up you know through the system, he and David Stahl, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah well they were both administrative assistant to the mayor [Richard J. Daley].  They were young, extremely well educated, Erwin had been to George Williams [George Williams College, Chicago, Illinois], I guess he had a master's [degree].  Dave, I'm not sure what his background was.  They were the Young Turks of their time. They really weren't a part of the political operations so much you know.  They weren't from the 11th Ward or the 9th Ward, or the 10th Ward or the 19th Ward (laughter), or any of the preferred wards of the time, and he ran Model Cities.
Speaker 1: Now what would you say you learned most about this experience you know during this time you know about city government and or how--?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I did not know really anything about city government and I you know I learned a lot you know, how it was organized, what the departments did, I mean it wasn't until I was at Model Cities that I knew there was such a thing as a budget director.  It never occurred to me that the city had a budget and somebody put it together and there was a whole office, and I mean why would it?  It didn't have anything to do with me, I had been in the school system [Chicago Public Schools] so you know I, I came to understand how and I--as I said the budget office [City of Chicago Office of Budget and Management] and the personnel department [City of Chicago Department of Human Resources] came out to do desk audits with the goal of probably reducing our pay, but nonetheless (background noise) and as a result of the desk audits where they talked, interviewed everybody I got recruited to the city budget office.  Ed Bedore was budget director at the time and I was--now this is 1973.
Speaker 1: Now this is the same year you got married to though to in '73 [1973]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the first black professional in the office and I will never forget.  At the time the budget office was called the mayor's budget office.  It was a division very much like the press office [City of Chicago Press Room] is today. It was a division of the mayor's office so when you were recruited, yeah you interviewed with Ed Bedore but you had to go see the--interview with the mayor.  So you know it would be like you know a life-long, daily communion and Catholic is being told you gotta go interview with the pope (laughter) you know, so first finding something to wear to go that wasn't too short, 'cause we're in the era of the mini skirt, I was young, the shorter the better.  So find something that I'm not going to have be pulling down constantly so I trundled over there to see the mayor.  Unfortunately I--my luck was to see the mayor on the day that Claude B. Holman died or it was reported that he died.  Claude Holman, I don't know which ward he was [4th Ward]--he was an African American alderman who was known, whenever the lakefront liberals, Singer [William Singer] and that crowd were arguing with the mayor on the council chambers, Claude Holman would stand up to agree wholeheartedly with whatever it was the mayor had said.  This would be Richard J.  He was a stalwart support supporter of Richard J. Daley and he had died and the mayor was preoccupied so, but I went and see him nonetheless and you know it was a short interview.  He said, "Well do you think this is what you wanna do?"  "Yes."  "Are you gonna make more money?"   "Yes."  "Good."  You know (laughter) "Goodbye." Oh, from then on it was so funny.  Whenever he would see me trailing around with Ed Bedore he'd look at me and say, "Who is that woman (laughter) and why is she you know at some meeting or function with Ed Bedore?"  I don't think he ever really had a fix on the who the heck I was (laughter), it's funny.
Story_ID: 580094
Speaker 1: Now Ed Bedore--he was there for a long time wasn't he?
Speaker 2: A long time yeah.
Speaker 1: Like how many years?
Speaker 2: God, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was--the budget office [City of Chicago Office of Budget and Management] was late in coming to the--it wasn't formed until 1955 and he wasn't the first budget director, he was the second or third one.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you--so you serve as assistant budget director for consum-?
Speaker 2: Yes, first I was brought in as federal grant coordinator then made an assistant budget director.
Speaker 1: Okay and then--okay, so you're there through--Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley] dies what year, he die-?
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976], so you're there three years before he passes away.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then at that point, Mayor--
Speaker 2: --Bilandic [Michael Bilandic].
Speaker 1: --Bilandic takes over, does that change the function much?  You know like he had been there for so--you know he had been mayor for so many years?
Speaker 2: It really didn't, by that time or when Bilandic came in, the rest of the team stayed in place.  So you still had Bedore as budget director, [HistoryMaker] Clark Burrus was comptroller, Tom Donovan [Thomas Donovan] was what's today called chief of staff, you had this entire infrastructure in place.
Speaker 1: And it didn't change?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: Huh.
Story_ID: 580095
Speaker 1: What happened when Jane Byrne was elected then?
Speaker 2: Oh, I got fired so I don't know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, you got fired when, when she--?
Speaker 2: Jane Byrne fired me.
Speaker 1: Oh, so tell that story (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well (laughter) when I was in budget [City of Chicago Office of Budget and Management], I'd become assistant budget director, you had the unpleasantness between--
Speaker 1: Now can, can we talk about how large the office is?  So how many assistants were there you know assistants--was there one assistant budget director?
Speaker 2: No, no, there was a deputy and probably two or three assistants, so you know and it was an office of twenty-five, thirty people at best.  It was re- it's always been a relative small office, but there was the unpleasantness between Bilandic [Michael Bilandic] and Jane Byrne who was head of the Department of Consumer Sales, Weights and Measures.  Well the Department of Consumer Sales, Weights and Measures, today the department of consumer services [City of Chicago Department of Business Affairs and Consumer Protection] had been given the responsibility under Daley [Richard J. Daley] of regulating public passenger vehicles.  Public passenger vehicles are taxicabs and limos and those buses that take people to O'Hare [Chicago O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois].  She was given that responsibility because public passenger vehicles had previously been regulated by a commission which was a not-very-well-watched-over division of the police department [Chicago Police Department] but given the public passenger vehicles were of no interest to the police who were busily rooting out crime, you had a fellow there, Jimmy Y. Carter [ph.], who ran the place and it became known by those within city government that the feds were maybe a half step behind Jimmy (laughter) because there were, there had been a history of entrepreneurial activity among the taxicab like-commissioner.  The taxicab inspectors and the taxi companies, I mean you know.  So and he had already gone up on I think tax charges, so it was just a matter of time until there, there was going to be just a very messy and embarrassing scandal.  So take public passenger vehicles and put them in a place where there is no question but you know, it's on the up-and-up and integrity and all of that because nobody believed that if she saw anything wrong Jane Byrne wouldn't go to six TV stations and eight newspapers and tell everything she knew (laughter) so put it over there.
Story_ID: 580096
Speaker 1: Then the taxicab companies wanted an increase in rates for which they have to come to the city council, and Jane [Jane Byrne] made the allegation, even though the increase was given that Bilandic [Michael Bilandic] had quote, unquote, greased the taxicab increase, and then you went into a whole you know thing I mean just weeks and weeks and weeks of carrying on carrying on.  The upshot of it was he fired her via a telegram while she was out, I think at a wake or some such place.  At any rate she wasn't at the office at the moment and appointed me as the acting commissioner of consumer sales, weights and measures.  Whereupon I asked somebody, 'cause I had dealt with departments that had fed funds, they didn't have any fed funds.  So I asked somebody where is this department any how (laughter) and they said it's up on the eighth floor.  So I gathered my little stuff and went up to the eighth floor to take over the Department of Consumer Sales, Weights and Measures [City of Chicago Department of Business Affairs and Consumer Protection] (laughter), and about two hours after I got up there here came the feds, but all they had--I learned to deal with these over my time in government, all they had--they came with subpoenas in hand, but it was just a records subpoena because they were looking into this, all these allegations of shenanigans and with taxicabs so.
Speaker 2: So that was your first--as soon as you got up there the feds came calling?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah and to this day I remember Harry Golden [Harry Golden, Jr.] from the Trib [sic. Chicago Sun-Times], he was a long-time Tribune [Chicago Tribune] reporter who covered city hall, one of the few reporters ever who actually understood the city budget, Harry Golden was great, but I remember--and he was one of the few people who knew who I was. The press corps, I mean I didn't--buried.  They didn't know who I was, he knew who I was 'cause he followed the budget and followed the budget office and  I remember Harry came up to see me and somehow I had managed to leave my old office with no cigarettes and Harry gave me his cigarettes (laughter).  I was forever grateful to Harry Golden (laughter), so I was, I was, that's what I did.
Speaker 2: So you were acting for how long then?
Speaker 1: The entire time of--
Speaker 2: What year are we on?
Speaker 1: That would have been what '76 [1976], '77 [1977] sometime in '77 [1977] to '79 [1979].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was about eighteen months or so.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, until she [Jane Byrne]--and then she was elected?
Speaker 1: Then she was elected and first thing she did was fire my little (laughter), such-and-such colored behind, yes (laughter) that was the first thing she did, oh yeah.
Story_ID: 580097
Speaker 1: So what did you learn though in that you know--let me ask you this, in your time as you know assistant budget director and, oh okay.
Speaker 2: No I got time.
Speaker 1: Okay, and in your time in those positions, what were--were you assigned at that point,  were they assigning people specific departments, you know where you--was that how it worked?
Speaker 2: Yeah that's, that's, generally how it worked but remember these are the days, at least in the budget office [City of Chicago Office of Budget and Management] before computers.  I mean we put together that budget manually so to get the book out every year took all hands on deck.  I worked with departments that had fed funds so I you know then I was only working on their fed funds stuff, but so many--those were the days where everybody got a ton of federal money so I worked with has become the department of human services [City of Chicago Department of Human Resources], I worked with health, I worked with police, I worked applications for the fire department [Chicago Fire Department] to get money for emergency medical services you know Streets and San [City of Chicago Department of Streets and Sanitation], I worked on all the, all of the departments that got summer programming money that the old Neighborhood Youth Corps, all at SEP [ph.] all those you know so it was an extremely good exposure to city government, to all of the departments, how they ran, how the you know, how they funding (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The aldermanic offi- right.
Speaker 2: --you had to deal with the Council [Chicago City Council], you had to deal with of course with the comptroller's office and the law department [City of Chicago Department of Law], you know the support departments.  You--so you, you got, it's the best place to see every single part of city government 'cause you had to deal with them all and you came to understand how the city budget worked.  What's the interaction among all those funds, the water fund, the vehicle tax fund, the airport funds you know, you understood--you came to understand how all those funds worked, how they were supported, how you could buy and sell between funds in order to relieve you know the corporate fund you know of expense, you know you'd have the O'Hare [Chicago O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois] fund, buy services from them so I mean you know in the four and a half years or so I was there you know I learned all that stuff.
Speaker 1: You know what surprise--you know I, I couldn't help but smiling because I keep thinking about how you--math was not your strong suit and then you end up, you know (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So when you were telling that story I'm like, you know.
Speaker 2: But I, you know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Like a disconnect here you know.
Speaker 2: It doesn't require higher math.  See what I couldn't, I couldn't get the X's and the, the geometry and stuff, but all the budget requires is that you can add, subtract, multiply and divide.  We're not talking higher math here.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: We're talking arithmetic.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I grew up you know in my father's [Arthur Gist] business.  I could add up a column of numbers you know, multiply, divide do that stuff.
Story_ID: 580098
Speaker 1: Also what was the difference between the co- you know what was the relationship between the city comptroller's office and the budget director?  Are there--were there any similarities between that, you know the--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Okay how does (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Our budget office [City of Chicago Office of Budget and Management] is really a policy office, people think of it as numbers but it's a policy office.  You are making decisions about where resources will be allocated in what amount for what functions, and the numbers are almost immaterial you know it is--yeah the, the resources that you have to provide for the human resources and whatever support they need with money which is where the numbers come in, whereas the city comptroller's office actually keeping the record and the books and all of that you know.
Speaker 1: Okay and they're getting the ratings for the city--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and things like that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They're doing all of that stuff but it's the budget office that is making the decisions about the allocation of resources.
Speaker 1: And did--were you learning about interacting with the account--excuse me, the council, 'cause the council [Chicago City Council] would have to--there was the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: You know they would have to approve the budget.
Speaker 2: Right, and, and that's you know that's where you learn to deal at least with the finance chair.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If nobody else.
Speaker 1: Now the finance chair was Ed [Edward M. Burke]--was it Ed?
Speaker 2: Ed, well remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At that--he had been finance, okay.
Speaker 2: Bilandic [Michael Bilandic] was finance chair after--first it was Tom King [Thomas King], Tom King had the unpleasantness with the feds (laughter), then Bilandic who was 11th Ward alderman became finance chair, and [HistoryMaker] Wilson Frost--was he finance chair?  I can't remember (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, he was finance chair, wait, wait--what was it--no but he mayor, wait what position was he when he became mayor pro tem (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pro tem?  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He may not have been finance chair.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it at some point Burke [Edward M. Burke] becomes finance chair.
Speaker 1: Right, and Burke while he's been in that position for a long.
Speaker 2: Except for the period when Tim Evans [Timothy Evans] was finance chair. Yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, okay.
Story_ID: 580099
Speaker 1: Byrne [Jane Byrne] let you go?
Speaker 2: She fired me, yeah.
Speaker 1: And then you go?
Speaker 2: I went to D.C. [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Oh, you went to D-, oh, oh, I see, okay.
Speaker 2: I couldn't get a job in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Because that was it?
Speaker 2: That was it.
Speaker 1: Now how was our D.C. experience?
Speaker 2: I got recruited to D.C. (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because it's.
Speaker 2: Because [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry (laughter) had become mayor and was building a staff, and a guy named, what's--I don't remember his first name, last name Rogers [ph.] who worked for ICMA, you know life takes strange turns.  This guy--International City Managers Association [International City/County Management Association], ICMA--he happened to be coming through Chicago reading an article at O'Hare [Chicago O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois] about my being fired, a newspaper article, calls and says, "Well you know Marion Berry is looking for people." "Yeah?"  "Send us your resume," so I did because by this time I'd been looking for a job for a couple of months.  So I sent my resume and trekked down to Washington and interviewed with Gladys [ph.], whatever her name was as for an assistant budget director slot and in the ways of government it takes them forever to do anything but they hired me and off we went to D.C. (laughter).
Story_ID: 580100
Speaker 1: So now what didn't you like about the experience Sharon [HistoryMaker Sharon Gist Gilliam], (laughter), didn't you--you went like (laughter)?
Speaker 2: D.C. [Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean I could ask what you liked but.
Speaker 2: It's a small city you know, it's the population there is about 600,000 what is it?  Sixty-seven square miles, it's the same size roughly as Boston [Massachusetts].  So Chicago's [Chicago, Illinois] 223 square miles closer to 3 million people.  It's a one-industry town and the industry is the government.  Yeah the other people swirling around they are consultants and what not but they're all tied back to the federal government.  The other thing is the, the City of D.C. which is what I worked for--I worked for the city government.  They have something called limited home rule.  They pass an ordinance, something as simple as you know putting in stop lights somewhere, that ordinance has to go to the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] to [U.S.] Congress and layover in the district committee for two weeks to see if anybody raises any objections or wants to change it.  Then and only then does it become an enacted law, so I wasn't used to being in a situation, I mean I was use to (laughter)--the City of Chicago government where you know the mayor wasn't like a divine-right monarch (laughter) and an alderman was you know a favorite prince there.  I use to refer to it as the pretend government.  I'm sure they would be most upset to find that out, but to me you know I just--I use to comment the mayor here has less power than the dumbest Chicago alderman (laughter), that's the--poor souls, but they were very happy that they had their limited home rule and they thought they were running a real government.
Story_ID: 580101
Speaker 1: So did you learn anything in that experience?  I mean at the time now--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what is Mayor Barry [HistoryMaker Marion Barry]--what is Marion Barry's administration, what are the issues that are facing the city at that time too but you know?
Speaker 2: Well actually I was there during his first term.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was Barry's first term and.
Speaker 1: He came on with a lot of positive press and everything (unclear).
Speaker 2: Lots of positive--and you know they were riding high.  It was a period of time where there were really fairly good governmental financial receipts because they were heavily property-taxed based and properties were just appreciating in value like mad, so you know they didn't have a whole lot of issues you know other than the fact that they were just a fairly inept group trying to run that government, but other than that (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what did you learn?
Speaker 2: I learned a lot about a different way of budgeting because their--they used the federal system just you know putting together the books you know, stuff that I had never knew in Chicago [Illinois] because I--you know it's not like I took courses anywhere, I learned it all on the job so the whole notion of FTEs and all, you know.
Speaker 1: What are FTEs?
Speaker 2: Full time equivalent--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Positions that's--
Speaker 1: FTEs right?
Speaker 2: --that's how we budgeted people, just a lot of that.  I learned--because, because of their budget had to go to the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] and be heard by the House [U.S. House of Representatives] and [U.S.] Senate district committees.  I learned a lot about that process, but most of all I just learned a lot of stuff about budgeting that stood me in good stead when I came back to Chicago.
Speaker 1: So that really--you learned sort of the other side of what you were doing especially since you were concentrated on federal funds, if I?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay because you said a lot of your things--so you really thought, sought from the top too?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay and that way from a city perspective.
Speaker 2: And I served about two years in the district budget office [District of Columbia Office of Budget and Planning] then I went to the Department of Housing and Community Development, which included the National Capital Housing Authority, their housing so I was budgeting for federal--for public housing.  Who knew I would ever use that again (laughter).  There was you know, it's--things work out, it's really funny.  You know I had no reason to think that I would ever, ever again be concerned with PFS, the performance funding system which is how they provide subsidy or that I would have any reason to know the difference between you know Project Based Section 8, and Section 8 new construction and (laughter) all of this stuff that has come in very handy lo these many years later.
Story_ID: 580102
Speaker 1: Who was the budget director when, when you worked in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], who, do you remember?
Speaker 2: Gladys Mack.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was she different from Ed Bedore?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Like night and day?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Was she--she was black?
Speaker 2: Black, yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: SO this was a whole--I just wanna say--
Speaker 2: Oh that was different, I mean I was in--now I was in--I had been under a government that was largely white [in Chicago, Illinois] and now I'm in a government that's all black, you know, the mayor [HistoryMaker Marion Barry], the chief of staff, the department heads, the only employees, it was a black government.
Speaker 1: So that was empowering in a way?  Was it empowering or was it, was it--they were getting organized (laughter)?
Speaker 2: You--it was not empowering necessarily.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just because in terms of just skill, ability or what I perceive to be ability, they were less able than the folks that I had left behind.
Speaker 1: Okay, now let me--so are you paying attention to what's happening in Chicago [Illinois] (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Not particularly.
Speaker 1: You weren't? So the whole campaign for Mayor Washington [Harold Washington], all of that were you?
Speaker 2: I wasn't particularly aware of that I--you know there would be stories from time-to-time you know when Jane Byrne did something really, really crazy like you know disbanded civil service and (unclear) can I call my friends back here 'cause it would show up in The Washington Post or on national news and I'd go what are you people doing back there?
Speaker 1: So how did your position, how did you end up getting hired then here?  I mean it was a big, I remember when you were hired it was a big deal?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Clark Burrus was on the search committee.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, and you had met.
Speaker 2: Clark knew where I was and he reached out.
Speaker 1: And you had met Clark when you were working with the--
Speaker 2: He was city comptroller (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was in the budget office [City of Chicago Office of Budget and Management].
Speaker 1: That's right, okay, that's right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah he was city comptroller, so I knew Clark and he knew me from the, from the budget office and then from consumer services [Department of Consumer Sales, Weights and Measures; City of Chicago Department of Business Affairs and Consumer Protection].
Speaker 1: So was there a search, much of a search or did he sort of grab you out sort of to say that there was this opportunity?  How?
Speaker 2: He grabbed me, I mean it wasn't some--I wasn't aware that there was some sort of you know a nationwide search and sure enough there weren't a--the people who came into the Washington administration were largely either from his campaign you know or there weren't very--there weren't very many people who came back for us from some earlier incarnation you know largely because they didn't trust those folk you know.  How I came to be trusted is not clear to me (laughter).
Story_ID: 580103
Speaker 1: You get plucked out and you--this is a big deal really.
Speaker 2: Right, I came back [to Chicago, Illinois] as deputy budget director to Dave Schulz [David F. Schulz] who was budget director and he had been made budget director from his post in the Department of Public Works [City of Chicago Department of Public Works; City of Chicago Department of Transportation].  Dave is probably one of the brightest people I have ever, ever met, the buy is brilliant and he was an engineer by training but who had somewhere along the way had picked up an M.B.A. I guess, really, really bright, bright guy and of course there, you know Jane [Jane Byrne] left the city finances in an absolute shambles.  I mean just--it was a mess.  So--
Speaker 1: So it was different than when you had been there before?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: When you say--when it was a mess, what, what do you mean, the recordkeeping or--?
Speaker 2: Oh no, she had done all things you know the midnight hires, the, sewer department [City of Chicago Department of Water Management] was overstaffed by 25, 50 percent.  You know there was no way the, the--you know the income couldn't support the staffing.  They had these funds and it was really a way of inter-fund transfers with departments buying and selling services among themselves which they were unfunded which you know it was just, I forget now I thought I'd remember the number the rest of my life but the potential deficit that we were dealing with was huge.  I mean so you had to lay off staff you know try and get the books straight it, you know immediately after we came in went to make the NBUS [ph.] rating agency trips and the rating agencies the first thing they said was: "Look, you know this is a mess.  You know, you got this council wars nonsense going on.  They downgraded the city's bonds (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --which means you pay more in debt service, I mean it was just--we were--and you know if, if the basic finances were not problem enough, just tried to dig yourself out of this hole, you had council wars going on.  Now it was great entertainment for the population (laughter) but you know it didn't make your job any--everything was a battle you know everything was a battle.  People were--any holdovers were of course suspect, it was crazy.
Speaker 1: Now when you, when you came back to the budget office [City of Chicago Office of Budget and Management] was the--was there some semblance of the old staff there or had that changed all during the (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, the whole staff, the budget office staff was intact.
Speaker 1: It was intact so it had--it had held over even though it had changed administrations?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay so, so you knew a lot of the people so it wasn't.
Speaker 2: I knew a lot of the people.  Now I'd been gone for four years.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So there'd been turnover but the deputy--or the assistant budget directors, Ed Swillo [ph.] was in charge of personnel.  He'd been there since the beginning of time.  George Curry was still there, you know as deputy budget director and George got out the book, I mean and back before all these computers and stuff somebody had to know how--getting out the book was you know this major deal so there were a number of people there who had been there when I was there.
Speaker 1: So when you say getting out the book can you describe that process?  Each--was there a book for each department?
Speaker 2: No, no, no the, the, the book is the city budget.
Speaker 1: That's (unclear), right, right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The annual appropriation ordinance.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And because of the way that the city budgets, every single position in all of the major funds is listed in there.  Well, at the time there were like forty, forty-two thousand positions you know and there's what, forty-two departments?  You gotta keep track of all that, you can't be losing people or they won't have a paycheck (laughter) you know, and all of that got done manually.  Now originally, now during the, the--while I was gone the, there had also been an awful lot of turnover in budget directors but they had a guy Mike Fornaciari [Michael Fornaciari], who they--some budget director or another brought in somewhere along the way to automate the system and he'd gotten a lot of it automated--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, you finally (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do you pronounce--spell his name?
Speaker 2: Fornaciari, F-O-R-N-I-C-I-A-R-I-A [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mike Fornaciari.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you get in and you're working with Dave Schulz (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Schulz. S-C-H-U-L-Z.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's up at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] now.
Story_ID: 580104
Speaker 1: Can you like share what it was like to sort of operate in that environment with council wars and you know maybe share some anecdotes about it?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was--I-it was just, one--
Speaker 1: Or even like the first presentation--
Speaker 2: Just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) of the budget, you know your first budget?
Speaker 2: Just, just determining what the budget hole was--what you know, because it was arguments about that you know.  What is the amount of the potential deficit?  Where is it you know?  Just going through all the departments pulling the data, running the numbers, trying to--and then how do we present it in such a way that the aldermen understand it, accept it and the general population at least you know, though the general population doesn't pay much attention to budget that they, they have a sense that hey there does have to be change, people are gonna have to be laid off, things are going to have to change. That meant working you know twelve and fourteen-hour days, seven days a week just to, just to come up with, A, the numbers and then, B, a way to display the numbers so that people could understand and then, all right now that we've defined the problem, what do you to solve the problem?  How many people are you gonna have to lay off?  And where and how do you continue to provide services to the citizenry needs, and how much of this is going to have to go through the council where you don't have a majority, and get approved?  Chicago [Illinois] is not a city that has a history of amending the budget.  There are some communities where they amend the budget constantly.  Chicago you know they amended the budget I think after the '67 [1967] snow.  They amended the budget after the '79 [1979] snow.  Otherwise they don't amend the--you know they pass that budget and that's it, you know, and then there was even a question as to what legislation applied because historically the city had been governed by the Cities and Villages Act [Cities and Villages Act of 1872], Chapter 23 of the old state statutes, but meantime in the time since I had left and gone and come back, there had been this con con--the state constitutional convention [Illinois Constitutional Convention] and we were all home rule city, so were we still governed by Chapter 23 that sets out the dates by which you have to have particular pieces of the budget passed, you know so there was an undercurrent you know among the lawyers and the council and what not and you know it was, it was just you know, it's hard to explain 'cause you know it's just day-to-day craziness (laughter), day-to-day.
Speaker 1: So let, now, but let--maybe that's hard to explain but you can talk who some of the key players, okay?
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Who were?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I mean who were there, so like you have Ed Burke [Edward M. Burke], he's finance?
Speaker 2: Ed Burke was chairman of finance you know you had Ed Vrdolyak who was simply 10th Ward alderman but was seen as the leader of the forces on the dark side (laughter) Darth Vader.
Speaker 1: Meaning that they were white aldermen, you know?
Speaker 2: They were white aldermen who were part of the twenty-nine; it was the twenty-nine and the twenty-one.  So you--and basically you had the white aldermen lining up together, the black aldermen lining up together, the Hispanics kind of lined up with the, the blacks and then you had David Orr who was an alderman at the time who lined up on our side, the, the twenty-one.  Who else?  That's kind of it.
Story_ID: 580105
Speaker 1: Who were the key people in the mayor's office and then I'm wondering how did that differ, this experience differ from Washington [D.C.] in that you know it was a--you know both, both were new to being in charge?
Speaker 2: All right, the chief of staff when I started was Bill Ware [William Ware] who had come from Harold's [Harold Washington] congressional office, very, very smart guy, lawyer, trained at U of C [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  It was funny, somewhat naive in that he, he sort of believed that everybody in the government was on the take and not to be trusted, I mean he really didn't--I don't think he realized until he'd been there sometime that you know most people just came did their job and went home, they would--you know, that's what they did.  Then you had a number of other people who disappeared from government quickly, Chuck Hunter [ph.], you know.  I don't know what ever happened to him, Maxine [ph.] left, which was there for a while, you know various and sundry--Fred Rice [HistoryMaker Fred Rice, Jr.] in police [Chicago Police Department], he was a great guy, great guy.  The various top coppers, it, it--and if you were in budget [City of Chicago Office of Budget and Management] you got to know the coppers because their budget was so huge.  If you had to, you had to save money you were gonna have go to the cops and get some givebacks I mean (laughter) you had to do something with these guys, so you know.  You had, what's his face?  I've forgotten his name, in streets and san [City of Chicago Department of Streets and Sanitation] what a character.
Speaker 1: Okay, I don't remember all right.
Speaker 2: Irish guy, he was just--he was a character and streets and san is a huge department and, and keeping them you know on anything like the straight and narrow.
Speaker 1: So what were the large--so the police, streets and san--?
Speaker 2: The largest departments are police, fire [Chicago Fire Department], streets and sanitation, you know.  Until you control costs there you know forget it.  You know all these other--I call them the health department is kind of next, Public--the old public works department [City of Chicago Department of Public Works] which doesn't exist any longer.  It was broken into the Department of Transportation [City of Chicago Department of Transportation] and a number of other agencies, but those, those were your big departments and your big costs.  You had water and sewer [City of Chicago Department of Water Management] and aviation [City of Chicago Department of Aviation] but they're their own funds you know and they generate their own revenue, so but the big corporate departments.  All the others you know I would refer to them disparagingly as the nickel and dime departments, you know, really whatever they did was not gonna make a big difference, maybe in people's lives (laughter) but not in, (laughter) in my you know in my little piece of the world, the money.
Story_ID: 580106
Speaker 1: So you come into a messy situation [at the City of Chicago Office of Budget and Management].  How long does it take for you to make, you know for you and Dave [David F. Schulz] to work together to make it a good situation?  Is that a year, is it two years?
Speaker 2: Well Dave was only--I came in (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was there--he was only there a year?
Speaker 2: Less than a year.
Speaker 1: Less than a year, okay.
Speaker 2: I came in and I got here like in June of '83 [1983], I guess it was early June of '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: So that's at the beginning of the administration [Harold Washington administration] (unclear) the administration?
Speaker 2: At the beginning of the administration, yeah, they took office I guess in.
Speaker 1: February?  January?
Speaker 2: No, April or May.
Speaker 1: April, April okay.  I keep forgetting the election, that's right.
Speaker 2: Right, election in April.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Took, they took office in late April or early May and I got here in June and then Dave was budget director until December of '83 [1983] and I was first deputy and then I stepped up and was made budget director in '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Was it clear that you were gonna be budget director when you came on?
Speaker 2: No, not when I came on.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: I, I expected Dave to be there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I'd be the first deputy.
Speaker 1: Now what made you, why did--why were you so impressed with him?  Why did you say?
Speaker 2: Just 'cause he--he was incredibly, and I didn't, I hadn't known him before, I mean you know.  He was incredibly, incredibly smart but he was one of those people who could look at a mass of data or information and see the relationships you know and figure them out but the other thing he could do is take a mass of information that is really very confusing to the average person or to people who aren't particularly familiar with it and figure out how to explain it and lay it out so that everybody except the dumbest among us could understand it (laughter).  You know and you have to be able to do that.  You have to be able to take something that is inherently complex and make it seem simple.
Speaker 1: So you worked--there wasn't--so this is, this is the first budget that--so I'm just trying to get things in perspective.  So you come to a city [Chicago, Illinois] that is in a budgetary hole, okay that's a mess.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You, you're, you come into an antagonistic situation where it's not like the forces are working and people are still getting to know the government.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you know there is some naivete in the midst (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --of fighting you know, and you have, and you have to prepare a budget.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so Dave and I worked the summer of '83 [1983], we would've been working on the '84 [1984] budget so.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that '84 budget [1984], was it--how did you get that '84 [1984] budget passed and he didn't--he, he left shortly after it got passed?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we got that passed.  You know we finally put it together we finally got it passed.
Speaker 1: Okay, were there politics involved with that?  Did you have to?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you, you know and at that level you have to be involved in the politics of things as well right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now--
Speaker 2: Essentially we had to negotiate with the twenty-nine and we did that through Burke [Edward M. Burke] and his office.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did the cuts occur in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the three?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In the top three?
Speaker 2: We got the, we got the budget balanced.  I mean we had to put together a balanced budget.
Speaker 1: Okay, you act like it's such a you know, in a way that it's such a simple process but it's just a lot of--I mean I just think you know you (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well you know I always said you know budgeting is not rocket science okay.  You--revenue and in the public sector, revenue and expense have got to equal.  If they don't equal you have a limited number of choices.  You can increase revenue, you can decrease expense or you can do some combination of that, that's all you got (laughter) yeah this is not sending you know the first colony to live on the moon.
Story_ID: 580107
Speaker 1: When did you know you were going to be up for his spot? Or did you or?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't.
Speaker 1: Because.
Speaker 2: I was sort of the only logical candidate unless they were going to bring in somebody from outside which that wasn't gonna happen, not in the midst of all that you know.  I was there, I worked well with Dave [David F. Schulz], we got the budget out.  I knew the people in the budget office [City of Chicago Office of Budget and Management].  I didn't necessarily know the department heads 'cause they were all new, but all those folks who'd been in the government you know.  I've got over there the city directory I took with me when I left in '89 [1989] you know and yeah, the prefixes on the phone numbers have changed 'cause they changed the phone system and they've reorganized departments, but the one truism about the city is that no matter how many times they reorganize and stuff, as long as you remember where the function was--like if I go over there and I want to call somebody in the Bureau of Bridges yeah it's in CDOT [City of Chicago Department of Transportation] now but it used to be in the Bureau of Bridges in the Department of Public Works [City of Chicago Department of Public Works; City of Chicago Department of Transportation] and when the structure changed the same people remained, and most important the phone numbers (laughter) remained so I could call somebody who use to be in the old Department of Public Works Bureau of Bridges.  On the same phone number I got on that book except I need to change the prefix from 747 to 742 and they'll answer the phone (laughter).
Speaker 1: You know that people would be amazed by that because they think wholesale change has really happened but these are government jobs, you know they're not political appointees, right?
Speaker 2: Right and the functions remain.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I don't care how you reorganize whatever.  Somebody has to open and close the bridges, paint them every couple of three years, fix them when they don't open and close.  There's gonna be a unit that does that and no matter what you call it and how you reorganize it, you're gonna have the bridge and engineers who know all these bascule bridges, moveable bridges, this that and the other bridges.  You're gonna keep them in place, otherwise the whole thing would go down the tubes you know (laughter).  You need somebody or some, some bodies who know the intricacies of the bridge over the river at Clark Street.  You're not gonna get rid of all those people and bring in some people who you know, don't know anything.
Speaker 1: Now so you are made, you know you're announced as the new head, you know head of the (unclear) budget, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was nominated as budget director and you have to go to council [Chicago City Council], you know to get confirmed.
Speaker 1: Okay, was that?
Speaker 2: So we did that.
Speaker 1: Was that process, was that process held up much?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So that was one of the exceptions then.
Speaker 2: No, they didn't mess around with me.  For one thing--
Speaker 1: You knew people?
Speaker 2: And not so much that I knew people, they knew me.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: When I left there in '79 [1979] most of the cast of characters in the council were still there when I got back in '83 [1983] you know.  The 1st Ward was Roti [Fred Roti], the 14th Ward was what's his face, Burke [Edward M. Burke], you know.  I knew a lot of these people, Stone [Bernard Stone], you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so when you--but this is a big deal.  Let me just, how many, how many black female budget directors in major cities existed at that point?
Speaker 2: At that time I might've been the first or the second.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know because typically that had not been a quote, unquote, woman's position you know.  You had not had women in finance, public works, police, fire, I mean you know.  Women ran the soft services, human services departments, personnel departments that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: But you were successful in that position, why do you think counted to your success?  Was it because you had had this background leading up a lot of years, it's not like you were sort of plumbed in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --you knew the government--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Is it all those things?
Speaker 2: I, I--
Speaker 1: You were viewed as no nonsense, no one was gonna mess with you.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Sorry, sorry for the commentary (laughter) okay.
Speaker 2: Well you know I, I think it was largely a--you know it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Was years of experience and experience not only in the Chicago [Illinois] government, but the experience in the D.C. [Washington, D.C.] government served me well, yeah it served me well.
Speaker 1: Okay, so let me ask in this period because you were in this position through you know the death of Mayor Washington [Harold Washington]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to, you know, Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer], to--
Speaker 2: No, then--
Speaker 1: No, Sawyer?
Speaker 2: Under Sawyer I got appointed as chief of staff.
Speaker 1: Chief of staff, okay that's right, okay, this is all right, and, sorry.
Speaker 2: Well what's now called chief of staff, I was called chief of operating of-, I called myself the chief operating officer (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear). Right. Okay.
Story_ID: 580108
Speaker 1: Can we talk?  I mean from your own words, what things were important that you learned or what are memorable moments you know during the Washington [Harold Washington] years [in Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Okay, I think some, some of the, the memorable things were--I remember and this is just a--I was, I was trying to get Mayor Washington to come to some event or another.  You know it's just, the poor man, he had to have been whipped to put up--I'm trying to get him to come to--I don't know what it was anymore, and I'm like, "Oh, Mr. Mayor won't you please come to this one too (unclear)?"  He said, "Sharon [HistoryMaker Sharon Gist Gilliam], I just can't do it."  He said, "There are only so many grins in a day," which I've always thought was just great, you know.  "There's so many grins in a day"--that I, I think I learned you know, I tend to be a compromiser by nature, not a fighter and I didn't understand when Harold would fight about everything that you really--there are some people and some situations where compromise is not gonna work.  Literally you know, your mother's old adage you know give them a foot they'll take a mile, is, is true that you just, you know.  Sometimes you just gotta stand up and fight.
Speaker 1: Now Sharon give an example of when you saw that, like maybe you thought, why is he fighting like this, and then you know you saw it come out to be a correct decision?
Speaker 2: Well, and I can't.
Speaker 1: You can't?
Speaker 2: I can't think of a individual example, it was just probably everything you know, positions that you know we would fight about, cuts that we would fight for and it was just you know day after day after day.
Speaker 1: Well he was trying also--he made some major changes in city government.  Do you remember, you know he--there were things that he was trying to do you know with the money, take money from downtown--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --put it in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Put it in the communities.
Speaker 1: Put it in the communities, that was a big, big effort.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There was--what were some of the other you know sort of initiatives that the?
Speaker 2: Initiatives?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well clearly the fair allocation of resources you know essentially to all of the wards no matter what.  Executive order for minority and women business you know that, that we couldn't get an ordinance passed but certainly the executive order provided for lots of minority firms and women-owned firms to get their first chance at getting you know any city work.  The--putting his arms around community development block grant.  The city used to get a lot more money than it does now and to make sure that, that was in fact spent in areas that--in poor areas where the federal legislation intended it be spent and not spent all over kingdom come in areas that really didn't need the help.  Certainly those things, just the inclusion of more women in government; you had women you know in all kinds of positions that had not seen women before which is important not only for those women, but it's more important for the tone it sets, you know now twenty years later nobody makes a big deal over you know, women police, or women budget director.  I think in this city we'd probably all fall over dead if the--when we get our first women police superintendent, but there are women in the pipeline now you know and he started that.
Speaker 1: Now how was, how was he as a manager?  I mean what was his you know--because at this point you're dealing with him closely right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well they--I mean he's the kind of boss everybody likes if you know how to do your job, 'cause he's not gonna tell you how to do it.  He gives you some general guidance on what he wants done or the end he wants achieved and it's up to you to go and get it done.   You know he was certainly not--I, I think he wasn't interested in the endless details so he was not in any way, shape or form a micromanager.  It was, hey this is where we gotta get to (laughter) now you go figure out how to get us there you know without too much strum and drum, and there are a couple of things I wanted to do that you know he was like, oh no you know.
Story_ID: 580109
Speaker 1: Well I had this absolutely bright idea before the federal Age Discrimination Act [Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967] that we would have a mandatory retirement age, and so I had Mike Fornaciari [Michael Fornaciari] run the numbers on you know how many people we got at various age cohorts, and this was brought about by some newspaper stories or something like we had a ninety-four-year-old asphalt raker out there or some such thing, I mean this so, but a way to reduce head count and reduce the costs was to get rid of the older folk who at the time I thought, well they ought to be retired anyway, and because they've been on the payroll so long, they're your most expensive people.  You know even if I had to keep the function and back-bill the slot, I'm getting rid of somebody at seventy thousand dollars that I can back bill at forty.  So you know, it's in net savings and because I am mandatorily retiring, I don't have to pay any unemployment comp, you know 'cause they're going out on retirement so you know I trotted down with that idea and, oh, no (laughter) so that all but--I was convinced that this was good so you know I started out with mandatorily retirement sixty-five and said, well maybe that's not so far from his [Harold Washington] age, let's get 'em--so, hey how about at seventy (laughter), we get rid of everybody over seventy.  Then how about we get rid of everybody over seventy-five (laughter), uh, he wouldn't go for any of it, not at any age, and it didn't help that Bob Aarons [ph.] who was in charge of the mayor's office of senior citizens [Mayor's Office of Senior Citizens and Handicapped; City of Chicago Department of Family and Support Services] and was his long-time bud from back in the days when they went to Roosevelt College [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] together and who also lived in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] was steadily undermining my position (laughter), steadily--aw, I lost that one.
Story_ID: 580110
Speaker 1: Now Sharon [HistoryMaker Sharon Gist Gilliam], did you enjoy, did you enjoy being budget director [for the City of Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Best job I've ever had.
Speaker 1: Okay, now why?  Can you talk about that some and--?
Speaker 2: Budget director to me is the best job there is in local government.  You get to see all of the departments.  You get to do something that is objectively measurable.  I like things where I can see what I have done and it can be measured by anybody who cares to look.  For, for a budget you put together the budget.  It is either balanced or it's not.  You manage that budget over the course of a year, at the end of the year you close it out, the accountants come in, they audit and they will tell you exactly where you ended up.  Now maybe people didn't like how you did, they can argue about that.  You should've done this, instead of doing that you know.  Fine, but there can be no question but what the budget was balanced, you maintained it, you ended the year in balance over the small surplus, yeah.
Story_ID: 580111
Speaker 1: Now what were some of the issues though that you dealt?  The airport [Chicago O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois] was a big issue during Mayor Washington's [Harold Washington] term right?  I mean the building, the people mover, did that affect him (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was not so much a big issue.
Speaker 1: Okay then, what about.
Speaker 2: We, I mean the.
Speaker 1: What were the big issues then?
Speaker 2: Well the big issues were the level of police protection. This was before we started having this downturn in crime.  We were still on the upswing in crime, so the level of police protection and whether or not you know the 12,500 police needed to be increased and you know everybody wanted a cop on every corner, never mind that you know cops at the time with support cost you like sixty thousand dollars apiece, so that, that was an issue--just ha- the number of employees in general was an issue, what else?  We fought over CDBG at.
Speaker 1: CDBG?
Speaker 2: Community Development Block Grant federal funds and ultimately that is one of the few federal programs that the council actually in effect re-appropriates and approves.  That's a hangover from those days.  Those were the--it would--it largely revolved around staffing levels and whether or not people were going to be you know, separated from the service.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what about with the block grants, the CDBG?  Did any of your experience--how did your experience you know working within the, you know with--and Washington, D.C., how did some of that or any contacts you might have helped?
Speaker 2: Okay that, that did not help so much.  Actually my previous experience in the Chicago budget office [City of Chicago Office of Budget and Management] helped there because the Community Development Block Grant was a compilation of a number of other previous grant programs and I had been involved in that when I was originally with the budget office and in fact what there had been at the time, there had been a committee formed and the two chairs, the co-chairs of the committee were Erwin France who was running Model Cities CCUO [Chicago Committee on Urban Opportunity] and Lou Hill [Lewis Hill] who was the commissioner of the department of development planning,  DDP. This was before it went through a number of its iterations.   Well they were in--Lou Hill was white, Erwin was black but they had the same kind of personalities so this did not make for a good situation because each of them was fighting to control the CDBG resources and there was a lot more of them in those days, and they were both extremely literate and vocal and the sniping at those meetings (laughter) was just amazing.  It would be great to have some tapes of some of the things that they said in those meetings.  Ultimately the first Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley] got mad or got sick of this battle between these two, you know both of them department heads and applied and assigned oversight at CDBG to the budget office, and then so (laughter) we ran the CD program--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --out of budget and that's you know so I had experience with CDBG going--CDBG going back to that.  We had CDBG and DHCD [Department of Housing and Community Development] in D.C. as well but you know it, it wasn't--given that I--my biggest issue and in terms of funding financing in D.C. once I got over to housing was public housing, I mean no matter where you are public housing is a headache.  It's no such thing as it's not being a headache.
Speaker 1: But it was a public--it was a headache during your time as budget director or a time, or you said in?
Speaker 2: As I was a budget officer for the Department of Housing and Community Development.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right okay, okay now is there, are there any anecdotes during this period?  Otherwise I'd like to move to when you, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let's move.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay.
Story_ID: 580112
Speaker 1: Okay so Mayor Washington [Harold Washington] dies.
Speaker 2: Dies.
Speaker 1: There's a huge grab, describe it.  Describe what happened to me.
Speaker 2: Well you know another major craziness, Mayor Washington dies, you have those who you know wrap themselves in the mantle and say that you know Mayor Washington would surely have wanted me.
Speaker 1: Can you say who, can you?  Okay, for his history's sake just tell.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Who the players are?
Speaker 2: Okay, Tim Evans [Timothy Evans], you know alleged that he had the mantle and should become the mayor.  He--his, his was, he was finance chair at the time.  Of course because he had been seen as the leader of the twenty-one of the opposition, there was no way he could get sufficient votes in the council [Chicago City Council], so that wasn't gonna happen.  There was no way that any white alderman could get sufficient votes in the council, so that wasn't gonna happen.  So they had to come to some alderman--since the statutes provide that an alderman will step forward, you know and that the only people who are gonna vote on this are the other alderman, so they had to come to a more or less consensus, somebody that they all knew and who both blacks and the whites could support. That turned out to be Gene Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer], 6th Ward alderman.  He had Washington credentials because the 6th Ward had been the earliest supporter of Harold and turned out the highest vote totals for him and Gene had been a stand-up supporter you know during all of council wars.  The other guys could abide him because he had not been a vocal--screaming, you know lead-'em-against-the twenty-one and he had been in the council you know before '83 [1983] so they knew him, so he would--you know in the council meeting that will forever live in history is Dick Mell [Richard Mell] is dancing on--standing on the tables and what not you know, and it went on all through the night and into the early morning hours.
Speaker 1: And he was, he won, I mean he got the vote?
Speaker 2: He finally got the vote, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay and then but people are still mourning the loss (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of Harold.
Speaker 1: --of Mayor Washington, there's a huge, it was a hugely contested battle that?
Speaker 2: It was yeah.
Speaker 1: The city [Chicago, Illinois] was divided?
Speaker 2: The city was divided and you know, on we went but there was still a government to run.
Speaker 1: And, and he [Eugene Sawyer] kept you then to be his?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because Ernie Barefield [Ernest Barefield]--there were people in the government essentially bureaucrats or appointees who lined up in this battle.  Well Ernie Barefield and others lined up with Evans.  So of course they were out.  I you know I took the position, look, I'm the budget director, I am not a politician, I can't vote for any of these guys.  I went home and told my staff they did not need to be going down to the council, no good could come of that, go home.  You know, we have a job to do and that is to prepare and manage the budget.  Now if you wanna be involved in all this nonsense go out there run for alderman, get yourself elected you know, you don't need to be involved, this is you know.
Story_ID: 580113
Speaker 1: So talk about your experience under you know, you know?
Speaker 2: Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mayor Sawyer, yes.
Speaker 2: Well, you know I had--I was--I became chief of staff, chief operating officer, chief administrative--whatever you want to call it.  Essentially you are the one that oversees the--
Speaker 1: The whole (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the department heads, right.
Speaker 1: You had to oversee the whole city [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: You oversee the whole city, all the departments, you know try and figure out what the heck they are doing and keep them from doing anything that's just terribly dumb or saying anything terribly dumb.  You know it is a job that I had for seventeen months and I was glad to be rid of it because your whole life--or I came to view my whole life as one of preventing disasters, you know (laughter).  You spent your time trying to prevent disasters and if a disaster occurred, keeping it out of the newspapers (laughter) you know, and it was always something, always something.
Speaker 1: Well that position, there's, there is typically a lot of turnover in that position, I mean people--how long is an average you know chief of staff in place 'cause I know, I know our present Mayor Daley [Richard M. Daley] he's had--
Speaker 2: He's had a number of 'em.
Speaker 1: I wanna say a ton, but I mean--
Speaker 2: Probably two or three years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean it burns you out, it burns you out and you don't--Ron Huberman is getting a chance to, to make some changes and actually have some initiatives, but normally you don't, and you know it is a job of just trying to keep the lid on.
Speaker 1: So it was the opposite in many ways of the job that you came out of?
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: Where you had control, this one you--are you totally, you're totally responding all the time?
Speaker 2: You're always responding, you're you know.  You're trying to get, well you're--you know there are things that you know the, the mayor puts out the state of the city message or the budget or any--whatever he puts out that says he's gonna do X, Y and Z.  So you gotta hammer on these guys to get X, Y and Z done, while they're moaning that they need more money, they need more people, they need the cooperation of A, B and C, you know there's always reasons why they can't do whatever it is they're supposed to be getting done, and you know and then if not they themselves, they've got some deputy or some staff or staff or something who's out there doing whatever (laughter) you know which some investigative reporter is going to find out about (laughter) you know and put on the six o'clock news.
Story_ID: 580114
Speaker 1: We had during what's his name-- Sawyer's [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] watch--we had the whole Cokely [Steve Cokely] affair.
Speaker 2: Oh, can you talk about that?
Speaker 1: With the anti-Semitism, aw you know it was like--and he wouldn't fire this clown and ugh it was just unreal and I, I--when this whole thing came up with the governor and this commission I was reminded of the Cokely affair and I wondered what ever happened to that goof (laughter), you know.
Speaker 2: 'Cause he sort of disappeared after that.
Speaker 1: Which was a good thing.
Speaker 2: Right, so you know it's, it's amazing 'cause your whole countenance changes you know like when you're a budget director you're in charge, nothing seems to bother you (laughter), and once you became chief of staff it was like a headache, but I mean--
Speaker 1: It was a major headache; you know it was just a major headache.
Speaker 2: What was the diff-?
Speaker 1: The health department was a disaster, the aviation we had--I forgot what his name is, he was--Jesus, ugh!
Speaker 2: Were there many holdovers though from the--there were quite a few holdovers--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --from the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they were mostly holdovers.
Speaker 2: Holders from--so it's not like you didn't know them?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay, right, right and well what?
Speaker 1: But it was different dealing with them in budget [City of Chicago Office of Budget and Management].  The thing is in budget you know I was just like hey, you make these numbers work or else, and I dealt with their finance people.  You know I oftentimes didn't even have to--you know I would deal with a department head a couple of times a year.  Mostly, I dealt with their deputies for administration and finance who tended to know what to do and were you know more or less competent people, so you know I didn't have--and all I was interested in was making the numbers work, you know.  Don't tell me your sad stories about whatever--yeah (laughter) these numbers gotta work.
Story_ID: 580115
Speaker 1: I have one question though still because when we, when we started with--just to go back to Mayor Washington's [Harold Washington] administration, how--what was the process of getting the ratings back up for the city?  I mean how, how long did that take and how long did it (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It took us three years; it took us three years of balanced budgets with very small surpluses.
Speaker 1: And this time, can you describe the state of the nation sort of, I mean you know or city [Chicago, Illinois] from an economic standpoint during that time and what?
Speaker 2: Well you know it wasn't really bad economic times.
Speaker 1: But the mayor--but in the--Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] is in office, right?  Is Reagan in office at that time right, early '80s [1980s], yes?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes, okay.
Speaker 2: Did he follow Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.]?
Speaker 1: He followed Carter, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, so Reagan's in office, it's really not bad times, there's a slight recession but we have at least come off the, the crazy hyper-inflation we had under Jimmy Carter, you know that was tough on the city, so the times weren't horrible.  We weren't in the midst of you know a major recession or anything so revenues were fairly stable.  The one thing that we did have to manage is, and this started under the Carter administration, was--the cities use to get something called GRS, General Revenue Sharing and it became a major part of every city in the country's budget and it was folded in and substantially supported the corporate fund.  Well the, the [U.S.] Congress got rid of General Revenue Sharing, they got, they didn't pass any further appropriations or authorization, but we had it, it was stepped down.  So I forgot what we got in General Revenue Sharing, several hundred million dollars so you know that had to be managed, but I think I was done--I--the last of the general revenue sharing was during my tenure as budget director, but you know we were managing the, that loss of revenue.
Story_ID: 580116
Speaker 1: Do you think, going back to Mayor Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer], do you think it's as his chief of staff, one of the challenges is the perception of how he got elected--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and then you know him sort of--'cause people don't really even--when they talk about Chicago [Illinois] having a black mayor, a lot of times they just sort of.
Speaker 2: They'll say we've had one, Harold Washington.
Speaker 1: One.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So was that--so you have, you're trying to manage these forces, you say you have the Cokely [Steve Cokely].  Were there other things that were you know like in the press sort of hounding you as you know as his chief staff?
Speaker 2: Well that was the worst of them.  That was the worst of them.
Speaker 1: Okay, not what--how was his management style different from Harold Washington's?
Speaker 2: Well he, he was simply not as forceful a personality--like his manage--though he clearly had a much better understanding of city government because he'd been around, he was an alderman, you know.  He knew those departments, what they did, he knew where the pressure points in the departments were, how to get things through and done and all of that, but you know the force of personality simply was not there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the election comes, can we talk about you know who's running for office at this point you know 'cause he you know--he was filling out Mayor Washington's term--had Mayor Washington.
Speaker 2: He--for halfway through, then you had--he ran against Rich Daley [Richard M. Daley], and Rich Daley won.
Speaker 1: Right and Rich Daley had been state's attorney; he had run previously, right?
Speaker 2: Right he had run in '83 [1983] and of course there's the famous three-way-race.  The vote is split and between Byrne [Jane Byrne] and Daley and Harold gets in so.
Speaker 1: So now and then he gets in, he serves--the mayor sort of serves and then you have Rich Daley come, coming--
Speaker 2: Back to run.
Speaker 1: --coming back to run and winning the position that his father [Richard J. Daley] once held.
Speaker 2: Yeah, held right (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. For a long time.
Story_ID: 580117
Speaker 1: Where are you right now, are you burned out, are you like--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had in fact I had said before Mayor Washington [Harold Washington] died that you know I was gonna start looking around and leaving, of course you know and leave to go the private sector.  That I'd really done all that I could do in the public sector and besides you know you leave when you're on top, maybe you can snag a really good well-paying job (laughter), and but you know once, once Harold Washington died you've a got a new mayor [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] who needs help to stay in place, and you know it was only gonna be seventeen months.  You knew that a, an election was upcoming and so that's what I did, I stayed in place.
Speaker 1: So afterwards are you looking--did you take a break, Sharon [HistoryMaker Sharon Gist Gilliam] at that point?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or did you immediately go in?
Speaker 2: I, you know Tony Drake [Anthony Drake] and Judy Byrd [Judith Byrd], but it was primarily Tony Drake was forming a consulting firm.  They asked me to come in and that's what I did so.
Speaker 1: So can you talk about who Tony Drake was and who Judy Byrd was?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And how you had met them?
Speaker 2: Tony, Tony Drake I had known from the budget office [City of Chicago Office of Budget and Management], my second tour of duty under Harold Washington.  I was looking for, I think an assistant budget director and assistant to the budget director, something and Tony's resume came across my desk.  He was the--with the state and I oftentimes recruited from the bureau of the budget, the State Bureau of the Budget or some of their agencies because the old Bureau of the Budget with Dr. Bob [ph.] whose name I can't remember now was an exceptionally good training ground for budget people, but the pay scales at the state were lower than the pay scales in Chicago [Illinois] 'cause they were tied to the economy of Springfield [Illinois].
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: So that sometimes you could pick up really good people who had been well trained in budget, because the state underpaid 'em and I got Tony Drake.  He came in and he turned out to just super, really, really good but Harold saw that he was really, really too (laughter) good and so he worked for me.  He got loaned over here to CH--over here to CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] for a time when they were--they had--during one of the many times of troubles over here they sent what's her name from the department of housing over and Tony went over, came over with her to run the finances over here.  Then he came back to the budget office and Harold reached down for him again and sent him out to the airport, and out at the airport, he learned, he really learned airport finance, he really liked it and figured out that, hey airport consulting was a niche business that a minority firm could really be successful in.  So he, but and Judy Byrd was also out at the airport.  She didn't originally come into the administration, I forget what department, but she was out at O'Hare [Chicago O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois] on the concession side, and when they advertised for concessionaires, and were looking for minority concessionaires Judy who was a lawyer by training, had been out there managing that program and getting minority concessionaires in place. So the two of them, he on airport finance or in the interim he had left the city and gone to another airport consulting firm, Landrum & Brown, ran its aviation finance practice and its Chicago office, so I mean he really learned the business, learned airport finance which is a you know, a sort of sub-set of (laughter) municipal finance and in some ways different.  Judy knew airport retail from her concessions experience and they brought me in because I had relationships in city government and could run a public sector practice.
Story_ID: 580118
Speaker 1: You buy a consulting firm, what are you buying?
Speaker 2: The, the talent of the people.
Speaker 1: The talent of the people and their relationships (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the contacts.
Speaker 1: You're buying their relationships.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: That's all you're buying.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: So the--so okay, the three of you decide you're gonna do this.  Now what are--how are you positioning yourself?  Is it clear what you're gonna be doing with your consult-?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the, the firm was largely an aviation consulting firm to airport-owner operators and it specialized, it came to specialize in finance and what's called concessions or retail you know, all those shops you see at airports, and we were one of the few minority firms in aviation consulting and with the requirements, you know, in some jurisdictions that there be minority involvement in their contracts.  We were, you know we were able to get con- first, you know you start out small.  You're a subcontractor and finally you're able to bid and win contracts on your own.  One of the major clients, that, that Tony [Anthony Drake] was able to get was the St. Louis Airport [Lambert-St. Louis International Airport, St. Louis, Missouri] and we've always, the firm always had some contracts, though we weren't the aviation consultant.  Landrum & Brown remained the aviation consult to the Chicago [Illinois] airport system, but we hold, there--Unison [Unison-Maximus, Inc.] held that role for St. Louis [Missouri] and for Kansas City [Missouri] and they'd pick up other contracts all over the country.
Speaker 2: Okay, so can you sort of plot that like--first of all how were you positioning yourself in the marketplace?  What were your competitors from you know, a you know minority-owned business or you know stand- or what, who were your competitors, and then what were you perceived you know, and then what were your roles within the organization?
Speaker 1: Okay, well let me start with the easiest, the roles within the organization.  I was always based in Chicago and I left the public sector practice.  That is I did consulting to state and local government, largely local government and acted as the chief operating officer because I was the one who did not constantly travel.  Judy [Judith Byrd] ran the airport--Judy ran and still runs the airport retail practice--that is all of the concessions planning at all of these airports all around the country.  Tony ran and still runs the airport finance practice, okay all over the country, and you know we hired staff to, to further those ends.  We positioned ourselves as an airport consulting firm, one of the few minority--there may be three or four minority firms--a couple of Hispanic firms now, but at the time that we started, there was probably only one and I don't remember the name of you know the, the other firm.  So you know it was a real anomaly at the time.  You--we started out doing subcontract work to the, the bigger companies, the Landrum & Browns and all of the others who were in the field out there.  It--there are a number of--well not, it's a relatively small niche business.  There may be ten to twelve aviation consulting firms to the airports.  There's another group of people who do consulting to the airlines, but they are two different groups of folks and then the big public accounting firms and their consulting arms also do work in that industry.  Then the--in the--on the retail side you have some of the firms that do shopping center management because if you think about it in some ways retail on an airport is sort of a shopping center.  So those folks are competitors on the concessions side.
Story_ID: 580119
Speaker 1: And, so what were some of the critical milestones, you know along the way in the building of the business [Unison-Maximus, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Well first and foremost is the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And airports changed a lot in that period, I mean.
Speaker 2: Yeah well first and foremost just keeping the doors open and getting to the point where you were--you had enough staff and you had enough of a name in the industry to bid jobs, 'cause all the work is almost gotten through bids, competitive bidding to, to bid jobs in and where you could be the prime contractor, you know so where you have some control over your life.  That was major.
Speaker 1: When did you become, when did that happen?  Was that with St. Louis [Lambert-St. Louis International Airport, St. Louis, Missouri] that that happened?
Speaker 2: No, we got small primes before that so.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Probably two years after we opened the doors in '80 [1980] summer of '89 [1989], probably by '91 [1991], you know, getting off, getting out of the shared office space like and getting our own office space, that--building staff you know, it's the usual small business kinds of milestones.  Getting a large, continuing client where you are their aviation consultant and I'm not sure when that happened, but that, that happened with St. Louis, where you know, you know that you will constantly--it's these big airports, there are always project on-going, there are always financial projects, there are never ending, it's like O'Hare [Chicago O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois], there's something always out there under construction (laughter) you know.  They're always selling debt, refinancing debt, doing something with debt planning. They're always fiddling around with the concessions.  I mean it's the really hub, big hub airports.  There's always something going on.  So there's always work to be done.
Speaker 1: So it was a nice niche to be in really (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 580120
Speaker 1: What do you think developed as sort of the hallmark of your--you know of Unison [Unison-Maximus, Inc.]?  I mean as, you know, doing good work, or--I mean I'm just trying to?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was on Tony's [Anthony Drake] side of really understanding airport finance and being careful and doing extremely good, detailed work.  On Judy's [Judith Byrd] side retail, she is known for being extremely creative and being able to make--to do concessions planning so that the concessions stand out as something that's tied to that city.  Judy's team did the concessions planning for the new Midway [Chicago Midway International Airport, Chicago, Illinois], you know and all of those changes so that it has a Chicago [Illinois] flair and all of that.  So, yeah she's good at that.
Speaker 1: Okay and you were--did you enjoy run--you know managing the office and doing, you know doing those things and then you were?
Speaker 2: I didn't dislike it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't dislike it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay and so but you all, you had your separate sort of--it was almost like sort of separate businesses.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Within the context of a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --group and it all worked.
Speaker 2: And it worked, yeah because I, you know I never had the fascination that the--Judy and Tony love airports.  I never had a fascination with airports.  I like cities, and so I you know, I did all kinds of projects for all kinds of city agencies, and some work for the county.
Speaker 1: So what kind of work, what, what kinds of projects were you working on, you yourself?
Speaker 2: Okay, reorganizations, financial projects of one sort or another, and putting together a budget, helping to put together a budget you know, just the usual mix and match.
Speaker 1: Sharon [HistoryMaker Sharon Gist Gilliam], did you ever miss being you know budget director at this point, like you know, right--there's a huge difference between running you know a small business and you know being head of a major--
Speaker 2: Right, city department (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) metro- right, city department.
Speaker 2: Not really, not really.  Probably because I stayed close enough through the public--to the public sector through my work that I still saw a lot of the issues and what not.
Story_ID: 580121
Speaker 1: I would like to go to--now you, you first--okay, during this period, a little, well no really do I wanna--well, a little--a few years after let's say you started getting your prime contracts you were--you, you had stayed involved from a civic perspective.  So you got appointed to the--I mean where CHA Board of Commissioners [Chicago Housing Authority Board of Commissioners] first, and can you tell?
Speaker 2: No, I got appointed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nineteen ninety-nine [1999]?
Speaker 2: I got appointed to this, to the CHA Board of Commissioners in '99 [1999].
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, '99 [1999], I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: But I had previously--the first civic board I--civic board I got appointed to amazingly enough was the Judicial Inquiry Board and let's see '89 [1989], this is probably about '91 [1991] or so?
Speaker 1: They said '93 [1993].
Speaker 2: Ninety-three [1993]?  Okay, I got appointed to the Judicial Inquiry Board and you know I, I served on that.  Then I got appointed in '90 [1990]--summer of '95 [1995] to the school reform board of the Chicago reform board [Chicago School Reform Board of Trustees], whatever they call the five-member board in '95 [1995] when the mayor [Richard M. Daley] took over the schools.  I did that for a couple of years and I got recruited to the State Board of Education [Illinois State Board of Education], ISBE, and I did that for a couple of years, '97 [1997] to '99 [1999] and then I got recruited to this board.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The CHA Board.
Story_ID: 580122
Speaker 1: Now this is you becoming really a public servant in many ways.  Up to this point your career had been you know, what do I--a government employee, I mean--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Sort of a government employee, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now, now with, with the--on the school board, can you just discuss what you know what were the circumstances beyond that, and what team you were part of you know that would you know?
Speaker 2: Okay, sure in '95 [1995] the mayor [Richard M. Daley] had gotten passed legislation that allowed him to select without council confirmation five people to serve on what they came to call the reform board, or school reform board [Chicago School Reform Board of Trustees] and he selected as the chair of that board Gery Chico who is a lawyer in private practice now but at one time had been is chief of staff and I was on the board, Norm Bobins [Norman R. Bobins] who's head of LaSalle Bank [LaSalle Bank National Association] was on the board, and I forget who the other two people were.
Speaker 1: Oh was it?
Speaker 2: Oh, what's his name who's a doctor, a pediatrician?
Speaker 1: And wasn't it also, oh God, Saffold, was Saffold?
Speaker 2: Gene Saffold.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Who is an investment banker and always has been.  So we were the band of five merry persons (laughter) who made up the school reform board, and Vallas.
Speaker 1: Paul Vallas?
Speaker 2: Paul Vallas was CEO of the schools and we were there to support Paul and to--he embarked on an absolutely huge building program, building new schools, renovating old schools you know, passing the--well stopping the just promotions with no attainment of any skills, social promotion policy, getting rid of that, putting in place a number of testing regimens and I mean it's just endless change during the, that period.
Speaker 1: Now how, how are you--it took a lot of time right?  When there are public boards like that where it's you know it has a lot.
Speaker 2: Well actually the school board didn't take--it meets up once a month, because we were a five-member board we were too small to have committees.  So everything was taken up in the committee as a whole, the board itself.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: And because we met only once a month you really had to only set aside the day of the meeting.  Now they do meet all day long, so you had to set aside that one day and I would set aside a day generally a Sunday to read all the board materials for the upcoming meeting.  So that wasn't a huge time commitment.  Now the chair of that board has a huge commitment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because you know they'd, they tend to spend a lot of time with the CEO, but if you're just a member you know, you're good to go.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you know what's interesting is that you know you had been a teacher also, did--?
Speaker 2: Un-hm, long ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, right I mean a long ago, but you, but had you interacted much with the schools during your time as budget director?  Had that been a key?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Not so much, so it's not like--did you enjoy the experience?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.
Speaker 1: Did--what did you learn that you, you know were sort of, you know surprised about or didn't know at?
Speaker 2: I didn't learn anything because I'd had enough relationships with the board of ed [Chicago Board of Education] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 2: --to kind of have a sense of what it was like.  The--I guess everybody who's in the public sector is constantly reminded that--the first time you're amazed at how all of the different entities have totally different cultures.  The schools, CPS [Chicago Public Schools] has a culture of its own and it is different than the city's culture, which is different that the county's culture or the public.  Each of the public entities has a culture of its own and the city--than the school's culture is, you know it's a tough culture.
Speaker 1: Oh you find--oh okay, not, not any tougher than the CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] I can't imagine?
Speaker 2: It, it--because it's so much bigger, I mean you're talking 640 schools, in excess of 40,000 employees, 25,000 of which are teachers and almost everybody unionized you know, turning that ship around is you know is more than a notion.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, you--the--did you--how long are the terms on the school board, were they?
Speaker 2: School board I think are four-year terms.  I served two.
Story_ID: 580123
Speaker 1: And I went on to the ISBE the state board of education [Illinois State Board of Education], oh I'm--no, the state board of education because I was asked--they had no African American member at the time, they had a Hispanic member so and I thought--
Speaker 2: Now was Ron Gidwitz [Ronald Gidwitz] there?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay, who was there?
Speaker 1: He isn't there, I forget the name.
Speaker 2: But now was--?
Speaker 1: Scott [ph.], the guy's name.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But this--
Speaker 1: --this is under a Republican governor.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But the state board of education like so many state boards and commissions must have X number of people from the opp- the non-appointing party's party, so that's how they you know.  So they're always on the, that's how I got on the JIB [Judicial Inquiry Board] as well, they were looking for a Democrat.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: So I ended up on that.
Story_ID: 580124
Speaker 1: So talk about you becoming head of CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] and the, and can you sort of lay just a history in terms of what had happened with the CHA leading up to this and I want you to include to include Vince Lane [HistoryMaker Vincent Lane] in that, and his successor, okay just--
Speaker 2: All right, the Chicago Housing Authority was founded as an entity in 1937 after the passage of the national Housing Act of 1937.  States were given the opportunities to form these housing authorities and they, they did so generally in counties or the local municipalities.  The City of Chicago Housing Authority has been around since '37 [1937].  It went through really good times from '37 [1937] to the early '70s [1970s].  Like so many of these authorities, was pretty much decimated by the Brooke Amendment which required that, one, they house the poorest of the poor and, two, that tenants only pay 25 percent of their adjusted gross income in rent.  So you, you changed the demographics of public housing substantially after the Brooke Amendment in '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Now who was Brooke, who was Brooke?
Speaker 2: Brooke was Senator Edward Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke] of Massachusetts, who was amazingly enough a black Republican; and he passed the Brooke Amendment for the--with the best of intentions but like so many things that are well intentioned, they are the unintended consequences.  Chicago's [Chicago, Illinois] housing authority you know went through a period where the demography changed substantially, such that it did become the housing of last resort, largely single mothers with numbers of children, many on some form of public subsidy.  In the old days it would have been AFDC [Aid to Families with Dependent Children] what is today TANF [Temporary Assistance for Needy Families].  The feds themselves while they provided operating subsidy, they did not provide until really the mid- to late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s] what they called modernization funds so you really didn't have funding to do capital improvements to the buildings.  So the buildings now were getting older, they'd been built in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] largely, except the oldest developments, Madden Park-Wells [Madden Park Homes and Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois], Lathrop [Julia C. Lathrop Homes, Chicago, Illinois] and Jane Addams [Jane Addams Homes, Chicago, Illinois] which had been built in the '30s [1930s].  They were, they were constantly being--they were disintegrating really, but as they were getting older and they needed major capital maintenance and weren't getting it.  The population was not treating the buildings well because of the demographics that were there, and you had a pretty much under the notorious Charles Swibel, who was the long-time chair of the board, you had really an uncaring to say the least--
Speaker 1: Management (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Management folks and there are those who would go beyond uncaring and say you know, criminal. But be that as it may, the authority went on after or at the--I'm not clear whether it was Jane Byrne's last few months or--in office or Harold Washington's first few, Swibel was booted out--course once Harold Washington came into office there were cries to improve the Chicago Housing Authority.  The board was changed, executive managers or CEOs came and went like clockwork, the--you had still the unmaintained buildings and the very difficult situation.  You really didn't have the money to rehab the buildings all of that.  They went through a period I guess the winter of '84 [1984] where, or no it must've been '86 [1986], it was just before the '87 [1987] elections were coming up where Mayor Washington sent a team over from city hall to in effect run the authority because it was in such dire straits, they couldn't pay their bills and you know it was just a mess.
Story_ID: 580125
Speaker 1: Ultimately, Vince Lane [HistoryMaker Vincent Lane] was brought in to run the authority [Chicago Housing Authority] and he acted as both chairman and CEO.  He started turning it around, and one of the things that he came up with much to his credit though it was out in the a firmament somewhere was the whole notion of mixed income communities, and Lake Parc Place [Chicago, Illinois] was redeveloped as--its really sort of modified mixed income in that what you have is affordable and low income housing in this, in the same building.  There's really no market-rate people in Lake Parc Place, but you do have people that above 60 percent of varying medium and people substantially below it.  So, he started making changes.  Eventually he went--he was--went on his way. A couple of other people came in to run the authority and then it was judged to be in such bad shape that the feds came in, in '95 [1995].  They took over the authority as they're want to do from time-to-time around the country.  I think right now Detroit Housing Authority [Detroit Housing Commission] is under federal control, but you know it's it is not without precedent.  So they came over and took over the authority in '95 [1995] sending a team to, to run it.  Ran it 'til '99 [1999] at which point they offered to give it back to the mayor [Richard M. Daley].  The mayor is not dumb, he said, "I'll take it back but (laughter), look there's some things we gotta agree to here."  So he took it, he in effect too it back, appointed a board, this time with advice and consent of the council [Chicago City Council] and negotiated something with the feds, something called the Moving to Work agreement, which provided that we would get $1.6 billion dollars over ten years of which would give us the funding to rehab or redevelop our entire stock of roughly twenty-five thousand occupied units, and that's what we've embarked on over the last, so we're near seven of the ten-year plan.
Speaker 2: So can you talk about that program, but can you--now who's the person in between Vince who was with HUD, [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] who was that person?  I can't remember his name.
Speaker 1: Aw, yeah, Shu- Shuldiner [Joseph Shuldiner].
Speaker 2: Okay, and was he a good manager or was he not, you know or was that?
Speaker 1: I wasn't here I don't know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay. Okay.
Story_ID: 580126
Speaker 1: Within the context of this, the government, the federal government really are cutting people off of welfare, right?  I mean this is within the context of that (unclear)?
Speaker 2: You're right.
Speaker 1: Okay and so can you describe, what did you call it the Move to--?
Speaker 2: This is Moving to Work, MTW--
Speaker 1: So what does that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) demonstration.
Speaker 1: Can, can you--what is that?
Speaker 2: The Moving to Work demonstration has little to do with work, I'm not sure why it's called Moving to Work.  This is a HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] funded program. What a public housing authority does is enter into an agreement with the feds for X amount of funding over X period of time in return for substantially improving the, the quality.
Speaker 1: Of, of the.
Speaker 2: Of the public housing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell--so you're at the seven of ten years [with the Chicago Housing Authority]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What has actually happened and what are the plans going forward?
Speaker 2: All right what we--when we took over 10/1/9--the date we use is 10/1/99 [October 1, 1999], we had roughly 24,700 and some households in residence.  We said that at the end of the day all of those households would have either a new or rehabilitated unit.  There had been an earlier program by HUD testing--giving what was called the 202 Viability Test [Section 202 Viability Test] theoretically to all of their inventory across the country and the, the question to be asked there was--is it cheaper to rehabilitate this structure or to voucher out, that is to give, to give the tenants a housing choice voucher, a Section 8 voucher and send them on out onto the market place.  Well all of our high-rise buildings failed the 202 Viability Test, so that's all of Stateway [Stateway Gardens, Chicago, Illinois], all of Taylor [Robert Taylor Homes, Chicago, Illinois], much of Horner [Henry Horner Homes, Chicago, Illinois], all of Rockwell [Rockwell Gardens, Chicago, Illinois], much of Cabrini [Cabrini-Green Homes, Chicago, Illinois] they all failed the viability test which meant that they had to come down.  So Chicago [Illinois] was, and the mayor [Richard M. Daley] was faced with a choice. He could over time take all of the buildings down and voucher out all the tenants, or and what he determined to do was to redevelop under another housing program called Hope VI, redevelop the sites where the high-rises were and to rehab all of the low rises, and that's the program we're embarked on.  Now, the only high-rises that did not fail the viability test were our senior high rises, they were much better maintained, didn't take the wear, tear and abuse that the family high rises did.  So we had fifty-eight of those we have rehabbed them all.  We've got the happiest seniors in the land because they got buildings that you know 100 percent rehabs all new kitchens and bathrooms and you know community rooms and the heating was replaced and the roofs were replaced and the windows and they were all air conditioned, so you know.  When we go to a meeting in a senior building you know the most we hear you know complaints about their parking lots (laughter), that's about it, the buildings themselves are fabulous.
Story_ID: 580127
Speaker 1: What are you wanting to do, what is sort of your mandate and what do you wanna do you know with CHA [Chicago Housing Authority]?
Speaker 2: Well our, our mandate first and foremost is to redevelop or rehabilitate our entire inventory.  Our inventory at the end of the day will be twenty-five thousand units of housing, ninety-seven hundred of those units are senior units in fifty-eight senior buildings.  All except three of the senior buildings have been totally rehabbed now and the seniors are resettled happily into their new air-conditioned apartments.  We have ten developments that are being redeveloped, on the West Side, ABLA [ABLA Homes, Chicago, Illinois] Horner [Henry Horner Homes, Chicago, Illinois] and Rockwell [Rockwell Gardens, Chicago, Illinois], south, North Side, Cabrini-Green [Cabrini-Green Homes, Chicago, Illinois] and then South Side, Stateway [Stateway Gardens, Chicago, Illinois], Robert Taylor [Robert Taylor Homes, Chicago, Illinois], Madden Park-Wells-Darrow [Madden Park Homes, Ida B. Wells Homes, and Clarence Darrow Homes, Chicago, Illinois].  Those will all be redeveloped as mixed-income communities restoring the original street grid generally in two single families, two and--not very many single families they're too expensive--two three-flats, town homes with some limited number of mid-rises which are condos you know and one and two bedroom condos at that.  So you know they're not designed for a bunch of you know--kids and elevators and don't work, take it from me you know.  You don't want kids in buildings with elevators, especially where they don't have parents who keep an eye on them.  The other thing--and the mayor [Richard M. Daley] talks about rebuilding people's souls--the other thing that we are seeking to do is to get the residents on the road to self-sufficiency so we're offering literacy training, education, job training and job search help, you know get folks working.  Folks are in public housing because they are poor.  They are poor because they haven't the education, job skills to get a job that pays a living wage.  So you know to me this ain't, yeah it's hard to do because now you've got to overcome a multi-generational culture of folks who have not worked, their parents and their grandparents didn't work you know.  It's not a culture of education and work, and you gotta turn that around for the adults insofar as you can, but definitely for these children.  They have got to see that you go to school, you get an education, you get a job that pays you know, a decent family-sustaining wage and you go into the private housing market.  People forget that the Housing Act of 1937 provided for transitional public housing.  It was never intended to be lifetime and what's worse now, multi-generation housing.  The idea you know that we work with our tenants and say, look what we're looking to do is you move from public housing--we're also building affordable housing it these mixed-income communities--to affordable housing and then on to market-rate home ownership  The same thing that you know that we saw forty years ago where the two-parent families worked, saved their money, ultimately bought a house and became you know, tax-paying, mortgage-paying, college-tuition paying (laughter) homeowners.
Speaker 1: Do you think that's gonna happen Sharon [HistoryMaker Sharon Gist Gilliam]?
Speaker 2: It will happen for some of--a segment.
Speaker 1: Of, of the population (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of the population.
Story_ID: 580128
Speaker 1: Now what, some people would say that you know what we see happening is the ghettoization of the suburbs, that you know they may--you're, you're tearing down you know the high-rise buildings and people are moving to the suburbs and the city is being redeveloped.
Speaker 2: Well the city is being redeveloped and there are people moving to the suburbs.  My folks, that is CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] residents who take housing choice vouchers are generally relocating within a couple of miles of wherever they're leaving.   We, we took a look at the numbers when some of the south suburban mayors and their Congressman Jackson [HistoryMaker Jesse Jackson, Jr.] were carrying on to see how many--and we have to keep track of all our people, where they were going.  As of last year we had thirty-four people who had done what we call porting out. That is, they had taken Section 8 vouchers to go to another jurisdiction, thirty-four families and some of them went to Iowa, you know.  We have not--our folks generally stay in an area that they know, where they have friends, relatives and relationships.  They don't go trailing out to the south suburbs or the near west suburbs where you gotta have a car to get back and forth, where they don't know anybody, you know that's just not happening. That--now there is a county housing authority [Housing Authority of Cook County] and there are no doubt folks out, they are using housing choice vouchers, but they were folks who are were always in the suburbs.  They might have been hidden from view, but they were out there.
Speaker 1: So, so you feel positive, you believe that you can change if you can change the culture, okay?
Speaker 2: Not a hundred percent they're--you just have to accept the fact that you know for as long as mankind have been around there have been some people who can't make it, can't cope, can't succeed, but that's no reason not to try and we know from all of the zillions of studies done by the education industry that you know if you start kids on the right road (laughter), chances are they'll keep on going down it.
Speaker 1: Now in the position you are right now, there is someone--there's an executive director, right or is it one?
Speaker 2: Right, right I'm the chairman of the board of commissioners, there's ten of us on the board of commissioners appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council.  Then there is a chief executive officer which is--who is Terry Peterson and he hires the staff.  We have now about 450 employees.
Speaker 1: Okay, and are you saying that the number of units before this were--whatever it's called need, need to--something to work, something, okay?.
Speaker 2: Moving to Work demonstration (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Moving to Work demonstration (laughter), before--how--what were the units before and then what are they now?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You said twenty-five--?
Speaker 2: We had in occupancy about 24,700-and-some.  There were a lot more units standing there were in the thirty-some-thousand.  At its height the Chicago Housing Authority had at forty-one thousand public housing units, all occupied, at its height.  Over time, you know as buildings deteriorated and closed, a lot of the buildings you saw standing were anywhere from one quarter to three quarters occupied.  None of them were 100 percent occupied.
Speaker 1: That's about the size of the town I first grew up in you know that, so that--I mean (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well that's what I remind people of, twenty-five thousand housing units is much larger than most of the towns, cities and villages in Illinois.  We are a city within a city.
Story_ID: 580129
Speaker 1: Tell me Sharon [HistoryMaker Sharon Gist Gilliam] where are you right now in your life, I mean what are you, you know are you--(laughter), I know you (unclear) but we move into sort of the philosophical--but I'm just wondering what, what things have you not done in your life that you would like to do and you've formed another, you're still doing consulting?
Speaker 2: I'm still doing consulting, I'm a principal in a small start-up firm [UCG Associates, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] though I give very little time and energy to that, I'm not sure that I'm up for doing yet another start-up consulting firm.  You know I'm really an investor in it and what not.  I'm--I do serve on this board.  I'm on the board of the Northwestern Memorial Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] board which I really like and on the Chicago History Museum [Chicago, Illinois] board so.  I, I can see myself you know five years from now, eight years from now just being just one of those little old ladies who gets on everybody's nerves as I come to my board meetings and raise uncomfortable questions (laughter) you know, that's--
Speaker 1: So you like being civically active?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I love it, yeah I really do like it
Speaker 1: Tell me with--would you consider yourself more public servant now than private person, do you, I mean do you get your--do you get in, I'm just trying to understand you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  I--no, I guess because I've always been in and around the public sector it's probably just a part of me.  I've never not been involved in some way either through work or volunteer efforts or both, so you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --I've just been around it a long, long time.
Story_ID: 580130
Speaker 1: Do you find that of the, of the boards and commissions you've served on which have you enjoyed the most?
Speaker 2: I enjoy different ones for different reasons.  I like the Chicago History Museum [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: You know that's the historical society [Chicago Historical Society, Chicago, Illinois], has it changed its name?
Speaker 2: It--we've changed our name.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay I see okay.
Speaker 2: The old historical society which is now the Chicago History Museum, let's everybody burn that in their brains.  I like that because I like history and I like Chicago [Illinois] history particularly.  So that is something I like sort of I guess from an intellectual standpoint.  I love the Northwestern Memorial [Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] board simply because they are so incredibly competent at what they do.  I mean that is just a very, very well run hospital.  I've always been on the finance committee there and just to sit through you know finance committee meeting, you know we meet at seven thirty in the morning, we're outta there at nine, you know we may have bought and sold $200 million worth of property, and I mean that's a billion dollar organization, that's what it takes to run that place and they do it so well with all the craziness that surrounds you in the healthcare industry with you know with government funding and lack of government funding and all of the rest and they manage it while at the same time being on the cutting edge of medicine which is difficult in itself so, you know I, I really like that and I really have come to, you know when I got appointed to this board [Chicago Housing Authority] I was like oh, wow.  Is this something I wanna do, but it is amazing if you set a goal and just work toward it.  Who would have thought seven years ago that you know we could redevelop ten different areas.  Now yeah there's the day-to-day drama you know with the activists and the courts and yada, yada.  I mean there is never a day that there isn't something, but you just sort of march.  Terry [Terry Peterson] says a good saying, he said, "Look, we just move the chains down the field," yeah a football analogy you just can't you know, you get knocked down you get up and you keep going.
Speaker 1: You know because for--I think about it, there was incredible amount of publicity and negative you know, a lot of analysis and it's been very and when I remember when you took this position you know it was like why would you go from the fry (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Has she lost her mind?
Speaker 1: --from the frying pan (laughter) into the fire, but it's been very quiet and you see the city.
Speaker 2: And that's because we're doing what we said we would do, we told the residents, hey you meet the site's specific criteria you can come back and they are folks coming back  We said we're taking these buildings down, but nobody will be homeless.  Nobody is homeless you know everybody has a warm, dry roof over their head in a better situation than they were previously in and you know yeah we just constantly march on and you know year-by-year get that year's worth of stuff done.
Story_ID: 580131
Speaker 1: Since you're dealing in a community that's largely minority and largely black, what are your hopes and concerns about the black community that you see?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly--well there is no one black community, that's first and foremost you know some folks are you know perfectly--they will, they will do perfectly well no matter what.  I look at my little cousins with you know going to private schools and you know rooms full of toys who consider a computer a toy, yet another toy that they have (laughter), their computer.  So you know that part of--the population that I deal with is the very, very low income, it's that they will understand that this country is no longer all that liberal, it is no longer one that is willing to listen to excuses for why you didn't do it, and they need to understand that, you know.  They really do need to understand that this ain't the '60s [1960s] and Lyndon [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] ain't coming back, okay (laughter), if anything is as the Baby Boom generation continues to age, and there such a large cohort in the overall population, what we will see I'm afraid of is a much more conservative country than it is even now let alone where we were say in the '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s] as we go forward you know.  Folks are not worried about the poor, folks are worried about whether or not there will be social security when they retire in five years you know and how they are going to manage so, you know if, if you are poor and think that you know there's all this concern about your situation, aw, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: So what do you think will happen with that part of the black community, I guess is what I'm asking?
Speaker 2: Well you know as with all things, some will make it and some will not, now what's gone happen to those who don't given that nobody is talking about increasing or reinstituting TANF [Temporary Assistance for Needy Families] and.
Speaker 1: What is--explain what TANF?
Speaker 2: Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, it's a replacement for what was AFDC [Aid to Families with Dependent Children] or ADC [Aid to Dependent Children].
Speaker 1: So you mean what happens when it's not reinstated?
Speaker 2: No, I said nobody's talking about increasing it or--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right now you're entitled to sixty months life-time of TANF, five years.
Speaker 1: That's it?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So once you're, what, what are the research--what is it showing now?
Speaker 2: Well most people have gotten up, gone out and got themselves jobs.  Now they may be minimum wage jobs, but they got jobs and they're off TANF.  I was just talking to a friend of mine who is doing some work for the State of Georgia and they have managed to, they have managed to get some counties down there with absolutely no TANF recipients.  Everybody has gone to work, now you're never going to see that in Cook County [Illinois] but you know and it's a matter of turning people's heads around.
Speaker 1: So you see yourself in really sort of on this bandwagon to turn people's heads around. I mean many (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right to, that, that--?
Speaker 2: The mayor [Richard M. Daley] calls it rebuilding their souls, I call it changing a culture.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and so when I ask that question if I asked about the lesser of the black community, that's what you see is changing the culture of that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --of the community to back to where it was when--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Well, what it's, what it has been since you know slavery, I mean what did our forefathers say?  They took a chance on being killed in order to learn to read you know, education, education, work you know.  We all knew people who, fathers who worked two jobs at a minimum you know from the time they were seventeen, eighteen years old to the time they were eighty if they lived that long. And the value of education I mean, I'm sure in your family it was you know from the time you could walk you could say college (laughter) you know. That was--certainly that was the, the case in my family if you will you know.  My father [Arthur Gist] worked two jobs, my mother [Vivian Montgomery Gist] worked and we went to school and we went to school and we went to school (laughter), you know.
Story_ID: 580132
Speaker 1: So now let me ask, you know when you--have you had occasion much to think about your life you know and your sort of trajectory, which wasn't really planned?
Speaker 2: Right, no and I'm not a very self-reflective person, I just sort of bundle along (laughter).
Speaker 1: But I mean if you were to think--if I could engage you in thinking about you know (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Since you're, you're not as reflective, that's okay I can deal with you too (laughter), but if you could think a-back to the little girl who was working on her, her father's [Arthur Gist] store, or even you know, you know I, I was thinking about the description of your father's table that for the month of, what did you say, February (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) February?
Speaker 1: Never you know, you couldn't get to it, if you could think back to that person then and the person now, what would you say you know has developed along that, you know the, the way?  I mean who is that, who is Sharon [HistoryMaker Sharon Gist Gilliam] today versus who was Sharon then?
Speaker 2: Who she was then?  I, you know I am probably not that different than I was then, I really am not.  I'm still sort of the, the nerdy person who likes to read, who would rather read than say watch TV or do something else, who has a few close friends and I'm not gregarious with tons of friends and all of that so, who takes seriously whatever work I'm doing at whatever time I'm doing it you know, put some energy and effort into it, so it's you know.  I really don't think I've changed that much.
Story_ID: 580133
Speaker 1: What would you want your legacy to be though?
Speaker 2: Um?  I don't know that I you know, I, I suppose I see a lot of the projects I worked on over the years both with the city and now with CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] is some sort of a legacy you know.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that a little bit more?
Speaker 2: Well, among the things I worked on--there, one thing that I'm proud of that I'll always remember is I think I told you earlier about the earliest, the emergency medical services [EMS] by the fire department [Chicago Fire Department], was funded by Model Cities, but one of the things I did once I got to the budget office [City of Chicago Office of Budget and Management] there was some federal--there were federal grants available through state public health that cities could get to start an EMS service, a real EMS service with the, the type of ambulances that we see today, and I worked on those grants.  I was in the budget office, I wrote the grants.  I worked with a guy in the fire department, we put those applications together and got the money that got us the rigs and got the money that would provide for the training of the first EMT-1s [emergency medical technicians],  and then got more money in the next round of funding to go for EMT-2s and then paramedics, so every time I see 42 [Ambulance 42] down here in the Loop [Chicago, Illinois] heading up to pick up somebody you know I look at that you know so, I worked on that you know.  Neighborhood centers I worked on those programs at Model Cities, and when this over, Lord help us, when this is--I, I said at a big employee meeting that we have you know, when I'm a little old blue-haired lady you know have some young man drive me around and I'll look at ABLA [ABLA Homes, Chicago, Illinois] and the neighborhood I live in now and any number that--at least ten other neighborhoods I'll be able to drive and say, you know maybe I didn't build it but I had a part in getting that done.
Speaker 1: So it's also making things better in many ways, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what about the role of you know yourself as a woman, or that you know the things like we talked about you being the first, you know possibly the first or the second you know female budget director and you know the world has changed a lot during that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that's not even you know when you think about it, it's maybe twenty years ago.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah twenty years ago.
Speaker 2: Yeah, twenty-three years ago.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't know I, I guess I just I don't think about that so much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know that, I'm just a product of that times there, I don't know that it was, you know if I had been the budget director of the City of Chicago [Illinois] in 1940 (laughter) that would be an accomplishment, but I just happened to come through at a period in history where the doors were opening for women and, and minorities.
Story_ID: 580134
Speaker 1: I have one last question then and, and it's about your family legacy.  If you see your family, you know as you had sort of talked about the trajectory, both--on both sides, you know, what would you say you know, how do you see yourself vis-a-vis your family legacy, as one more?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think, I guess you know I'm just another in a long step.  I've two sisters, one of them, they're younger sisters and one of them is getting ready to retire.  What's that all about somebody younger than you retiring, but you know she's a project manager for SAP, a big technology company and like. My (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And her name?
Speaker 2: Myra [Myra Gist].
Speaker 1: And your other sister?
Speaker 2: My other sister Vivian [Vivian Gist Spencer] is a professor, you know a tenured professor at college level teaching English and theater, so you know and we are, I think we are what our parents [Vivian Montgomery Gist and Arthur Gist] expected us to be and what our grandparents expected of their grandchildren.  I don't think that you know we are any more than they would have expected us to be and to have achieved. Now maybe if you know, Myra became the head of SAP or Vee [Vivian Gist Spencer] was you know, her real interest is theater and stuff if she were on Broadway or that would have been you know exceed expectations, but I think you know we are doing what we were expected, what we were programmed to do.
