Story_ID: 560180
Speaker 1: Our guest here for The HistoryMakers today is [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory who needs no introduction, but we're going to go through it anyway.  And let me begin by asking you, Dick, for your full name and if you would, please, spell it for me.
Speaker 2: Richard, R-I-C-H-A-R-D, Claxton, C-L-A-X-T-O-N, Gregory, G-R-E-G-O-R-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at this moment, doing this filming?
Speaker 2: When you say where are we?
Speaker 1: Place, city.
Speaker 2: Oh, right here, okay (laughter).  We're in Washington, D.C.--
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: --and probably the, probably the number one most powerful capital in the history of the planet.  I mean up until then you could say it was the Roman Empire.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But we are the number one.  And that's the interesting thing about being here, if you understand what Washington is.  America is probably the most insane, vicious, ungodly, unethical heathen mentalities ever existed in the history of the planet.  But we don't know that because there's a money thing out there and that nullifies everything.  But if you sit and look at--we have a building here named after J. Edgar Hoover [J. Edgar Hoover F.B.I. Building, Washington, D.C.].  And you'd have to go past Hitler to find out how filthy he was.  But yet in Germany, if we was in Germany today and saw a brand new building named after Adolf Hitler, we know something's wrong.  But here in America we don't.
Speaker 1: Let's, I'm gonna finish by asking you today's date, and then we're gonna get to--
Speaker 2: I wanna tell you, I do not know dates.  I don't keep dates in my head (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You would not be the first.
Speaker 2: So, does anybody know today's date?  I have to go by months.  It's July--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  The 29th.
Speaker 2: Twenty-ninth, okay, 29th.
Speaker 1: Okay, what month and year?
Speaker 2: The month is July and the year is '07 [2007].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Two thousand seven [2007].
Speaker 1: Good enough.
Story_ID: 560181
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you several People magazine like questions because they tell us that by asking you these questions, we relax you.  I haven't noticed that you are unrelaxed, but let me start by asking you your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I have none.
Speaker 1: All right.  How about your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I have none.
Speaker 1: Your time or season?
Speaker 2: Summertime.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How about your favorite vacation spot?
Speaker 2: None.
Speaker 1: And your favorite saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite saying?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I have none.
Story_ID: 560182
Speaker 1: Let's go to when you were born, your date of birth?
Speaker 2: October 12, 1932, St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: And your--you've answered the second question, in St. Louis, Missouri.  How far back can you go in your memory to your mother's [Lucille Gregory] family and your father's [Presley Gregory] family?
Speaker 2: I can't.
Speaker 1: Okay, either one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) no--my mother's sisters lived there.  Her brother was either dead or didn't live there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't know none of my father's folks at all.  I just, maybe from Bells, Tennessee, which is about a hundred miles outside of Memphis [Tennessee].  But I didn't know--
Speaker 1: Okay but that was your mother's birthplace, Bells, Tennessee (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.  That's my father's birthplace.
Speaker 1: Your father's.
Speaker 2: My mother's birthplace was St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 560183
Speaker 1: What about your earliest memories that you can take us back to as a child?  Sometimes we--
Speaker 2: My earliest memory was probably when I was about five years old, when I first started school.  Before that, I didn't--
Speaker 1: All right, five.  What--the elementary school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was the name of that elementary school there in St. Louis [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: John, John Marshall [John Marshall School].
Speaker 1: John Marshall, okay.
Speaker 2: Which is kind of interesting because when you state now and look back how racist white America was.  And the schools we went to were not built for us.  They were built for white folks.  So when we got there, they had to change the names.  And to think that every--there were no schools named after Negroes.  Every school that black folks went to was named after an important white person that had something to do with our liberation, which is incredible.
Speaker 1: True.
Speaker 2: I went to Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri], named after Charles Sumner.  When you think about John Marshall, [U.S.] Supreme Court, that was against slavery.  And I just, that, I've never been able to figure out the meanness, the, the hatred, and yet somebody bigger than them prevailed over naming, you know, schools for black folk.
Story_ID: 560184
Speaker 1: At what age can you remember that you became aware of some of the contradictions in American society?  Was it as early as elementary school [John Marshall School, St. Louis, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Oh, god, no.  No, I mean, the contradiction in American society wasn't given to me by white folks.  I got it from my mama [Lucille Gregory], you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  She used to talk to you about some of the contradictions?
Speaker 2: No, she never talked about contradictions.  I'm saying the contradictions that exists, the reason they was hard to break because my mama never told me anything was wrong with--my mama never told me when you go around the world, if you go to China, and go to the Christian society, Jesus Christ looked Chinese.  You got to Japan, Jesus Christ looked Japanese.  If you go to Brazil, Jesus Christ looks Brazilian.  But when I walk out my door and go to church, he's a white man.  Now, I don't give a care what color God is.  I don't care what color, but if it's gonna change, then I want one that look like me.  And I blame that on my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For the ignorance that was passed down through her.  You know, she never told me 'cause she didn't know that we had writers far greater than writers now, when you go back, before Jesus Christ was born.  The Romans, the Africans, hieroglyphics, man, they still ain't figured out what that is.  And yet, she teach me about a man that not one single word was ever written about him.  But all them great writers.  Man, it gotta be something wrong with that.  But she didn't know it.  But that passed on to me.  See, children don't hear what you mean.  They hear what you say.  I remember one time I called my house, and one of my children answered the phone.  I said, "Tell your mother [Lillian Smith Gregory] to come to the phone, I wanna yell at her."  And I heard my daughter say, "Why daddy wanna yell at you," you know.  And so I'm saying, most black folks grow up, especially if you wasn't in that rigid South, you know, where I grew up around nothing but black folks.  See, I--St. Louis [Missouri] was so rigidly segregated, you didn't have a white movie where black folks sit upstairs.  You didn't have a white restaurant where black folks had to go to the window.  You didn't get served.  And--
Speaker 1: So all of the restaurants in your neighborhood (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Even in the black community, they would serve you, but you couldn't come in there.  But in Chicago [Illinois]--in St. Louis, you had black restaurants, and there were white restaurants.  So you never get to see, see white folks at all.  So I grew up not really seeing white folk.  All the teachers was black.  The principals was black.  The police was white.  A black cop in St. Louis couldn't arrest a white person if they saw him murder somebody (laughter), you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, that's how rigid it was.  But you didn't, you didn't see anything wrong with it 'cause you didn't hear nobody saying there was anything wrong with it, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 560185
Speaker 1: What are some of the sights and sounds that you can remember, earliest recollections there in your St. Louis [Missouri] neighborhood, which was all black?  So what are some of the sights and sounds that you can remember from being five or six (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The sounds are just black folk talking.  You know, that was, black (laughter) folks talking.  I just loved to sit and listen to--especially black men.
Speaker 1: Anything that you recall specifically?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Nothing?
Speaker 2: Just, just, you know, just talking and it was just incredible.  You had, black folks used to have once a year, Thanksgiving, on Christmas, and they told the same stories.  But it was like handed down to--you had spiritual readers that black folks were heavy into.  I thought it was ignorance until I got older and learned better.  You had black healers, just, you know, you realize that black folks was brilliant, but not in a white racist system.  Brilliant when you come downtown, when you in your part where you can go out and pick the herbs that will cure the things that's wrong with you.  Remember, I was born before welfare and social security.  So them black folks in one day, one day, you can't get it in a white racist, insane system, one day, someone will sit down--and it'll probably be a white person, that's not even born yet, and sit down and say, "Wow, wait a minute.  How did they survive two days when there was no welfare?  There was no food stamps."  And we haven't demanded that they do.  You know, you got a big discussion on the word nigger, and we let that thug determine the agenda, and if you're not black, you're not aware that 98 percent of white women don't even--black women don't even use that word.  I've been married to a black woman [Lillian Smith Gregory] for forty--she ain't never said nigger.  And yet the way they frame the debate, you would have people all over the world thinking that everybody in the black community, it's, nigger, nigger, nigger, nigger all day long.  Black men and white men.  So one day when the researchers come in, that might be traced back to a sex thing.
Story_ID: 560186
Speaker 1: And so again, I'm saying the early things that I rem- now, the sad part of what in my subconscious mind was the horror, see, Mississippi was like the way Christians have a devil and a hell.  Well, where I came from Mississippi was equivalent to a devil and a hell because that's all we talked about when you talked about white folks doing bad things.  So it kind of, and they didn't do it by design, it kind of made you think that your town wasn't as bad as Mississippi.  And so you tolerated it, but those were horror stories that you heard.  Anytime anybody told you about a horror story, it was about white men would go in and, and cut black men's penis off and cut their testicles off.  And so to this day, I've never had sex with a white woman because of that.  It's fear.  I mean just absolutely, listening to those stories--
Speaker 2: In comparing St. Louis [Missouri] to a Biloxi, Mississippi or Jackson, Mississippi, in St. Louis, you had your own newspapers.  They gave you information.  You had your black teachers who were dedicated to the children.  You had individuals who were striving to do better, to become a doctor.  Can you remember any of those teachers or young playmates who were particularly outstanding (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I think--don't use the word Biloxi and Jackson because when I grew up, it was Mississippi.  I didn't know there was a city called Biloxi.  It was Mississippi.  It's like you go to another country.  You find people can tell you about America, but they ain't never heard of Chicago [Illinois] and New York [New York].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So we looked at Mississippi, and it was symbol.  It was a symbol that everything nasty that could happen to a black person happened in Mississippi.  And so that was, and the reason I go over this, what, that's what promoted my thinking, was that we were here, white, black doctors, talking about they're married to a light complected woman, which back then, about 98 percent of black doctors and lawyers were married to light complected women.  That's a whole 'nother issue we gonna have to deal with 'cause back then about 98 percent of black women were dark.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So when you got 2 percent that stick out and all your professional people, it was very rare to see a black doctor or black lawyer married to a dark complected woman.  And so you would hear stories like, this doctor's mother was sick, in an accident.  And he was rushing to the hospital 'cause just one hospital was the Negro hospital.  They didn't care how much money you had.  You went to the Negro hospital.  And, and his wife was in the car with him, and he made her lay on the floor because he wanted to get to the hospital before his mother died.  And he didn't wanna take the chance of that white racist cop thinking she was a white woman and pull him over (laughter).  And the black doctors and lawyers, professionals that had nice cars, they would be stopped because the white racist mentality police knew only pimps.  They didn't know what a black doctor looked like.  And so you have to be a pimp.  And so you would hear these stories being told, some of them with bitterness.  But most of 'em, it wasn't with bitterness.
Story_ID: 560187
Speaker 1: Were you still in elementary school [John Marshall School, St. Louis, Missouri] or in junior high, high school [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] when you started noticing these differences between light-skinned African Americans and dark-skinned African Americans, the way they were treated--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --their outlook for--
Speaker 2: No, I just, you just, you would hear people talking about it, about things that happened.  I have 'em in my head now as a grown man. Realize that nobody said, you know, doctors, mostly they married light complexioned.  Nobody tells you that.  But as a grown man that do research, in my mind, it dawned on me, looking back over what that situation was like and what black women had to go through, you know.  I mean I used to shine shoes in taverns and 98 percent of the women in the nice taverns was light complected.  And when you go to the honky tonk taverns, it was dark complected women, no education, that cuss, that got drunk, that fought.  And I'm in there when I'm like five years old to the extent I would see a dark complected woman coming down the street and cross over on the other 'cause I was scared of 'em.  That's the viciousness of this system of what they reduce you to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was imparted to you--
Speaker 2: It wasn't just, it wasn't--you say important?
Speaker 1: Impart- imparted to you.  That impression was given to you at five just by what you saw happening.
Speaker 2: What I saw, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Right.
Speaker 2: What I saw happening, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 560188
Speaker 1: Were there any particular teachers in elementary school [John Marshall School, St. Louis, Missouri], junior high, high school that you remember because of the way they treated you or because--
Speaker 2: Well, first--
Speaker 1: --of what they imparted to you?
Speaker 2: --it's hard for me to separate then and now when I look back and see the filth that we tolerated.  I went to a high school called Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School] in St. Louis [Missouri] that was built a hundred twenty-five years before I got there.  When I get there, it's now a Negro because, you know, the Negroes had moved into the neighborhood and the white folks had moved to other neighborhoods.  I got there, they hadn't added one brick to that building in one hundred twenty-five years, built for five hundred white folks.  We had eight thousand five hundred Negro students.  And I'd just like to go back and put them black folks together and say, death would be better.  See, they reduce us down to the lesser of the evils, you know, you got a choice between this whore that works six days a week or this whore that work two days a week.  A whore is a whore.  But that's what we was reduced to, and it wasn't nothing about quality education.  "Just get a good education, boy," because we wasn't gonna deal with racism and prejudice.  So I had to put the burden on me.  And we still doing that.  If you don't get a good education, and that's bullshit, man.  Had nothing to do with education.
Story_ID: 560189
Speaker 1: When you think about doctors and lawyers that died.  When you look at what happened in, what they call little Wall Street [Greenwood, Tulsa, Oklahoma], black businessmen hooked up with Jewish businessmen and Indian [Native American] businessmen and this ignorant, red neck, nigger hating white boy went to this black man that was profiting a hundred thousand dollars a week, and said, "Boy, I'd like to be part of this."  And he said, "Part of what?"  "Part of your, your operation."  Well, we have an association.  And so they went back and got their little crop dusting planes and came back and dropped them little incendiary bombs.
Speaker 2: You're talking about Tulsa [Oklahoma] now.
Speaker 1: Tulsa.  If you go to Tulsa and go to the library and pull that paper out, it's a big hole in it.  And the only reason that came out on a worldwide, white sophisticated level is when the Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] bombing of the federal building [Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building].  And white folks started hearing black folks, and they hated.  They wondered how could y'all be so low downed.  They started hearing black folks say, "Nah, this is not the worst act of terrorism," okay.  They said, "What do you mean?"  And then they told them.  And then they had black state legislators that told 'em.  They had an investigation, man.  They had an investigation because the white folks didn't believe it.  And in the investigation, it came out.  And the whole state was just--and then they start talking about reparations for that and going looking up for the, the--so that's a game we play, where, you think we just produced Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell].  Them black folks over there built pyramids, but they reduce us down to, we just--we've always had Colin Powells.  And the only reason Colin Powell and Condoleezza Rice can serve these white folks is our Civil Rights Movement.  I mean [President] Abraham Lincoln would have loved to brought in the brilliant black folks he was surrounded by.  But he'd have been shot quicker than he was.  And so we have created an atmosphere through this movement that you can bring in a Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] and send him to the UN [United Nations] or a Colin Powell or a Condoleezza Rice or Ron Brown.  And white folks will not be punished for doing that.  But, and that's what a hundred years that we got to teach our children, that this didn't just happen.  I look at Condoleezza Rice.  She has more Ph.D.'s than this white president's [President George Walker Bush] whole cabinet.  But they call her Condi, and she don't see nothing wrong with it, and most black folks don't see nothing wrong with it.  But they never called Madeleine Albright, Maddie.  And they never called Janet Reno, Janet.
Speaker 2: Let me take you to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But then they got Henry Kissinger, who ain't nothing but a thug.  He's been indicted for murder in the world court.  That's why he can't leave the country, and they refer to him as Dr. Henry Kissinger.  And they got a soda pop in this country that's darker than Condoleezza Rica, that they call Dr. Pepper.  And when you go buy one, you'd better ask for it by its full title 'cause if you go to the store and ask for a Pepper, they give you a chili pepper.
Story_ID: 560190
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this question because it seems to me that you may be saying that--and it goes against many, what many other African Americans are saying, that we were, they say that we were better off prior to integration--
Speaker 2: That's a lie. I don't even want you to finish it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a lie.  That's filth--
Speaker 1: Okay, you don't--
Speaker 2: --that's madness.
Speaker 1: You don't believe that.  You believe--
Speaker 2: You was better off 'cause they wouldn't let you be better off.  So then we took the lesser of the evils, huh?  So I'm in jail and I can't be around a woman so I fall in love with a man.  Don't tell me I'm better off.  That wasn't a decision I made.  That was something I did because of the circumstances.  We had better businesses.  You had better business 'cause white folk didn't want your business.  And the black folks was there.  And so we, that wasn't a true business.  So I ate in a black community.  You damn right, them black folks were coming, but I couldn't eat downtown.  So that was success out of a negative.  Water seeks its own level after it's been set free.  That's a big difference.
Speaker 1: So you believe we are much better off today than we were forty, fifty years ago?
Speaker 2: Well, it ain't nothing, it ain't got nothing to do with my belief.  The two most powerful magazines on the planet, two of the most powerful, Time and Newsweek, a black man runs both of 'em, and most black folk don't even know that.  Most black folk don't even know that.  You can walk all the way across this country today, all the way across Mississippi today and don't worry, have to worry about getting lynched.  There was a time you could have been a billionaire and you could a got lynched just because you was a billionaire.  When I first went down to Mississippi, all my horror stories came up.  I never heard 'em talk about Georgia or North Carolina.  It was Mississippi when I was a little boy.  That was the flagship for filth and so when they said come down to Mississippi, I knew I would die, but I went anyway 'cause this movement was bigger than me, my wife [Lillian Smith Gregory] or my family.  And when I was down there, I never thought I would see the day--can you imagine being some place that if something happened to you, there's nobody you can call.  You can't call the police.  You can't call the sheriff, you can't call the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] 'cause they probably did it.  You know, when Mrs. Liuzzo [Viola Liuzzo], the white woman that was shot the day, the evening we marched from Selma [Alabama] to Montgomery [Alabama], it was a FBI agent in the car with them thugs that did it.  What they tell us now is, he was undercover (laughter), so he couldn't do nothing to stop that.  But that's what that whole piece was like.  As we sit here today, head of the Mississippi state troopers is a black man.  That shouldn't be a question, should even be permitted to be asked, were we better off then than we are now?  It's something wrong with that, but that shows you the mentality, the insanity of black folks.  That sounds like something white folks would tell us to justify their filth.  "Well, you black folks was better off then than now."  You have, you have Ivy League schools, man, that if they had a quota on Jews, what do you think they had on us in the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s], huh?  And if you go to most of those Ivy League schools, and go get their yearbook, and go back two hundred years, there's only light complected dark folks, no dark ones.  And that's over.  And so that shouldn't even be debatable or were we better off then because then the next thing is, the white folks think you're better off that we brought you here than you was in Africa (laughter), and, you know, a whole lot of black folks buy into that.
Story_ID: 560191
Speaker 1: There came a time of awakening for you as a young person.  Was it around junior high or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --you spoke about Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri].  Was it there?
Speaker 2: No, after I got grown.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't.
Speaker 1: You had left, graduated and gone on to college?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, you were--
Speaker 2: See, when I went to college, Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois], I didn't know it was any ugly white folks.  Hollywood didn't show me none, you know.  I didn't see no ugly white folks.  The leading man was tall and handsome.  So when I got, I didn't know it was even dumb white folks 'til I got to college.  And a white boy used to cheat on my, off my paper.  And I called my mother [Lucille Gregory] and said, "Mama, I'm sitting here with a dumb white boy."  You know what my mother asked me?  "You ain't start drinking, have you, boy?"
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And then after she was thoroughly convinced, you know, she said, "See if you can bring him home for Thanksgiving."  It was almost like a symbol, a dumb white boy?  And one of the things that changed my life--
Story_ID: 560192
Speaker 1: And so at Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois] is where my life really changed.  I was never around white folks in my life.  And probably something that bothered me is, it was a man around the corner from where we lived named Mr. Dorsey [Henry Dorsey (ph.)].  And if he was alive and walked into this room today, and you were told he's the vice president of Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts], his presence, his manner, you would have no reason to question that.  He owned his home.  He sent his children to college.  So one day we decided that we'll follow him.  You know, back then nobody had cars.  And if black folk had cars, they were scared to take 'em to work 'cause they'd be fired.  I knew black folks that had Cadillacs and parked six blocks away from where they worked and walked to work so white folks wouldn't see that and fire them.  And so we just said, "Now, let's follow him today," not nothing mean, just our man.  So we stayed back and followed him.  And we saw him go into this barbershop downtown where the Anheuser-Busches and that type of money folks, and they went every day.  Those type white folks don't get up and shave every day.  They go to the barbershop every day, and they shave 'em and they massage their face.  And that's why when you see those types, they had that flush red.  So we said, "Oh, god, man, Jesus, he's passing for white."  And we went in and we saw him disappear, and he came back with a half short, cream jacket on down to the knees.  He was the shoeshine boy.  And so we sat, and we couldn't, wow, man.  So then we went down to the corner where the streetcar stopped.  And we didn't go down for him to see us.  We wasn't planning on telling nobody.  And he saw us, and he came out and waved.  "Richard [HistoryMaker Dick Gregory], Richard, (unclear), come here." Says, "Today's Friday," said, "Mr. Dorsey, is getting a little old now, and I need some help on the weekends." Said, "It's good money, good tips.  Would you all come down tomorrow and help me, and I'll introduce to," so, yeah.  So the next day, we walked down with him.  And just as we got there, he said, "Remember, my name is not Mr. Dorsey.  It's Henry."  Whew.  And when that song came out, "Save the Bones for Henry Jones 'cause Henry don't eat no meat" ['Save the Bones for Henry Jones'], it was hard for me to separate that song from him, you know.  And a lot of people justify it.  I don't.
Story_ID: 560193
Speaker 1: I don't justify that type of filth for survival.  There's a universal--I ain't talking about Jesus and them, there's a universal god force.  And it have to be violation of God for me to stoop below the dignity that God gave me with some filthy, slimy, ungodly thug, dogs just to pay my rent.  That have to anger God.  My god.  I'd feel the same way if one of my children reduced to prostitute and pimping to pay for their car.  All the stuff we've given them.  And so God have to be the same way, if there is a God at all, and it is.  And all these black folks think they're going to heaven.  Ho, ho, ho, ho.  If I see most of 'em there, then I know it ain't no God.  Hell ain't big enough for us, for the violations we have made as human beings and passed that down from one generation to another?  My mother [Lucille Gregory] pressed her hair 'cause her mother pressed her hair, and her mother pressed her hair, and you trace that back to slavery.  And any time the oppressed take on the likes and dislikes of the oppressor, I want my hair to look like that white woman, look like them folks that oppress me, that's got to--and to the extent that we pass it down, and it's not a violation except 'til you get to the universal god force.  And then you ask a simple question today, how can black women be 6 percent of America's population but 98 percent of fibroid tumors in America is black women.  And then you take your time and you trace it back.  I can't catch a fibroid.  You can't pass it off to me.  My mama didn't have fibroids.  Her mother didn't have fibroids, but wait a minute?  Where's this coming from?  As bad as it is to press your hair and dye your hair so it can look like somebody else, is not as bad as what we doing now, the chemicals.  The chemicals they straighten your hair out with would make a straightening iron look like it was giving nappy hair.  Those chemicals go through the brain into the system and that's one of the punishments we get because otherwise, it makes no sense.  So when you stop and look at what we pay, the price we pay, black men, 4 percent of the American population, 83 percent of prostate cancer death is black men and nobody's stopped--they're so busy worried about the word nigger that you can never be, and nobody stopped to say, wait a minute.  Hey, something, black folks is 12 percent of America (unclear).  Eighty-seven percent right this moment in America, everybody on kidney dialysis machines is black folks.  Now, we'd like to pass it off as a black thing.  There's no kidney dialysis machine in Africa not 'cause they're too poor, they don't need 'em.  And so when you look at the price we pay, we pay.
Story_ID: 560194
Speaker 1: I remember black folks, man, went to war and black folks was proud.  They didn't go to war because they loved America.  They went to war because you got veterans benefits.  You'd hear somebody say, "Oh, Tony, he's, he got Little Bit pregnant, but he's going to the [U.S.] military.  He'll make a nice little provider."  And if you look at 99 percent of black folks thirty years ago that went to college, it was G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], and it was 99 percent black men.  And I've always felt that in order for me to graduate from college or to go to college, I have to be willing to kill or be killed.  Well, black folks have blood dripping off your degree, okay, and you wonder what's gonna happen to these youngsters now.  You can trace it back to you, willing, because there's a simple deduction and some of the seminars I do around the world, I say, you know, y'all look up mercenaries. The French, it's brilliant.  The French Foreign Legion is mercenaries.  And look up the word soldier.  A soldier is a person that fights for his country, now, her country 'cause back then no women.  A mercenary is somebody who fights for somebody else's country.  And you know one of the things would scare you, (pause) if I'm a prostitute as woman and don't know it and so I don't understand why that cop arrested me.  That still don't make what I'm doing right because of ignorance.  So if I called myself a soldier and I wasn't, a soldier is a person that fights, kills and dies for his or her country.  A mercenary is somebody who fights and dies for somebody else's country.  We were mercenaries.  Now, it's very interesting cause if you look up the French Foreign Legions, and I went over there--and spent about three months, a mercenary is so sick, mentally deranged that in between all of France's wars, mercenaries have never been permitted to come to the Country of France.  They put 'em on remote islands and give 'em drugs and whiskey and fly women into 'em and they will kill they mama.  They'll rape their daughters.  They'll do horrible things because you're reduced down to that.  And so at some point, we gonna have to look and say, you know, there's something wrong, and yet, we proud of it because that show you the mode that we had reduced down to.
Story_ID: 560195
Speaker 1: I don't wanna get too far away from Henry Jones [sic. Henry Dorsey (ph.)].  I wanna go back to Henry Jones.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you looked at the job that he had which was shining shoes.  What do you say to those who say that we had to take those menial jobs for survival?
Speaker 2: Just like if you was an assassin, and you worked to feed your family.  That's bullshit, that's bullshit and one day, one day, the world is gonna tell black folks in America exactly how filthy they were.  Death is better.  You have, you have family?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Somebody tells me tonight, "Dick [HistoryMaker Dick Gregory], I'm a wipe your whole family out if you don't kill this brother."  And my excuse is, I had to do it?  I had to do it?  Something wrong with it.  But it's even something more wrong with it when we can, as a nation of people, think that, you know.  Bob Marley, the first and only superstar from the Caribbean, worldwide, I mean worldwide, they called me to, to work Harvard Yard [Cambridge, Massachusetts] with him.  It was a peace rally, but they was paying us.  I say I don't wanna work it.  And that's the same Harvard, I was the first Negro in the history of America to give the commencement address at Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] in 1975.  And it was strange how it happened because I never answered 'em back.  And to show you how diabolical this thug is, the class of 1925 had produced more billionaires than any other class in the history of Harvard.  So they were celebrating their fiftieth reunion.  And that's when the white children was walking out, not staying for graduation, wearing dungarees, barefooted, and they wanted to impress them.  And so a group of white folks said, you know, they love Dick Gregory all over the country.  So they ran a survey.  For the first time, they let the students say who they wanted.  And Dick Gregory was number one, Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy] was number two.  So I never answered the letter 'cause the letter was insulting the way they wrote it, right.  So some white children--I live in Plymouth, Mass [Plymouth, Massachusetts], forty-eight miles from--so some white students and graduates came down.  They said, "We need to talk to you.  We're in trouble," said, "they told us the other day that you're not the commencement speaker."  I said, "Why."  Say, "'Cause we never heard from you.  And we said, 'Well, if you didn't answer, that mean you're coming.'"  I said, "Well," they said, "Well, you got twenty-four hours."  And they came and they told me.  So I got in touch with 'em and said, "I would do the graduation on these conditions.  I don't want none of your blood money and two, I do not want a honorary doctor degree with your filthy name on it.  Now, if y'all accept that, then I'll be--," I just knew they wouldn't.  Well, the children were putting too much pressure.
Story_ID: 560196
Speaker 1: Now, the backdrop now is when Bob Marley took it personal, and he should have, because when they flew up to see me, his manager, he wanted to know why?  Says, "It's the disrespect I have for Bob Marley."  They said, "What do you mean?" I said, "Bob Marley is just not some idiot.  He one of the fine minds on the planet.  For him to do a song praising Buffalo Soldiers."  I've been to places (unclear) Buffalo Soldiers.  I leave, I wouldn't even speak.  Buffalo Soldiers, them Negroes was brought in to kill the buffaloes to starve the Indians [Native American] off the plains.  And today, you ride in parades and black folks is so outraged and degenerative (unclear) and perverted, they don't even see that.  And the Indians will tell you the stories that's been passed down, that if Indians had a choice of surrendering to a Negro cavalry or white, they'd pick the white 'cause the Negroes are that much more vicious because I got to convince this white boy here that I can be trusted.  Now, I don't put my life on nobody else, in no shape, form or fashion.  When a white boy, I don't know if he CIA [Central Intelligence Agency], FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], came to me one day and said, "You're crazy, nigger, but you got some children you love."  And I said, "Let me tell you something, white boy, if you ever snatch one of my children, you do one of two things, you kill 'em or get you a book to teach you how to raise niggers.  This movement bigger than me, it's bigger than my wife [Lillian Smith Gregory], it's bigger than my family.  There'll be no negotiations."  And you know the sad part about it, you got black folks in Iraq right now will be killed this time next week and never say how will this affect my family.  But when it comes my turn to be liberated, all type of questions get asked.  It's something sick about that.  There's something so outrageously sick.  I don't have no problem with black folks because I learned a long time ago if you commit murder and you insane, you can never get the electric chair.  So everybody cuts a little slack for crazy people, and so, and black folks--if anybody on this planet got a right to be crazy, it's African Americans for what we've been through, of what we had to go through.  But we don't recognize we're crazy.  We look at this as success.  We crazy.
Story_ID: 560197
Speaker 1: And somewhere, somewhere--I did a survey, I love to do surveys 'cause I don't have to ask nobody for the money.  And one day, I'm thinking, I said, I, if the nanny is a black woman, nursing white children, and I know that a child's capacity for learning don't open up 'til two and a half, and a child's capacity for love don't open up for two and a half.  So when mother is holding the baby up here and patting it, mommy, love baby, and she thinks the child loves her, the child don't know nothing about love.  That child is in here listening to the heartbeat, the only sound (makes sound), the sound that that child ever heard is this.  People we call primitive, they carry their babies on their back so baby can hear the heartbeat.  Any doctor that's serious about listening to your heart, he goes to the back and put the stethoscope there where the sound is not obstructed by the bones.  And so when you stop and think about that this nanny, since slavery have nursed this little white child.  So the question I was sitting around asking some folks if that baby is being nursed by a black woman and his head and ear is up close to her heartbeat, at what time will white folks become me?  That's what I wanted to know.  Maybe never.  So I said, "Okay, Dr. Jimmy Carter [James Carter], you and Dr. Allain [Joseph Allain, Jr.], find me the number one authority on the planet on breast milk," (laughter), "whatever the price."  Wouldn't you know it's a white man at Oxford University [University of Oxford, Oxford, England], the number one authority (laughter) on the planet in breast milk is a man.  And so, so I've always said, let's, let's--and so when you stop and think about--I went into Mississippi with a team.  And you have to be real tricky 'cause you don't want them to say what they might think you wanna say.  So you relax 'em.  I needed to find me somebody ninety-five or one hundred, eighty, just black men.  I say, we're gonna pay 'em a thousand dollars a day, and we just want 'em to sit and talk into a tape recorder of some of the most vicious things that white folks have called you.  Now, we not talking about these little punks now.  We talking about black men one hundred, one was 107, good minds and, man, the second day they--I say, don't worry about if you repeat.  And we do this three or four days.  And I came back up with these white researchers that worked for me, and I say, "Would you listen to this?  And then open up that piece of paper that I sent you to your lockbox."  In a year when we start setting up the project, I said, not one of 'em will ever say that that white man called 'em black, and none of 'em did because I hated blackness so bad that if he had a called me black, I'd broke that chain and choked him to death.  That's kind of scary, man.
Story_ID: 560198
Speaker 1: I remember as a little boy, "Hey, nigger, come here, oh, man, you crazy."  Black folks.  "Hey, black nigger."  "Man, who's that call me black," didn't hear the word, nigger.  I tell a brother, and we friends, kiss my ass.  Tell him kiss my black ass, that nigger drop books, man, and start fighting.  Now, this is one of the things we gonna have to do and stop all this crap.  But you have to produce that type.  My oldest son [Greg Gregory], one of the fine minds called me, "Dad, I'm cracked out in Detroit [Michigan]."  I said, "Hey, son, I can't help you."  "Dad, you help people all over the--."  "Son, I never smoked a reefer.  And please don't call your mama [Lillian Smith Gregory].  She never drank a beer."  "Dad--."  "Listen, if you had a brain tumor, would you call me, huh?  You know, now, you need to call somebody else.  But you lived with me long enough to know I ain't dealing with no emotions.  I ain't going through none of this crap y'all be going through, all right.  And I'm telling you now, don't call your mama.  She'd jump on the plane and fly, ain't a damn thing she can do for you."  But I said, "But now, let me tell you what I can do for you.  I can tell you that all addictions is based on pleasure.  What in the pit of your spirit is so foul, this little secret that you have to have pleasure to cover it up?"  I said, "It could be anything.  You're not Catholic, but if you was you could have been ripped off by a priest.  Look at what all these folks go through, holding something in 'em.  You might have raped somebody, you might have, you might have would have--you was nine years old and had sex with a three year old.  I don't know."  But all addictions, see, all we see is the bullshit part because we not qualified to see nothing else.  And I said, "Let me tell you something about addictions, son.  The number one addiction in this country is not heroin or cocaine.  The number one addiction is gambling addiction."  With gambling, you wipe out the whole family.  I'm not (unclear), the treasure, you spend your children--there's something about gambling that if I just get one more shot at it, I can win, just one more shot, I can win.  That addiction is so incredible that you, insurance money you spend, the money you--the house, you lose, everything.  Number two is sex addiction.  Number three is alcohol.  Now, ain't it funny how we are all scared of drugs--I'm not talking about black folk.  I'm talking about America, and yet more people will die this coming weekend from driving drunk than will die from a drug overdose in the next four years (laughter).  That's kind of scary.  Ninety-eight percent of forcible violent rape is alcohol related.  Ninety-nine percent of men tampering with little tots, it's 99 percent.  The priests that was ripping up those boys, they wasn't on crack.  They was on alcohol.
Story_ID: 560199
Speaker 1: So what I'm saying is that until the researchers come in who's qualified--see, that's what happened with Thurgood Marshall.  A couple of Jewish lawyers said to him, said, "Son, until Negroes can put your piece together and go to law school, only you can liberate you 'cause I don't know your pain."  And this was that group that came out that went to work.  And so again, I'm saying that when you stop and think about that, way down, that fine, fine point of, don't call me black.  I can tolerate everything else.  Why?  Why can I tolerate everything else?  I can never be a nigger, but I can be black.  And, you know, something that I--and then another thing we did--
Speaker 2: Let me, let me interrupt you here because we've got a lot of ground to cover, and I wanna go back to--
Speaker 1: But let me just finish this little piece.
Speaker 2: Oh, go ahead, go ahead.
Speaker 1: Then I said, okay, let's go north.  And this is something you can do.  You can take your camera now and ask black northerners, male, tell me some of the vicious things that a white racist police structure have done to you or that you heard.  See lots of black folks ain't been harassed by white cops, but how many stories have you heard of what they done.  And, you know, what you'll never hear--you can do this for a year or a day, you'll never hear a black man say, "He messed with my automobile; never hear a black man say he took his night stick and broke my headlights or smashed my window."  Now, there's no school that teach white racist cops, don't mess with my car.  That's a sixth universal sense.  And then I had all my children read 'Ragtime' [E.L. Doctorow] and look at the movie.  The 'Ragtime' is a mythical story, written by a white boy, about a black from New Orleans [Louisiana], jazz musician, played trumpet called Coalhouse Porter [sic. Coalhouse Walker], lives in New York [New York], and he's so incredible as a musician, he has a Model T Ford [Ford Model T] when white folk can't even spell it.  And he was at this chocolate shop, and he see this beautiful sister.  It's on Thursday.  That's why I always tell people, if you really gonna do something serious pertaining to black folks, do it on Thursday, Wednesday night, Thursday, 'cause that was the maid's day off.  Across the country, the maid's day off was Thursday cause they had to work on the weekend.  And so if you was gonna have something in the Negro community like a party or a dance, you had it on Wednesday night 'cause the maid didn't have to be at work on Thursday morning.  So he see her at the chocolate place and he talks to her.  And he's just overwhelmed.  And she starts talking to him, and she says, "Well, I got to get back to my white folks."  He said, what (unclear), said, "I'm a maid and today is my day off."  Now, normally, if you lived here and your sister was a maid, on the day off, she'd come live with your family.  But if she live someplace where she didn't have to--she'd go back there.  So it's almost like not having a full day off because if you're back there, you're gonna, if you see a wet towel on the floor, you're gonna pick it up.  So he asked her, "Next Thursday, can I come by and pick you up and take you to dinner and we'll go see a movie?"  And she says, yes.  So he came by Thursday in his Model T, and he saw the address, and he parked right by the, hundred feet from a fire station.  And he go get her and he come back.  And them white firemen had shitted in his car.  He blew up fire stations from White Plains, New York where it happened all the way down to downtown Manhattan [New York] (laughter).  That's what the book is about.  That's what the play is about.  That's what the movie is about.  So them white folks know how filthy we are, and how filthy (unclear).  How, let me, you know how many black folks have come home today and realized a white racist cop had shot they mother in the back of the head and one of they children and will never blow up a police station.  But don't mess with my car.  And until we can get to, we can start unwinding what have really happened, we in trouble.
Story_ID: 560200
Speaker 1: Okay, wanted to just go back because we wanted to get some of the archival information in.  You were pretty good in track--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --at Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri], and you were able to get a track scholarship.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: They wanted you there at Southern Illinois [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] because of your track prowess.  You wanted to get a good education.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, I didn't--
Speaker 1: Okay, why did you accept that scholarship?
Speaker 2: Well, let me go back first.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: Education never was in my head in no shape, form or fashion.  My mind was ten thousand miles, different from what was going on in school.  I saw light complected students get more privileges than dark complected students in an all-black system with all black teachers.  I went to school every day, couldn't wait to get there.
Story_ID: 560201
Speaker 1: Now, you have to go back in the timeframe, back in the '30s [1930s].  There was no TV.  Black women in the movie, there were no Mau Mau queens.  Black folks was portrayed as savages, ignorant, a white boy named Tarzan controlling 'em.  Now, that's real to me 'cause when I went to see 'Superman,' thank god, we didn't live in a big building 'cause I'd came home and made me a cape and jumped off 'cause I believed that crap.  And so why would I ever wanna go to Africa as a little boy.  I didn't see Africans in the UN [United Nations].  I didn't see African heads of state.  Where would I see 'em?  So why would I ever, ever wanna go to Africa?  Now, let me fast forward that.  I was with a bunch of wealthy, sophisticated black folks last year for the--it was this year, but it was for last year's Academy Award [Oscars].  And so I said, well, I'm a go down to my room.  And they said, "Well, we're having an Academy Award party."  I really don't wanna be there.  So a guy said, "Ah, something wrong."  I said, "Well, two movies that's up for Academy Awards is 'The Last King of Scotland' and 'Blood Diamond,'" said, "they filth."  And I tell people who I'm seeing, go see 'em.  And if you can go get you a old Tarzan movie, see that, and you see the difference.  Back then, they controlled the black mentality by showing us savages.  Now, they control it, if you look at them two movies, they have turned them black folk in blood thirsty, killing machines, okay.  I don't expect them Hollywood actors to know that.  They ain't but a bunch of pimps that don't know anything.  But they script.  But go look at 'em and then look at all the educated, so called educated black folks that loved it, killing machines.  Then go look at every Nazi movie Americans ever knew and see if you see blood.  Out of all them Jews they killed, they ain't never showed you a picture of blood, hm.  When they had the bodies stacked outside, waiting to go to the cremator, you didn't see blood dripping.  All your cowboy movies, you ain't never seen a blood bath.  These they show you, Africans raping the women.  I'm not saying they're not doing it, but you think American soldiers and the Russian soldiers.  The Germans killed 50 million Russians [sic.], I have never seen no blood.  This is what I'm talking about, this whole thing where we come out with this perverted mentality 'cause we accepted all kind of crap.
Story_ID: 560202
Speaker 1: Now, we talking about children having children.  Well, don't give me the story of Jesus.  If God, who is the boss, I cannot tell you the respect I have for God.  I'm not into -isms and -osms.  But if God look on this planet with all the females when he got ready to plant a son in a woman's belly, one year old, two years old, women was probably a hundred and something, and he put a baby in a thirteen year old girl's belly, and you black folk gonna tell me I can't have sex with a fourteen year old.  Get out my face.  There's something wrong with that.  God, the boss, the supreme, impregnated a thirteen year old child, and I'm a listen to some ignorant folk in a stupid, ignorant country.  If God didn't mean for you to be pregnant at thirteen, you wouldn't menstruate at thirteen.  And this is what bothers me, that I got to listen--that's why I don't do high schools.  How I'm a tell your children and grandchildren how to eat when they don't buy the food?  Huh?  And now, when they get caught, they gonna blame it on the Chinese, ha, ha (unclear).  All at once, Colgate [Colgate Palmolive Company], one of the major corporations in the world, gonna let some Chinese trick 'em.  But ain't it funny when they talk about China, they say Communist China, but they don't say Communist Russia.  Ain't that kind of scary?  You have never heard them say, Communist Russia, but they'll say Communist China.  And so when you stop and look at how--so now, go back to when I was in school, I didn't know that, who got a white piece of paper here.  I didn't know that, well, let me show that.  Give me that, no, that cardboard there.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right there.  Let me show you something.  And give me a pen somebody.  Now, think, I went to an all-black school, black grade school [John Marshall School, St. Louis, Missouri], black high school [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri], right?  And little children, we made stick figures.  I am one of the fine black minds when it come to liberation and will die at the drop of a hat.  That's how black I am.  But at seventy-five years old, I learnt how to draw stick figures.  And at seventy-five, I can't draw a black one, huh?  That's how they messed up my mind.  I cannot draw a black stick figure, in a all-black school, all-black teachers, and that's this filth I come up with today, is this, in my head, in my head.  And so consequently, what I'm saying is, I went there.  I didn't know.  I didn't understand.  I just knew something was wrong and something wasn't right.
Story_ID: 560203
Speaker 1: And, and so I get to high school, the number one, probably in America, our high school was better than most white folks' private schools because we had a, some kind of strange, black insanity that we wanted to prove something to white folks.  So when I'm in high school, in the '40s [1940s], my Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] had a higher percentage of Ph.D.'s teaching there than Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] had.  I'm not talking about black, than Harvard had white Ph.D.'s.  Why?  Well, your father's a lawyer, your mother's a doctor.  You ain't never had to work.  So you got through high school.  It was a known fact you was going to college.  You got through college.  You didn't need no job.  So you got your master's degree.  Then you got your Ph.D.  Where you gonna work?  You think you was going to Harvard and teach?  Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]?  All the black universities [HBCUs] had already had they Ph.D.'s.  My track coach, cross country, Dr. Warren St. James, had two Ph.D.'s.  One in physical education from the physical education school [Springfield College] in Springfield, Massachusetts that invented basketball and a Ph.D. in economics.  Because of the Civil Rights Movement, he ended up head of the economics department of a major university in New York, not that he just got that way.  So this is what this--and so they can brag to the white boys downtown like we (unclear) chess.  "Yeah, look at these Negroes," and one of the shames of my life is until I graduated from Sumner High School in January, 1952, a Negro as dark as me could never be president of the class.  That's scary, man.  And so what I did, is say to Douglas Hourgood [ph.] who was a great brother, man, had he wanted to play baseball, he could a been a pitcher in Major Leagues [Major League Baseball].  He belonged to the French conversation course, class, a society, he belonged to the Latin society.  And he became a serious, not a play vice president of diversity, he became a serious vice president of RCA Victor [RCA Records].  And there was nobody with the qualifications to be president of that class but him.  And I said to him, "Doug, you my president, man, but you can't be president of this graduating class 'cause a dark complected Negro in this all-black school, with a principal blacker than black shoes had never been a dark complected, so I'm taking it."  And he hugged me, and said, "I understand."  Now, that's what school meant to me.
Story_ID: 560204
Speaker 1: And so when I'm sitting there and homework.  I don't know where my daddy [Presley Gregory] is.  The lights is cut off.  It's cold in the wintertime.  There was no such thing as refrigerators then or central air condition or central heat.  So I got a group of thugs, hoodlums, criminals who don't have the integrity to know what a lot of black folks was going through, and they give me homework to a house with no lights.  In my first book ['From the Back of the Bus,' Dick Gregory] I talked about how these black folks brought a turkey by our house for Christmas and they knew our lights was cut off and we had no heat.  And they bring us a raw turkey.  My mama [Lucille Gregory] was nice.  She said, "Thank you."  I went and threw it in the backyard.  And so how do you give me homework?  How is my mama supposed to help me with trigonometry when she can't spell it, huh?  She ain't never had arithmetic.  That's the next move.  If I got to live in this society that demands certain things, then go to the church and say, we gonna have study.  See, the most trifling, ignorant, dog time black have never wanted they children to do bad in school, have never wanted they children to grow up and be nothing but hustlers and pimps unlessen they were crazy.  Then you--but when I come home with my homework, and there's nobody there to help me, and then I get pneumonia and out of school two weeks.  I got back.  They didn't stop nothing.  It continued on.  So the next thing I know, I'm being laughed at and so then I quit school.  I did it and that's where your juvenile gangs was coming from, folks that had they stayed, they could have been Ph.D.'s.  But there were circumstances that nobody surrounded me, but demanded certain things out of me in a white racist system, and didn't leave leeway.  Let me explain this a little better, from a track standpoint.  For years, the world was not aware that if you was in lane one and I was in lane two and she was in lane three and she was in lane four across, that lane one runs a shorter distance if we're gonna go around, not straight.  Then lane two, lane two runs a shorter distance than lane three.  So they found out, they said, oh, my god, and that's why at a certain period of time, you go look at the race, they have 'em staggered.  Lane one is in the back.  Lane two is ahead of that, and lane nine is way up.  But they still running the same time.  Well, that's the way I look at this, when integration came and white folks start seeing me out there, and they got upset because they didn't know I was staggered and in the right lane equal with everybody else.  And so when I'm going to school, and I've been sick, like three weeks.  I go back, I go into class, and they spelling.  And so the word is hospital.  So she getting to get to the Gs and I got this little girl sitting in there, I kind of like--you know, how that went, that crazy stuff when you--you never told her.  You just like her.  She my girlfriend.  So they getting ready to call on me, and I jump up and call the teacher a black bitch, seven years old.  Why?  'Cause I'd rather for the whole world to know I called a teacher a black bitch than know I can't spell hospital.  Now, there's nobody in school that know that.  There's nobody in school that have the compassion to know what goes through me, the school is for me, not no damn teacher, and yet all of that was wiped out.  They gone teach me on the same level as some white boy or girl is being taught on because a handful of black folks made it in spite of, not because of, in spite of.  But for every black doctor that we made, how many died before they got there.  How many got on drugs and got on all kinds of crazy stuff before they got there.  And so school, to me, was a place that I could be hurt.
Story_ID: 560205
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you accepted your scholarship to Southern Illinois [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] for a reason?
Speaker 2: Well, first, let me just say this.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had scholarships at a hundred and thirty-two colleges.  I had more scholarships in music and couldn't read a lick of music, than I had in--and I went to Southern Illinois University 'cause that high school [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] coach I told you, Dr. Warren St. James, he went there.  And so I'll finish this, and I'll jump to why I went there.  I went to school because it was a fashion show.  The women teachers never wore the same outfit the same week.  Men would wear the same suit every day.  And some wouldn't, some would (unclear), but new cars.  Man, they talk about the pimps and the hoes, and no, no, teachers had new cars.  It was respectable.  Your credit was good.  The only sad thing about it in St. Louis [Missouri] a woman teacher couldn't be married.  A man teacher could, but a woman teacher couldn't.  And so when I got there, the first thing I did, look at the parking lot.  Look at all these fine cars pulling up, wow, man.  And then going in and looking at these sisters, man.  Who's the only sister I see twenty-four hours a day?  My mama [Lucille Gregory].  She wasn't fine, tired, white folks done worked her down, disrespected her and she come home mad at me, mad at us, tired.  She ain't home with us on Christmas.  She out there with them, and she think they like her.  "Richard [HistoryMaker Dick Gregory], you need to go to--." I don't wanna go out there.  I don't wanna be nowhere around there.  My mama, my mama, man, she worked for some of the top wealthy people in--she'd steal mashed potatoes 'cause she didn't know that white folks don't eat food the next day.  Well, I didn't have no problem with her stealing 'em, but I did have problems when she'd bring it home and demand we say the blessing over stolen food.  And so that was my fascination with school, man, to go there and see those outfits, and see that--I wouldn't have to go now.  I see one TV commercial man with finer outfits, bigger legs and bigger booties and prettier faces than the whole school would have in hundred years.  But I'm saying, once you take something out of that circle, so then they used to laugh at me.  You see, the number one thing when I was a little boy was fat.  If you look at all them politicians, all the powerful politicians, down from the presidents to folks at Tammany Hall to, they had the big round bellies with the vest and the golden chain hanging down because people were poor all over the world and that represented money.  That represent eating good.  And skinny people, they were scared of you.  And me and my brother, we were so skinny, they, people see us coming and walk across the street.  And then the children laugh at us and talk about how skinny.  "Yeah, your legs so skinny, you ought to sue 'em for non-support," and all that.
Story_ID: 560206
Speaker 1: And so school was a place where I could be hurt, and then one day, I got to listening to 'em, and I said to myself, I said, man, this stuff is funny, man.  So then I figured out that if I start telling you about your mama, and about you ain't got no daddy before you tell me, then they laugh at you with me.  So I developed that.  And, man, I was swift.  I mean you--so when it got to these little juvenile gangs we got here now, these are punks, man.  These ain't none of--these ain't real gangs.  The real gangs, man, when they see me coming, they move over other side of the street.  That's how swift I got with this voice and jumping you before you jump me.  And so that's where that whole, that whole bit of being clever and witty.  Now, I resented the fact, I resented my mama [Lucille Gregory] because of what she went through.  I resented where I lived, I was in conditions.  And so I went to the opera.  In St. Louis [Missouri], they had free operas, Muny Opera [The Municipal Opera Association of St. Louis; The Municipal Theatre Association of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] at the park.  And every night in the summer.  And I went every night, man, because I could sit there and dream.  And if you were a Negro, you had to sit, you couldn't pay, you had to sit in a certain section, every night.  So me and my friend, Skeezy, by the time we was fourteen years old, every major opera that ever been written, we could sing from front to back without--and whatever language it was in.  Now, we didn't know German; we could sing it in German.  We didn't know French; we could sing it French.  And I had me a season's ticket.  I didn't know we supposed to put on tuxedos and stuff to the Philharmonics [St. Louis Philharmonic Orchestra], had me a season's ticket 'cause I made all the money I wanted to make.  And me and Skeezy would go to the St. Louis Philharmonics, season, we'd see--every day, every time they performed, we'd be there, first class tickets.  And white folk kind of let, like--they didn't laugh at us.  They just thought we were cute.  It was like a phenomenon.  It's the whole, the whole thing.  And now I go to Budapest [Hungary] and go around the world to see opera now.  Why?  I don't understand what they're saying.  I just knew the people that run the world didn't listen to no jazz, didn't listen to no blues, you know.  They listen to opera.  So I go over to Europe (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You wanted to be like them.
Speaker 1: No, I didn't wanna be like--the people, yeah.  I mean something was wrong with work.  I didn't realize 'til now that the people that run the world ain't never had a job in they life and all this ol' stuff about we want our children to work.  That ain't nothing but a white, Christian work ethic for fools.  The people, I'm a say this again, the people that run the world have never had a job in they life.  It's a game.  I could feel something.  I didn't know what it was.  And so, me and my brother were so skinny, they put us in what they called Turner Open Air School [Charles Turner Open Air School, St. Louis, Missouri], is where they send handicapped folks.  And we went there, and we had special air, filtered air because, you know, they was worrying about us getting TB [tuberculosis] and stuff.  And that's what developed my lungs, 'cause my life has been very--strange things have happened.  My lungs got developed sitting in this school where we breathing in filtered air.  But, man, if you had one leg or you was born with no arms, Danny Wimpy was (unclear), and, man, that was (unclear), man, I couldn't wait to get there to look at these freaks, man, look at these guys play ball.  And just the whole thing, man, and then you start looking and you start--and then you start seeing people happy because they locked into this thing and a girl, man, was born with no arms, and she was typing and could type faster than the teacher that had the typing class, with her toes.  So that was, I came up with that, in that.  And so now (simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 560207
Speaker 1: And that development of your lungs led you to be one of the outstanding nation's half miler?
Speaker 2: No, no, bigger than that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When black folks was convinced that genetically, we couldn't run long distance.  You see, if you just ask the question, if 98 percent of all black folks on this planet is born around water, okay.  Now, remember African American don't represent typical black folks on this planet.  Ninety-eight percent of all black folks on this planet is born around water.  That's not reflected in the Olympic swimming (laughter).  Okay, you got some folks, man, in Africa, go over there, and they up like, like thirty stories up, diving down, okay, rocks on the mountain.  It's a big difference when they put me in a box, and I'm up on a diving board where my rhythm is, huh?  It's a big difference when they put in--and so, like I'm saying, there's certain things that's reflected.  And so we was convinced, oh, we over here, black folks, Jesse Owens, baby, you know, that's all we would--Jesse Owens.  And so one day I decided that I was just gone get up and run.  Now, I wasn't on the track team then.  And so I start running around the block, four o'clock on Saturday morning, and I noticed the longer I ran, the more people came out to look at me.  And so now, it's five o'clock, now it's six o'clock.  I see people going to work.  I wave at 'em.  So now, it's twelve o'clock, and I'm still running.  But the difference was, when I was running on this side where ain't nobody there, then I'd slow down.  When I saw people out, I'd gallop--I didn't know that I'm pacing myself for one which will eventually make me set the world's record.  I didn't know nothing about pacing.  I'm just--so then I noticed if I start running at four o'clock and wave at you when you going to work, and you come home, and I'm still out there running, then something come over you and something come over me.  And that's when my life changed.  I was not reduced down to that, "Nigger, you don't know where your daddy [Presley Gregory] is," or funny things about my mama [Lucille Gregory], you know.  And then the word start getting out.  And back then we had nothing but streetcars.  And so I would run from the streetcar when it came in front of my house, all the way to the end of the line which was way out in the white neighborhood, and then the word got out.  And white folks start getting on the streetcar on Saturdays so they could see this--then we changed into buses and the trick to the bus was, when the bus had to stop to pick up people, and it had to stop for the stop sign and stuff, so I learned how to pace, slow up until that bus pulls up at that corner.  And if it's a lot of people, then you speed up and then pass it, and you keep running 'cause you know, and I was able to do that and do that.  And then all, cops and everybody started hearing about this phenomena.  And then one day, I asked a track coach, not the cross country coach, the track coach--
Speaker 1: Was Mr. Warren St. James the cross country [at Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: No, no, he was cross country, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The track coach was a guy named Brown [ph.], and I said, "I really don't wanna be on the team.  I just want the right to take a bath.  You know, I can't take a bath at home," and so they tell me if I get on the sports team, I can take a bath.  That's the only reason I got on.  So he said, "Yeah, but do me a favor.  Whenever you come out, don't get on my track."  So I had to run outside, four square blocks outside.  So I didn't have the privileged of a 440 yard track.  And so one day he saw me running.  He said, "Come down on the track."  And I wiped 'em out and the next thing I knew I was on the track.  I wanted to get to school early in the morning so I could kind of study a little bit and the earliest class you had was band.  It was like seven o'clock.  So I joined the band, couldn't read a lick.  And when I finished, I can't read to this day, I had like a one hundred thirty scholarships and 90 percent of 'em was in music.  And so, it was that kind of--so now, Warren St. James say go to, you know.
Story_ID: 560208
Speaker 1: So now you have all these scholarship offers--
Speaker 2: No, before that.
Speaker 1: All right. Go ahead (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, I'm running.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And there's no, remember we had three high schools, Sumner [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri], Vashon [Vashon High School, St. Louis, Missouri] and Washington Tech [Booker T. Washington Technical High School, St. Louis, Missouri].  We couldn't play football with white high schools or basketball.  So the price they paid for segregation wasn't much of a price.  But you can't have a football season just playing two other schools.  So the law was, in the State of Missouri, if you were black, they had to pay for you.  We'd come all the way to Washington, D.C. and played them in high school.  We'd go to Kansas City, Missouri.  We'd go to West Virginia because there was--and so, and they paid for that, man, you know, that was one of the--so now, we're on the track.  And I realized that I'm not an athlete.  I'm a monster, something that was developed in my neighborhood 'cause I didn't wanna be me.  I didn't like the way I looked.  I didn't like the way the people looked, the way the people acted.  So now, I started on the relay intimidating folks.  I said, okay, I want you to bring the relay stick in, I hate to do this 'cause your mom and dad gonna be there, but you bring that stick in twenty-five yards behind, and then you, you make up ten and then you lose ten, and then when I get it, I'll kick it home coming from a fifty yard deficit and catch everybody.  I'm not aware of how that's making me good 'cause I have nobody to warn against that 'cause black folk put they energy in the short distance.  And so now I ran the fastest time in the world in high school, and the sad part, my mother [Lucille Gregory] didn't know it was me.  My mother called all white folks mister and missus, but they didn't have to call her that, you know.  And she asked me one day, she said, "Mr. Bob Burns [Robert Burns]," that's the sports announcer, everybody called him Bob Burns, said, "Mr. Bob Burns, I heard him talking about this, this guy that runs.  His name is [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory."  See, white folks changed my name to Dick Gregory, and a lot of black folk didn't know that was me.  And my mother said, "Do you know, do you know this guy named Dick Gregory."  I said, "Yeah, I met him a couple of times." She said, "He seem like a nice person."  She died not knowing it was me, you know.  And I started to tell her, but she'd a thought I was lying.  She said something real sad to me one day, said, "You know, that Dick Gregory's down in Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois] with you, y'all on the track team." Said, "I did an awful thing the other day, and I guess it's 'cause I'm sick."  She said, "I made believe that they was talking about you and it's a horrible thing to steal another woman's son."  Is that painful, you know (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 560209
Speaker 1: So I was waiting for the scholastic yearbook to come out in August to take it and show her that I had the fastest time in the world.  So where do you get a scholastic yearbook in the Negro community.  So I went down to the board of education--I'm like a hero.  I'm like God in St. Louis [Missouri], black and white.  And so I'm there, and I been sitting there for an hour.  So the superintendent of schools come out, Hickey [Philip J. Hickey], say, "Dick [HistoryMaker Dick Gregory], how are you?"  "Fine."  He said, "Can I help you?"  I say, "I'm waiting on a scholastic yearbook."  He said, "Oh, just a minute."  He go over to get it.  Now, my heart is beating.  I'm, I do go the mile and the fastest time in the mile is a white boy from New Jersey.  So I said, well, mine was so special, I probably got a separate page.  I didn't see it.  So now, I took my time and turned each page, one at a time, and I wasn't in there.  So he came back and said, "Can I help you?"  I said, "Well, I'm looking for my name."  "Oh, oh, no, you're not in there."  "Well, why?"  "You was at the Negro meets."  Then, the dual school systems, blacks didn't run against whites.  Whites didn't run against blacks.  So I started crying.  I said, "I wanna ask you a question.  At the all-Negro meet, y'all don't hire black timers.  Those are white folks.  You think they lied."  He said, "No, no, it's not about that.  The Negro meets' times is not counted."  And I grabbed him in his tie and snatched him to me and elbowed him and said, "You white, stinking, no good motherfucker, let me tell you something. I ran faster than anybody on the planet.  I don't like my mama [Lucille Gregory].  I don't know where my daddy [Presley Gregory] is, and everybody have played with me.  And I developed this little skinny, puny body to do something that's never been done before, and all you gonna do is look at me.  I'm a tell you something, you son of a bitch.  You gonna pay for that or I'll burn every school down to the ground come September."  So then I left.  I went over to the guy at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], Mr. Wheeler [Henry Winfield Wheeler].  And I told him, I said, "I'm gonna make 'em pay for this."  He said, "Well, son, we getting ready to have a demonstration about overcrowded conditions."  Remember, back then nobody knew nothing about no integration.  He said, "Why don't you join up with us?"  I said, "Okay."  Well, back then, we had a truancy law where the boys had to stay in school 'til twenty-one and the girls was considered a woman at eighteen.  So they could--so we had so many guys out on the corner all day.  But they loved me.  They--so I would go and we--our track meets was drawing more than the football games, okay.
Story_ID: 560210
Speaker 1: So I went out and organized, and this is in August. School starts in September, day after Labor Day.  So I go and I tell 'em, I said, "Brothers, I need y'all to do Brother Greg [HistoryMaker Dick Gregory] a favor, man.  I need y'all to go register in the school closest to you because the law say you have to be in school 'til you twenty-one so they can't deny you.  And I just need y'all to be there one day, and the second I'm a pull everybody out, and we're going down to the board of education.  Do that for Brother Greg."  And they did.  And the second day, we led 'em out of the schools, and I had the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] where we would meet them.  And a guy named Pop Baker [ph.], one of the finest black men that ever lived on the planet, man, just his voice, his concern.  And he was like the one that kept order.  He's the one that kept the Bloods and the Crips in line.  And everybody was scared of him 'cause he would hurt you.  And he came down, and said, "Gregory, you can't do this.  You're fucking with my bread and butter."  I said, "Pop, look in my eyes, look at my eyes real good.  Don't make me kill you.  I'll take that baseball bat from you and beat you to death.  This is bigger than some nigger shit, boy.  None of y'all went to war for me, I was, none of you, Pop.  Move out the way and let these folks--." Now, I had my little partners in there to intimidate the students.  You leave or get whopped.  So, now, we left and we all converging.  The cops is out there, FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] is out there, to this one place, and we go to the--you know what the papers and news ran that night?  The largest demonstration in the history and nobody stole nothing.  Now, let me tell you, (unclear) back then you had these little stands.  People didn't have stores and stuff like they, grocery store, but stands, little Italian with the wheels on it.  Nobody stole nothing.  So now I'm down there, and Hickey [Philip J. Hickey] is out of his mind.  He's embarrassed in front of white folks 'cause this had never happened to him.  So I get arrested.  I get home.  There's a white man sitting in the house.  My mother's crying, "Richie, what you done done.  Mr. So and So say you a Communist."  I said, "White boy, let me tell you something.  My mama crazy, she a fool.  She call you mister and as long as you been here, you ain't never called her miss.  I know that.  But let me tell you something that's gonna make my mama feel bad.  She permits no man in this house with their hat on, and the only reason you sitting here with your hat on 'cause you a white boy.  Now, I know you say you from the FBI, and I know you got a gun, but I'm a tell you this.  My mama don't know how to spell communism and if you'd a walked in here a white man smiling and said, 'Oh, Lucille [Lucille Gregory], your son's a Communist,' she'd a baked me a pie.  Get out of here or kill me."  So I escort him to the door.  You'll pay for this.  He's more embarrassed.  The next day, my boys are gone 'cause I just promised 'em one day, but the press had played it up, and it was like the, we marched again.  Hickey said, "God damn it, what do you want?"  I said, "I want my record to count."  Something came over him.  He said, "What?  That's what this--?" "That's what this is about."  He said, "Just a minute."  Then I understood the power of a white man.  He, "Can, can you wait a minute?"  He went--I found out later he made a phone call.  He come back, said, "If you got thirty minutes, we'll take care of that."  He came back, and he says, "In another hour, the cross country teams in the State of Missouri will be integrated," just like that.
Speaker 2: Just like that.
Story_ID: 560211
Speaker 1: Now, see, under fear and stress, they forgot you can't integrate cross country and don't integrate basketball and football (laughter).  So they had to redo all of that.  Now, the Negro athletes were so fabulous, the major cities, like Kansas City, St. Louis, secretly, they said, "Well, if we got to play against them, we want some."  So to this day, if you check, you will find out that Missouri claims they had integrated their schools before the 1954 [U.S.] Supreme Court decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] and what they did was made a deal.  Kansas City, Missouri, St. Louis, Missouri, but that didn't pertain to Cape Girardeau [Missouri], okay.  Now, that's how they did that. So now, I'm running--
Speaker 2: Just those two cities and--
Speaker 1: Well, they--just those two.  And couldn't nobody know, you know, white folks do whatever they wanna do if they have the power to do it.  So now I go to the cross country championship for the state and won it, walking away, the first Negro in the history of America that won a state cross country championship.  Now, we back in the spring now.  And now we get to go to Columbia, Missouri, University of Missouri.  The black university [HBCU] was Lincoln [Lincoln University] in Jeff City [Jefferson City, Missouri].  So now we go, but a funny thing, man.  We couldn't stay in hotels.  We couldn't eat in restaurants.  We couldn't stay in the dormitories on campus like white teams stayed or in the gym and stuff.  So we came one hundred forty miles on Friday to qualify and had to drive back to St. Louis and come back that morning.  I won the mile, the half mile, the two miles and anchor the mile relay.  In just my points alone, we won the state meet.  But we had other folks that set records.  (Unclear) Ona Paton [ph.], one of the finest high jumpers in the world.  He eventually set the world's record in high school.  This is when we unleashed on them.  And then we go back, and just the whole, I mean the problem was I doubled crossed Dr. Warren St. James.  I said to a friend of mine, I say, "Boo," said, "I want you to come up and be my guest.  I'm a tell you a little secret.  Everybody knew I'm a set the world's record."  I say, "Matter of fact, I had a girlfriend of mine and some little thug friends of mine on the track last Saturday with my street shoes and street clothes on.  I ran the mile faster than the high school record was."  So I said, "But I'm a teach you a little some.  Everybody gonna be mad at me."  So we go up, and the governor had invited fifteen governors from surrounding states.  So now comes time for the mile, the press is there from all over.  So the fastest time other than mine--mine was like 4:19 officially.  This white boy was 4:28 from Cape Girardeau.  So I went up to him.  I said, "Let me ask you something."  I said, "Is your mother and father here?"  He said, "Yes."  I said, "They come to see you or me?"  He said, "They came to see you."  I said, "Will you help me make them feel good for the first lap."  He said, "What do you mean?"  I said, "I want you to lead the first lap."  So the first lap, he led.  The second lap, he led.  My coach done gone crazy now, 'cause he know the time I ran the first two laps.  I can't even break the Missouri record.  So the third lap, the fourth lap as we was coming down, I went around him.  I started to grab his hand and take him so the two of us were running, I stepped in front of him, one of the slowest times I'd had.  My coach went out of his mind.  He grabbed me.  "How could you do this to me?"  "How did you do it to me?"  You wanted to punish white folks, man.  It got nothing to do with me.  You wanted them to see this nigger that you had coached.  You wanted them to see this thing.  Well, I'm not a thing.  I ran faster than anybody in the world last year.  That's good enough for me.  Now, I don't know, my brother, five years behind gonna come and smash the world record and get credit.  And every now and then I go home and look at the tickertape that went around the world.
Speaker 2: Give us your brother's name.
Speaker 1: Ron Gregory.  And he went to Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana] and set every record down there at Notre Dame--
Story_ID: 560212
Speaker 1: But I'm saying, so I know that you got to be careful what you do 'cause people behind you is looking at you, you know.  So now, I got all this behind me, and now I was getting ready to go to college, which I didn't wanna do.  So that wasn't where my head was.  Now, Warren [Warren St. James] tell me, say, well, Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois], and it's just a god force, and that's where my life changed.  Remember, I hadn't been around white folks at all, and the ones I (unclear) around.  My mother [Lucille Gregory] used to tell me, say, "If you behave yourself and stop being so crazy, see, Richard [HistoryMaker Dick Gregory], I work for some of the richest white folks in the world.  They got books that white folks is not privileged to see."  And say, "You got a good mind.  If you come out there," and say, "all you gotta do is just cut grass, them white folks, they go into the office around ten o'clock, and I'll come out and cut the grass."  So I came out.  She gave me the key, and I pulled some books out and read some things.  And my life will never, ever, ever, after reading it, then I realized that the white folks who think they white, they not.  They the real niggers on the planet.  Then it dawned on me as I got older that Hitler [Adolf Hitler] didn't declare war on Africa.  He declared war on white folks.  Where does this mess come from that we think they all together.  World War I [WWI] and World War II [WWII] wasn't white folks jumping on black folks, they were jumping on each other.  And so, consequently, I see that now.  And so now, I'm going to SIU.  And I get there, and you're there the week before, freshmen convocation.  You're there by yourself, orientation.  And so I'm looking at the president, the most powerful white man I've ever seen in my life, man.
Speaker 2: The president of SIU.
Speaker 1: Of the university, Dr. Morris [Delyte W. Morris].  And he's standing there, and he's talking to me.  I mean he's talking to everybody, he's talking to me.  Here's what he said.  "You can stay here a thousand years.  You can make straight A's.  If you don't understand God and love and peace, then this institution is a failure."  I'm sitting there saying, did I hear this white man say this to me?  Did I hear this white man mention God and all this other stuff don't count?  And I walked out there a different person.  It's like once the baby come out of mama's belly, you can't put it back in.  And my whole life, I had a new dignity.  And the president and I was like, he thought I was his son.  And they gave me a job at the cafeteria, and I saw to it that all black folks ate and take some meat home with you.  And I was so great down there, if you told on me you'd probably be fired.  A black woman couldn't live in the dormitory there.  The only reason black men could live in the dormitory 'cause they wouldn't get that bold and have black athletes.  The only reason we was there 'cause they could watch us.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But I'm a get back to this, how good we were doing before this.  In town, in the City of Carbondale [Illinois], poor black folks, little hick town, racists, thirty something miles from Cairo, Illinois, which they was still lynching black folks.  But they were able to rent their little shacks and houses out to black students because blacks were not able to--and it was cheaper than the dormitory for black men.  So 90 percent of the black students lived in town.
Speaker 2: They lived in white people's housing?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: They lived in white people's (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, Negro.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the white man, if a person would let you live there, they would lynched them right there in that town.
Story_ID: 560213
Speaker 1: But the mayor of the town was the head of the history department [at Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois], John R. Wright, and when he gets to the slavery part, when it's nigger in the book, he would write nigger up on the blackboard.  And then one day I grabbed him.  I said, "Let me tell you something, white boy, I don't have no problem with the word nigger 'cause your mama's a nigger, but if you ever put nigger on this blackboard again, and don't have it in capital letters, I will throw you out this window."  And then one day, he told me, he said, "You might as well quit.  I know you think can't nobody touch you, and I know you--how close you are with the president [Delyte W. Morris], but you not gonna pass my class."  I say, "I'm stealing the same tests the white fraternities are stealing, cracker.  You flunk me, you better flunk all of them."  So I said, "Let me tell you something.  I ought to just whoop your ass now."  He said, "I don't care."  And I could see this pure hatred.  He said, "I saw you yesterday walk across campus holding that white woman's hand.  And I just broke down and cried."  I said, "Let me tell you something, that's a Negro, light-complected sister from Carrier Mills, Illinois and the only reason she's that light because y'all was raping them.  We wasn't raping white women.  And now you tell me I behave myself; ain't never dated a white in my life.  And I'm being punished because of your filth.  Well--I'm a tell you one thing.  You better apologize to me by this evening or not only am I going to tell the president, but I'm a throw you out this window."  So this is, you're there with all this conflict.
Story_ID: 560214
Speaker 1: Then we found out that the white fraternities was stealing the tests, the good ol' boys.  So I got with the black folks and said, "Listen, here's what we need to do.  If the whites got the test and we don't get it, it builds in they stereotype about how dumb we are."  I said, "Here's how we gonna do it."  I said, "Eddie McCluthen [ph.] is the head honcho as far as black folks.  He don't carry no weight.  We, as college students, have never respected him.  I go by and laugh and talk with his wife, take him to track meets."  I said, "But here's what we gonna do.  We gonna go by and see Eddie, and we gonna put him on the payroll because any money come through that cafeteria is mine before it's the school's.  And he got keys to every building here, which means we got keys," and that's how we did it, man.  Now, we sitting and we bring the black, the black students get there a week before we get there.  When we get there we have no control over 'em.  So then I get my little partners together, and I said let's--we gonna have to quit our summer jobs a week early 'cause we have to be here when the freshmen get here.  And we did, and we pulled the blacks over.  It's still two different, see, you (unclear) was in town.  So we carried them into our little club in town.  I said, "I'm tell y'all something.  Forget your mama and your daddy.  Forget who's doctors and lawyers.  Forget how smart you are.  There's two schools here.  One, the white folks run and one we run.  Now, you can flunk out the white one, but we'll run you out this black one.  So, we gonna tell you what the law is and it'll do no good to report to white folks 'cause the white folks that could do something, they love me, okay.  So here's the law."  And that's how we did it.  Leo Wilson was the only black guy that was married.  One of my home boys was Spencer Hackney and we used to do a thing called dog eat dog week which was Halloween week, dog eat dog.  And we printed up a little paper of all the black dudes that was dating white women and all the white women who were dating black dudes in the school [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] loved it, them nigger hating, they loved it.  And nobody could find this (unclear).  We had it printed in Murphysboro [Illinois].  And we had some folks slip it on campus, and everybody lived for that day to see what--well, one day, I told Spence, I said, "Spence, I'm trying to make a deal with the guys and the old lady look like she, she wants to hit on me.  So she's scared.  She white, she don't want nobody to know, including you.  So let me handle the book (unclear) information."  So he laughing.  When the book came out, the paper, dog eat dog, Spencer Hackney's picture's on the front page.  I got a picture with that white woman he going with.  I said, "We spare nobody, Spence.  We can't attack these folks and change people's life and you get a free pass.  That's the way we run this.  And if that means we can't be friends, or you wanna go get your gun, just get it.  That's the way we're running it.  We gonna run this ship."  So then the next thing we needed to do, a Negro had never been outstanding athlete of the year, the school over a hundred years old.  You go into the gym and all the records is held by black folks except, you know, (unclear) shot put and wrestling and stuff, you know.  But never before has a Negro been outstanding athlete of the year.  And the reason is, you have to outrun God to get a scholarship there if you're black.  If you're white, you can sit on the third team of the football team 'til you graduate.  But when it comes to voting at the banquet, all three teams, all three of the football teams, everybody get to vote.  They outvote us.  That's how much hate and viciousness it was.  So I said, well, a black woman's--you couldn't even, a black fraternity could not have a house on campus.  It was only black, one black fraternity that was registered, recognized and that was the Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity].  So I get with--
Story_ID: 560215
Speaker 1: You have to understand who I was at Southern Illinois [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] and what I felt by hearing the president [Delyte W. Morris].  I had carte blanche to his house.  One day one of his boys just playing sic'd the dog on me.  I whooped both his sons and the dog and waited for the president to come home and jump on him.  That was our relationship that we had.  So then, remember when I was there, we had two thousand five hundred students.  Today, they got thirty-five thousand.  It cost fifteen dollars a quarter to go to school there.  And this is, the only reason there wasn't a more racist institution that you could go to, the ones that was more racist than that, the blacks couldn't get in at all.  That was the atmosphere.  And so you couldn't even, no restaurants in town.  The movie was segregated.  If you went to buy some clothes, you had to try them on at home.  You bought 'em and they'd take your change, give you your change back.  You couldn't even come in the place.  So UDs, university drugstore was on campus.  That's the only place you could eat with white friends, black friends was there.  So, so we had a really, a nice thing together with the ones that we had picked.  And we were guerillas.  We didn't take nothing off nobody, including our own friends.  So then we went in town and had our meeting.  But I said to Leo [Leo Wilson] the night before--he was the only one of us that was married, I said, "Leo, I got to run a strange game down tomorrow, and I need you with me.  And it might hurt you, but I need you with me.  And if you're not with me, I'm a quit school.  That's how important this is, but I can't tell you tonight."  So we get there, so we said, "We have a problem at this school that the sisters is here, all of 'em live in town.  None of 'em can live in the dormitory.  They cook for us.  They screw us, we party, and when it comes time for something nice, we bring out high school sweethearts or Leo bring his wife.  Well, we got a new law tonight.  Leo, hear me good.  Nobody, Negro man on this campus, will ever bring a woman down here for homecoming or a football game until every black sister on this campus have a date.  What do you think, Leroy [ph.]--," (unclear) we'd already gone on.  "Okay, brother, that's the law."  I said, "Now, you folks down here, I haven't had time to deal with y'all yet, but trust me, violate it.  See, nobody care about a nigger whooping a nigger's ass down here and you will get a good whooping."  Now, we had to go talk to the sisters 'cause there were some sisters, everybody talk about how short, nappy hair and no titties, little legs, but they smart.  So we bring the sisters in and tell 'em what the law is.  "And we don't want none of you all telling us you don't wanna go 'cause I'm a tell you the same thing we told them brothers.  We will run you out of here.  Any of you feel you ain't got the right outfit, just come see me or see Brother Spence [Spencer Hackney].  We'll take care of it.  But that's the new law."  In two weeks, man, you thought you had died and went to heaven, a whole new vibration, a whole new vibration, had--even white folks was trying to figure out, a whole new vibration had came over that campus.
Story_ID: 560216
Speaker 1: So then the next things we did was integrated the movie.  And the guy came to see me and again, luck of god, he said, the biggest most expensive movie in the history of the movie was 'The Robe' about Jesus Christ, $10 million.  Can you imagine they spend that much today?  And he says, "Mr. Gregory [HistoryMaker Dick Gregory], (unclear) we got a problem.  I got (unclear), we invested a lot of money in this movie and if Negroes sit downstairs, white folk won't come.  If I make a deal, if you wait for this two week run over, I'll do it on my own."  That's how we integrated that.  I had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He kept his promise.
Speaker 1: It had nothing to do with his promise.  He knew I was gonna keep mine.  He had no choice.
Speaker 2: Now, was this your first year there or second year [at Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois], during--
Speaker 1: Second year.
Speaker 2: Second year, okay.
Speaker 1: And then we--
Speaker 2: You're a campus leader or at least a black campus leader--
Speaker 1: The Negroes and the decent white folks which weren't many and a handful of teachers, which wasn't many (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right.
Speaker 1: And so, but they couldn't deal with me 'cause of the president [Delyte W. Morris].  So now we have a conference track meet at home, and we tear it up.  We won everything.  So now I'm walking in town that night.  There's a place called John's, Papa John [ph.], not the one we know, the Italian place.  White boys go drink beer and take they girlfriends and kiss all up in the doorway and all that junk.  My boys is yelling at me, the white boys run track, "Greg, hey, man, you did it, baby."  I said to Leo [Leo Wilson], see, he got the jacket on, the jacket you win from the statesmen, that he couldn't a got it without us.  And he can go in there and I can't.  I said, "Wait, I'll be back."  I went and found me two bricks and threw through the window.  The place is packed, all right.  John ran out, and I said, "Be very careful, John.  You got enough sense to know that most niggers in this town you can mess with.  There's a handful you can't, and I'm one of 'em."  "Well, I'm John Pappa [ph.], blah, blah, blah."  He called the police.  The police came and saw it was me, said, "Dick, can we take you home?  I know you had a hard night and you won the mile, the half mile, the two mile, he had a hard day today."  He said, "He's under a lot of pressure, and I know he didn't mean to do it."  So I said, "Just a minute.  Leo, give me that brick," and I threw that brick, that other brick through the window in front of me.  He said, "John, just go head on and we'll handle this."  I said, "You can't handle nothing.  We don't wanna come in tonight, but we coming back tomorrow."  And you be the witness, we coming back tomorrow, and we gonna sit down and we gonna eat.  We might pay and we might not because I have the privilege of signing anything I do here to the university.  And it ain't too many university people know I can do that.  So the next day we came back, integrate the restaurant.  Now, I go to the president--
Speaker 2: Now that restaurant is inte--
Speaker 1: All of 'em.
Speaker 2: Okay, good.
Speaker 1: All of 'em.  Now, I go to the president, and I said, there's a problem on--no, Theta Xi [Theta Xi Fraternity] variety show had this huge variety show every year for over a hundred years.  And the Negroes never won nothing.  They ain't won singing, they ain't won dancing.  So I take the money out the till and I go buy fifty tickets and I passed them out to the mob.  By this time, we got a good ol' white boy that we cut him in.  So we go and I tell Leo, "Lock the door."  So I get up on stage.  I say, "A Negro has never won nothing in the history of Theta Xi variety.  We winning everything tonight.  You can't get out.  The door is locked or all y'all gone get a whooping.  And so, Melba [ph.], come here, do a little dance.  Okay.  (Unclear) sing a little song.  Okay, here's the two winners of the dance contest and the song contest.  Where's the trophies?"  Well--and that's how we did it.  And then from that point on.
Story_ID: 560217
Speaker 1: Now, we got to deal with the president [Delyte W. Morris] on the fraternities not being on campus.  So all my life coming out of St. Louis [Missouri], I always wanted to be a Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity].  I said, the Kappas was cool.  They could dance, good lovers, and the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] was sissies.  Now, that word didn't mean gay.  It meant they can't play ball, they can't do this.  So we go to the rush party for the Alphas, and we're all sitting there.  And the guy stands up and says, "Now, you dogs, you have no choice but to be Alpha--I mean Kappa because we the only ones recognized on campus."  And I didn't know that.  So I didn't think none of 'em was recognized, so I got up.  I say, "I need to ask--." "Sit down, dog 'til you--." I said, "Leo [Leo Wilson], hit the door.  Just understand one thing before we kick all y'all's ass."  I said, "I don't believe you are selling Kappas because you the only Negro fraternity or sorority that SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] recognize.  Let's go y'all," and I said on the way out, "And y'all lucky we ain't whooping your ass."  So then the next day I go see the president.  And I said, "It's Greg [HistoryMaker Dick Gregory], this is kind of--." I said, "Doc, if this ain't changed in a week, I will personally burn every fraternity and sorority down to the ground."  And so he called me in the next day and said, "It'll take me a little bit of time.  I think we can do it in two weeks."  I think I got to--and we did it, you know.  Now, the next--
Speaker 2: So the Alphas and the Omegas [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] came--
Speaker 1: Everything, everything.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know--
Speaker 2: Sororities too.
Speaker 1: Everything, the whole thing.  And we went and joined the Alphas.  We went and got J.C. Penn, Dr. Penn, out of bed that night and told him what we was gonna do and why we was gonna do.  So he brought the brothers in from around the area, and they came in with that same nonsense.  See, my whole thing is, if the mob don't insult you and spank you to be a filthy mob hood, why do I got to be insulted?  I'm born insulted in this white racist system.  And so we went through the Alphas, as little initiation as possible, no humiliation.
Story_ID: 560218
Speaker 1: And this thing start changing.  Now, we down to the dormitory.  No Negro women permitted in dormitories.  So I met with the president [Delyte W. Morris] and some of his people [at Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois].  I said, you know, here's my problem.  All y'all laugh about all these black women having all these babies out of wedlock.  But they have no supervision.  White women live at the dormitory.  They got to be in by a certain time.  The door is locked.  We don't, and then poor Negroes down that's renting rooms, they ain't gone squeal on us because we'll take their money away.  So they part of it.  We get back in town from a track meet or they come in from a football banquet, we go see our ladies, take a little beer or a little whiskey, drugs were nothing then, and we sit there and have a party, man.  And them black folk that own them houses, they been doing that for forty years.  They ain't gone say nothing.  And so that's, so I'm sitting there, and saying, y'all laugh and sneak and think that the black woman's more trifling than the white woman, move--close all these dormitories down and let these white hoes live in town and see how many get pregnant.  They getting pregnant here now.  I know some brothers that's screwing some of 'em in the dormitory that's for all women.  So don't run this game down on me.  So then the president met with us the next day and said, "Well, here's the problem.  We building the new dormitory.  They breaking ground next week.  Can we get you to wait 'til it's been built and it'll be integrated."  I said, "On one condition.  You announce it tomorrow."  And he did.
Story_ID: 560219
Speaker 1: And that's what that's--and let me tell you why that's so incredible.  Now, the last little thing we have to do is outstanding athlete.  So we go to the athletic director, a little cocky white boy, supposed to have a pretty wife and everybody talks about how pretty his wife is, ex-Marine captain [U.S. Marine Corps].  So he's, "Well, you, I know what you're doing on this campus.  We hear what you doing.  But you're not talking to Delyte Morris [Delyte W. Morris].  You're talking to me."  I said, "White boy, let me tell you something.  A Negro will be outstanding athlete of Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois] this year or we gonna run you off campus."  So then we have to go organize and decide that we gonna quit school, all the athletes.  So we go, they say, "I don't care.  That's what you wanna do, y'all quit."  So everybody got a little (unclear)--so in our conferences, Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], Eastern Michigan, Ypsilanti [Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan] and New York [New York].  So I call up their coach, "Hey, [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory, baby, how you feeling?  Hey, look, we got a little hassle going on down at SIU, and I just wanna know if we lead all the athletes out, can we come there?"  He said, "We'll send the buses for you."  So then we go back and we tell him.  And I never considered myself an athlete.  I've never played a game of basketball in my life.  I never played the game of baseball in my life, never played football.  But I did something special which was out something, and only I know inside what I was doing was bigger than athletics.  So they came to me the next day and said, "Congratulations.  You have been chosen as the athlete of the year."  And they said it like it was just ordinary, like, you know, like this ain't nothing special.  You deserve it, nothing like you, right?  And now, now, let me tell you why this is important.
Story_ID: 560220
Speaker 1: So now we got the last thing to break down.  I said, "How come a Negro woman can't run for homecoming queen [at Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois]."  So they, that's where the line, the president [Delyte W. Morris] and all of 'em was--so I said, "Leo [Leo Wilson], here's what we do.  One of the greatest bands in the world--." This was before the Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] band, was a band out of St. Louis [Missouri] called Tom (Unclear) Post [ph.].  So I go up and hire 'em to come down to play for homecoming.  So we go like thirty miles out of town and start making floats like it's for St. Louis 'cause you know the white folks would tell.  So we go into the tavern in town and get them ol' wino sisters, one of them, (unclear) on her legs, got them ol' funny looking shoes on with the leg eyes and we say, "We gonna make you the queen for homecoming, and we want you to be drunk on the float and you always smell like stinky pee.  We don't want you to clean up, and we'll give you a hundred dollars."  You know what a hundred dollars was back then.  So we lined up our floats, put them wino sisters on, and when the last float came down without missing a beat, Tom (Unclear) Post struck up, wow, and marched out there, came down that street, man, and we had our floats.  It embarrassed them so bad, it humiliated them so bad.  So then we had to negotiate.  And here's what they said.  For the next three years, because this school is not gonna vote for a Negro queen and (unclear) maid a honor second place, said, "But we'll give you a Negro maid of honor for the next three years to get 'em used to it.  Is that acceptable?"  "Yeah."  And said, and we get the sister they suggested, that--light complected, pretty, said, "We will pick one."  So me and Leo go in town, see the sister, say, "Baby, you know what we doing.  You know life done changed for y'all because of what we doing.  We get death threats.  We just don't talk about it." Say, "I need you to do us a favor.  We don't say attractive, we say ugly, and you know you're ugly.  You know that.  So we ain't playing no games.  We need you to do us a favor, and we'll pay you five hundred," and I'm crying now, when I said, "I hate to have to do this to my mama [Lucille Gregory]."  I said, "But we need you because they say we can pick one, and if we let the black folks pick one, it won't be a dark one and it won't be one who white folks don't consider attractive, so we want you to sit up on that stage and we'll decide if you gonna be in a gown or just some ordinary--," and that's what we did.  Them white folk was so embarrassed.  They said, "We'll vote next year."  I said, "This is what we did, man.  This is what we were able to do."
Story_ID: 560221
Speaker 1: And then the final thing was the school [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] couldn't be a major school because it didn't have a hotel, a bowling alley, a student union.  And the problem, in Illinois, all the politics was keyed to the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] so everybody else was just stepchildren.  So we had to vote.  It was twenty-two people, voted.  Nineteen, two thousand two hundred, one thousand nine hundred voted with--'cause we had to raise the tuition.  Now, think about this now.  We had to raise the tuition from fifteen dollars to forty-five dollars and a whole lot of people, white folks couldn't come there.  We know they ain't gonna vote (unclear).  Had a ol' white girl there named Smitty [ph.].  Wherever God is in heaven, she'll sit next to him.  She was (unclear) in love with a brother.  So she was head of the student council.  So the votes is over.  They voted one thousand nine hundred against raising it, and three hundred for raising it.  I say, "When you got to turn it in?"  She said, "Seven o'clock this morning."  I said, "Well, we got time to change all this," and we changed every vote.  So it ended up three hundred voted for it and one thousand nine hundred voted (unclear) voted against (unclear).  So one, the president's [Delyte W. Morris] happy.  He's out of his mind.  "Jesus Christ, Dick [HistoryMaker Dick Gregory], how'd you do it?"  And I told him.  He says, "You can't do this.  You can't."  At 7:30, I went by the house.  "This is a free, democratic society.  We don't do it this way."  We (unclear).  I said, "Well, then we got a half hour.  I'm can go back and change them back."  "Well, the fact it's already been changed so we, you know."  And that's how that happened.  That's why I say one day (unclear).  And because of that, they got money from the state legislature, alumni, white alumni that ain't been there in thirty or forty years start coming back 'cause that was, the whole bit, bowling alley, hotel on campus and all of that.  And so that's how we were able to pull that off.
Story_ID: 560222
Speaker 1: Is it fair to say that you made a greater impact as an agent for change than you did as an athlete?
Speaker 2: Well, athlete, you ain't nothing but a gladiator.  And I was just so tired of--if you put all the athletes together in the history of the planet, they'd never come up with a cure for cancer or sugar diabetes or high blood pressure.  That's a game we play.  And we like that because that's what they like.  But what we haven't seen is last World Series, less than one tenth of 1 percent of those athletes was Negroes because while we wasn't looking they gave us midnight basketball.  Nobody wanna play basketball at midnight but a fool and in place of that, they took away Little League baseball.  And if you look at Little League baseball, for the last fifteen years there's always more Japanese there.  There are no Negroes there at all.  That's how they did it, systematically did it, that whole, the whole thing.  And so I've always asked, you know, when are we gonna get tired of being gladiators for a white racist system?  I mean when you look at powerful positions Jews are in, when have you ever heard of them or a Jewish athlete.  They used to.  But there comes a time you grow out of that, you know.  All this crap going on now with Bonds [Barry Bonds] and he used steroids.  Well, wait a minute, you can't find a better gentleman and a better humanitarian in a human being than [HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron.  They had to bring the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] when he was approaching Babe Ruth's record because of death threats.  So we wanna make believe these white folks are reacting because of steroids.  And as close as him and Ted Turner was, when they built that new stadium, it was hinted it'd be named after him.  Aaron's name ain't nowhere on it, huh, come on, now, huh?  So when you stop and think about, now, Babe Ruth's daughter [Julia Ruth Stevens] is going out of her mind.  She's the most vicious thing on the planet against, and so I sent a message to Bonds.  I said, "Look, Babe Ruth's a Negro and all of us in the know, know that."  And I said, "And with DNA now, why don't you put up a million dollars, since you're supposed to be so nasty.  They tell me you don't care nothing about the press.  You was dogging the press even before this happened.  So be nasty for yourself and say, we'll give you a million dollars for yourself or any organization if you take a DNA test and can prove you got less Negro blood in you than I've got in me.  It's over, you know."  Now, I can't say if the person got to him or not.  But when Babe Ruth--see, in the Negro League, they knew who was Negroes and who was not because they would tell you if you was light complected, say, brother, no, you have to play with Kansas City  [Missouri] (unclear), just go on over there, man.  And everything cool.  And they did.  And some of 'em went over and stayed and some, you know, come back after the season was over and I had a uncle, who was more white than white folks, light complected.  He lived in a black neighborhood, married to a black woman, had a job at one of the Fortune 500 companies.  And they never asked him was he a Negro; he never told 'em.  He ended up being the second in control of a Fortune 500 company because they thought he was white.  So when you talk about the curse of the Bambino, that's what that's about.  When the word start getting out, the people in Boston [Massachusetts] got scared, the owners.  That's why they got rid of him.  And that's why it's so much tension now, whenever Boston and New York [New York Yankees] play, it's like a World Series because they got rid of him.  They sold him for ten thousand dollars, man.  So now, Babe Ruth, you know, all the brothers in the ball, knew he was.  He'd come back and play the Negro League after they season was over.  So when he hit the, set the new home run record, the world stopped.  He came to St. Louis [Missouri] to play the Negro League, and the team he was on, Satchel Paige was pitching against him.  Now, think about the beauty of this, what I'm fixing to tell you, man.  He let Babe Ruth hit the ball out the park, and he met him at home plate, and they say, they just trash talked at home plate for like thirty minutes, no game, nothing.  He's just telling, "Yeah, nigger, you know you can't hit me.  Let me tell you, now, think about this.  The only reason, the only reason you have ever hit a home run on me today because I wanted the Negroes in the stand," remember it's all black, "I wanted them to see you do something that the white folks have seen you do, and I want them to know so they can feel the greatness and go back and tell their friends, 'I saw him hit a home run.'"  That's how cool Satchel Paige was.
Story_ID: 560223
Speaker 1: This is this whole, you know, the whole game that's, that's played.  Now, what will happen now is things will be taken out of context.  And this is why I say that we got ancestors that ain't born yet will cuss the ground that we walked on, will wonder why King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], would look at Malcolm [Malcolm X] like he was a wimp.  You know, I used to call Malcolm a wimp in New York [New York].  Me and Malcolm, Malcolm, I'm the only person that Malcolm wrote, the only true revolutionary in America is [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory.  That's how close we was.  Me, him and Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] used to hang out, and we'd say, "Okay, Malcolm, you go on down there.  We gonna eat us some barbeque ribs and gonna get us some white ladies and some whiskey."  And one day I got with Malcolm and I say, "Malcolm, you ain't nothing but a fool, man.  It a take twenty, forty years before Negroes catch up with who you are."  I said, "But let me tell you something that's my problem with you."  If you ever notice when Malcolm would be speaking in Harlem [New York, New York], he'd be on a ladder at 125th [Street] and it'd be a flag on the ladder.  That was the conditions they let him speak.  He had to have a flag, American flag.  And he tolerated that.  The other thing is during Malcolm's power, only--there wasn't one black Negro principal or assistant principal in all of Harlem.  Now, remember, Harlem had the highest concentration of black folks anywhere in the world outside of Africa, and no Negro principals and no Negro assistant principals, and Malcolm tolerated that.  There was only two black businesses in Harlem owned by black folks, Small's Paradise [New York, New York], some old chicken shack, and, and all the stores, the clothing stores, I mean the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] wasn't own by black folks.  And the Cotton Club [New York, New York], you hear black folks bragging about, they couldn't go in there.  And the entertainers, Count Basie and Duke [Duke Ellington], they had to go through the back door.  And what happened is, is the clothing stores in Harlem, they used white mannequins to advertise their clothes and Malcolm didn't, couldn't do nothing about that.
Story_ID: 560224
Speaker 1: So, you know, let me just say one other thing about Malcolm [Malcolm X], and you probably know this.  There were two Muslims that was killed--I don't think they was killed those Muslims, they might have been.  But it was a hassle in Brooklyn [New York] and cops ran (unclear), two was killed.  And ten thousand black folks converged on that police station.  And the mayor called the governor and said, "I don't think you'll have time to get the National Guard in here before it happens, but New York [New York] is about to see something that they've never witnessed in the history of New York."  And then Malcolm showed up, ran in late, got up there and raised his hand, "Shh, cool it, brothers, sisters, y'all go home; we'll take care of it," remember that.  The next morning when The New York Times came out, an editorial, "No Negro should have that much power in America."  And that's when I told Malcolm, "That's your death notice, son."  That's why he was killed.  No Negro, can you imagine?  Not, oh, thanks to Malcolm X, we looked at you as a rabble rouser.  There's nobody, went up there and raised his hand; "My brothers and sisters go home.  We'll handle it.  Don't--we've had enough killing."  And the next morning, editorial (laughter), "No Negro in America should have this much power," (laughter).
Story_ID: 560225
Speaker 1: Let me go back to your days there at Southern Illinois [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] because war came.  You were taken into service.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, no war, no war.
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: It was draft, you had draft (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Draft, okay, I thought there was a war going on during that period.  So we're talking about around '55 [1955] or so.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what was it like and what was your reaction to that draft notice?
Speaker 2: Well, let me say this.  Remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the reason I ask that question by the way, I wanna say because you had quite a bit of power there at SIU Saluki, and the fact that you would get drafted--
Speaker 2: Well, because I went in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  And a few Negroes were, a couple of 'em, Harvey Welsh was in the [U.S.] Air Force ROTC.  I didn't wanna be in, but the war, remember, you have to go back to war was glamorous.  The war movies, some powerful white actor.  It was sex, it was love scenes.  If you got shot as John Wayne, he'd cough and spit up and say, "Tell Nellie I love her."  I had no reason not to believe that wasn't war.  That was war, man, that was--and so the reason they having trouble now is because they see these dead bodies in their living room.  We didn't see no dead bodies.  You hear hollering and moaning.  You see 'em--during World War I [WWI] and World War II [WWII] and the Korean War, you ain't seen no soldiers walking around with legs missing like you turn on TV now.  Instead it was a whole love story.  So you know that wasn't like, I didn't have no problem with that.  That was, that was, hey, man, they got me, hey.  Let's have fun.  The problem started when I got there with the attitude I had, they had integrated the [U.S.] Army under Truman [President Harry S. Truman], but--now, to show you how times have changed.  When Truman used to have his morning walks, not for physical fitness, 'cause he's dressed up, tailor made suit, homburg hat on, long dress coat with the velvet collar.  And they'd ask him, "Mr. Truman, what do you think about the Negro?"  "Well, we got to do something for them niggers."  He never said Negro, he said, nigger.  But there was a secret law that the press would never report it.  A president do that today, he'd have to leave the White House.
Story_ID: 560226
Speaker 1: That's, and see, that's what we have to see as African Americans, how this thing done changed, the whole mindset done changed.  What was good is not good.  The whole, the whole thing done changed, and we don't see it and haven't been able to see it because we're still looking through it through our eyes and don't ask questions.  "Oh, black folks don't have to--." If you telling me that black folks read better fifty years ago than they're reading now, I'd say you a damn fool.  You got to be out of your mind, and yet we buy into that.  All the black folks that dropping out of high school.  Well, if so many is dropping out of high school, how come white folks complaining about all these black folks in they colleges?  Where they coming from?  See, we let them just tell us anything.  You know, the prostitute, the face is black.  I go all over the world.  Ninety-eight percent of prostitutes on this planet is white women, and white folks is just 8 percent of the population.  And so when you stop and think about this, well, she's a hooker.  Where that come from?  Major General George Hooker [sic. Joseph Hooker] was a whoremonger and an alcoholic commissioned by [President] Abraham Lincoln.  He traveled with his women to service him and his officers.  Now, you think those were slave women?  And that's where the word came from, she's a hooker, okay.  But you look at this woman down there, what's the one married to the billionaire [J. Howard Marshall] that son died in--
Speaker 2: Oh, right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Anna Nicole [Anna Nicole Smith].
Speaker 2: Anna Nicole.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, my sister get pregnant out of wedlock, you even got black folks say the baby's illegit [illegitimate].  This slut have a baby and twelve white boys say we the daddy, and they ain't called that slut a ho yet.  And yet we tolerate that.  That's how crazy we are.  If white folks say it's okay, it's okay.  If black folks say it's okay, well, let me tell you what we have to, you know--
Story_ID: 560227
Speaker 1: And so, when I got, went into the [U.S.] Army, I was the third fastest half miler in the nation.  My Army records say, "No extensive use of lower extremities," 'cause I gotta have my toes.  And I should have been 4-F.  No extensive use mean I can't march, I can't drill, I can't go to the rifle range, just run, boy.  And I had a ball.  It was some racist white folks, jealous white folks that couldn't believe I was having the privileges I was having.  I was wise, I was clever, I was smart, I was witty.  And I understood white supremacy.  Most white folks don't understand white supremacy.  And few black folks understand it.  See, I heard my mama [Lucille Gregory] say to me, if it wasn't for these redneck, nigger hating potbelly, snuff dipping southern white crackers and one day it dawned on me, they don't determine public policy.  It's the president of Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and AT&T [AT&T Inc.] who determines this.  And then my whole life start changing of seeing, Bill Cosby's a good example.  His son [Ennis Cosby] get killed and he can't do no more Jell-O commercials (laughter).  And you know black folks ain't even figured that out.  His son got killed and he cannot, he was, he was the darling of white America.  And what got him in trouble, white supremacy.  He dared say, I wanna buy NBC and NBC was for sale.  And whites said--and he had the money and the credit to buy it.  And white supremacists step in.  His son died mysteriously.  He supposed to had a flat tire.  The reason they can get by with that is most folks don't know that was the most expensive Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz] in the world.  And when you got a flat tire, you just push a button and that tire went up and another came down.  So, okay.  Then they bring some white woman up--I'm not saying it ain't true what the white woman said, but thirty years ago?  "He gave me some drugs and had sex with me."  Well, it's been sleep for, and then all at once that stuff coming out the woodwork.  And until we understand white supremacy, it's, you know.  And so when I was in the Army I walked around, see, if you get out the Army 'cause you crazy, it's called Section 8.  You, that's not a bad discharge, but it's Section 8.  So I used to walk around in Texas, hot with some blue, white--the white bucks all the college was wearing in the '50s [1950s].  I painted mine powder blue and had long draws on and a canteen around, and a sign saying, Section 8.  And I'd just walk all over.  That was, that was the largest military campus in the world, complex in the world.  I'd just walk all around.  So one day they got a complaint.  And a guy called me in.  He said, Colonel Green [ph.], "We all love you," said, "but it's some complaints coming and you need to go--we told 'em you're a comedian.  So you need to go down to the PX [post exchange] and you better be funny or you're going to jail."  I go down to the PX, and I wasn't funny so I wouldn't go to the jail.  I was just funny.  I've always been funny.  And I'd tell little corny stuff about, I was arrested this morning for impersonating a officer.  I slept 'til twelve noon, and they'd just go out the box.  They went out they mind, just little corny stuff.  And then I ended up going to the all-Army contest.  And then I won, and then I was blessed by God 'cause the winner in every category goes on 'The Ed Sullivan Show.'  That was the largest show.  And I won, but because my stuff was so political, they gave it to somebody else.  And I look back now and realize it was the best thing ever happened for me.  See, the greatest laugh you as a human ever had didn't come from a professional comedian.  It come from a friend or a relative.  A comedian is timing.  The only way you get timing is working, timing, timing, timing.  And I'd never worked.  I just, it was a little game I played in the Army.  Had I been on 'The Ed Sullivan Show,' my ego and my darkness of my heart wouldn't have permitted me to let anybody tell me I wasn't good.  And so I never would a, could have made it.
Story_ID: 560228
Speaker 1: I wanna pursue that, but first I wanna just go back to, you told us about your being 4-F because of your toes, but you didn't tell us what had happened to your toes?
Speaker 2: I was frozen, my toes was frozen when I was six years old.  I was on my way to school.  It was a blizzard.  And I sit now and I look at, and I just stayed on the corner.  I didn't go nowhere.  I just stayed there crying.  And at twelve o'clock a white cop came by and picked me up and put me in the car and didn't take me to the hospital.  They carried me home.  Back then, nobody locked the doors, and you had coal stoves.  So I went in the kitchen and let the oven down and sit in the chair and put a little towel there and put my feet there.  And I washed my feet.  I didn't know you was supposed to put your feet in ice.  And I watched my feet swell up and bust (makes sound) right in front of me.  I knew if I was a white boy, they wouldn't a carried me home to a empty house.  It's interesting about the hospitals.  If you was black, you couldn't go to the white hospital.  If you was white, you couldn't go to the Negro hospital.  But what happened, a guy by the name of Dr. Haskell [Roscoe Haskell], a little short, no nonsense.  We called him evil, didn't take nothing off nobody.  And one day, it was eight Negroes on a scaffold washing the windows of City Hospital No. 1 [St. Louis, Missouri], the white hospital.  And the scaffold fell.  And they couldn't take 'em right there to the hospital.  They carried 'em all the way across town to Homer G. [Homer G. Phillips Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri] and five of 'em died before they got there, and Haskell, Dr. Haskell went crazy.  They will never get by with this.  They will pay for this.  This is the Negro.  And one day, we had, we had fire companies and black fire--Negro, 'cause the white folks didn't wanna sleep in the same bed that the Negroes slept in.  So they would race to the fires, you know, black folk, white folk was betting one another who would get there first.  Well, one day they're coming down the street.  One's coming north and the other is going east, and a white woman who was hard of hearing kept going.  She was in the center of the corner, and she saw 'em and she froze, and they, they swerved to keep from hitting her.  And when they came around, they both hit each other.  So when the ambulance got there and see these black firefighters laying there dying, it didn't dawn on them all of 'em wasn't black, and they carried the white ones to Homer G. Phillips and Dr. Dabbs [Leroy R. Dabbs] said, "Send 'em downtown, not here."  And about six of 'em died on the way downtown, and them white folks were--and that's when they integrated the hospitals.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Thanks to this black man who say, it's get even time.  "Send 'em downtown," and within a month the hospitals, I mean they were just outraged over that.  And so it was that type of--and so I stayed out of school about two years.  And up until I went on my first fast, I could tell you two weeks ahead when it was gonna snow 'cause my feet would itch.  And then after I went on my first fast, I don't know what happened, but my feet don't itch now.  When it snows, I get caught off guard just like you and everybody else.
Story_ID: 560229
Speaker 1: Let's go back to your tour of duty there in the [U.S.] Army, even though you came in second for the Ed Sullivan ['The Ed Sullivan Show'] prize--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you were gaining a reputation there throughout the Army.
Speaker 2: No, they didn't count--Army don't count that.  That don't mean nothing, man.  We ain't nothing but guinea pigs--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and it didn't count at all, in no shape, form or fashion.  What goes in--you think the Army got good food.  A soldier eat anything, man, (laughter), you know.  So, but, nah, I--there was nothing I did in the Army that promoted me as a comic.  I mean who you, who you--I mean, yeah, the little chumps, entertainers that got drafted.  So that's all you competing with and they just all--and they're white.  And all they doing was that old, if you look at all the--Bob Hope.  They ought be shame of they self.  They wasn't doing nothing but telling jokes where the women got the butt of the joke, you know, like, "Take my wife, please," you know, all that kind of stuff, you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But they didn't have anything else.  That was all they had to listen to.  And so I got up there and just stood flatfooted and just started talking about the Army, from experience, about the whole thing, and just, you know, the conversation would just come to you, you know.  "Hey, they just called me up today, want me to be a chaplain's orderly."  And I said, "Man, today's my day off, man.  I'm on my way to town to check out some hoes."  "Well, Harry Truman [President Harry S. Truman] decided that the Army's gonna be integrated and there are no Negro chaplains.  So we can't just make you a chaplain.  We gonna make you a chaplain's orderly."  I'd do stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And, okay, I don't wanna go to jail, so okay, "All right.  Boy, go to C company and tell Private Rickbacker, his mama dead."  "All right, C Company, fall out.  Private Rickbacker, yo mama dead."  And they went crazy.  They talking about putting me in jail.  You supposed to use tact.  You just don't go tell somebody--say, "Look, man, I don't care what you say.  I am here.  I didn't wanna be this.  I don't know nothing about it.  You picked me 'cause you scared of Truman's order."  They say, "Well, you going to jail if you do that again.  Private, go to A Company, tell Sergeant Smitty, his mama dead and you better use tact."  "A Company fall out (shouting); everybody whose mama is alive, take one step forward and Smitty don't move, baby."  That's the kind of old crazy stuff and they would go out of they mind.  They went, 'cause they never heard anything like it, you know.
Speaker 1: That was unique then.
Speaker 2: It was unique, it was honest.  It was talking about the Army 'cause I didn't give a damn about 'em.  And it's just, it was the whole--and then next thing I know, I'm out the Army.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And had I won, I'd have been in trouble.
Story_ID: 560230
Speaker 1: And then, I had a good friend in the [U.S.] Army, Jim Ellis.  And he was in, he was stationed--and I met him.  He was All-American at Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan].  And he got drafted or he--no, he was ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] so he came in as a lieutenant.  So I used to, I went and bought me a lieutenant's outfit and I'd go hang out in the officers' club.  And you know, that's serious penalty.  That's one step short of the firing squad 'cause they serious about they stuff.  And so Jimmy, he was asking me was I scared.  I said, you know, Custer, General Custer [George Armstrong Custer]--well, you know, Custer wasn't a general.  He was commissioned as a captain at twenty-three.  They called him general, but he wasn't a general.  So I told him, I said, "If General Custer, that thug, can be recognized in the history book as a general, and he wasn't nothing but a captain, then don't tell me I can't walk around with a officer's uniform on."  And so we, so he was in G-2.  He's in intelligence.  And the towns was segregated, so he investigated the Negro stuff.  I used to go with him.  And we go to town and these guys in the Negro town, you have to understand a Army camp, the thousands of soldiers that's in town on payday.  It's just, it was just unreal, with millions of dollars.  And so we go in town and we start seeing these guys that was putting mickies in people's drink to take they money from 'em and prostitutes would set 'em up.  But what they didn't know is a mickey works, it renders you unconscious or you pass out.  But according to your body weight and when was the last time you ate.  So if you don't have a lot of body weight, and you haven't ate, you go--I remember when I was a little boy, the Negroes, when they was going out and drink heavy, not because of no fraud, they'd eat a half a stick of butter to coat they stomachs so they could handle the whiskey.  And so I didn't pay too much attention to it.  So one day I'm with Jim back on campus, on the base.  And he said, "Man, it's a damn shame, man, the amount of black folks that's driving drunk and how many of 'em die.  And they hit this same wall."  So when I was on one Army base, you couldn't get on a bus in Killeen, Texas until all the white folks had got on.  Well, they had a twelve o'clock bed check, so you got--we had eighty-five soldiers, no, we had one hundred ten thousand soldiers.  So you can imagine, all the white folks waiting on the bus to get back.  So we didn't get back.  So the best thing we do is drive, and if we wasn't welcome in that town, we'd go thirty miles away.  So you drinking and you driving, and you know how many black folks died in the [U.S.] military because they couldn't have services.  They couldn't get buses.  They couldn't get this and had to drive.  So one day me and Jim is talking.  So I said, "Jim, it's too many, too many folks," now when--back then, when you died, drunken driving, you didn't get, your family didn't get insurance.  You got a dishonorable discharge, the whole thing.  So I'm sitting there, and I said, Jim, "I'm gonna come by the office and look through some stuff."  I looked through the files, and it was outrageous, man.  So I started snooping around to find out how many white boys in that same spot.  None.  So I couldn't talk to Jim 'cause his head was already set.  He's a party boy.  So I was talking to a friend of mine.  I said, "Man, something's wrong.  Something ain't right."
Story_ID: 560231
Speaker 1: And so I said to Jim Ellis, I said, "I need to borrow your car tonight.  I need to make me a little run," 'cause if I told him what I wanted, he wouldn't let me had it.  I say, "I got a couple little girls, man.  They wanna drink and they say they never been to bed with a soldier.  So give me the keys."  "You got enough money?"  "I'm cool."  So I go in town.  I take Jim's pistol.  He had a bunch of 'em.  So I take his pistol and put it in my pocket, and I go in town, and I go to this Negro bar 'cause you couldn't go to white bars.  So I'm sitting there and I'm talking and what I was gonna do was try to take, order drinks and then had a little pouch I was gonna put it in without wasting it and have it checked to see if they was putting mickies in the drinks.  And before I could do that I start feeling dizzy, and I realize they got me, you know.  And so I'm walking all strange, and I get up, and I said, "That's why all these nigger soldiers is dying, you thugs."  And then the shooting started now.  And the bullet hit the wall and hit me in the head, and I ain't never knew nothing about being shot.  So I'm laying on the floor waiting to die, you know.  And people running out the place and people stepping on me, man, and so I'm laying there hurt.  So I must not be ready to die.  So I get up and run out the place and I get back and my head full of blood and Jim went off.  I told him what happened.  And he went out of his mind.  He said, "They'll pay for this tonight."  I said, "No, man, take me to the hospital.  I need to get my head sewed."  I'll get, and they'll put some stitches in it.  So the next night I go in there and you'd thought somebody came from another planet.  Jim turned that joint out.  He pistol whipped 'em, beat 'em with baseballs, all kind of stuff.  A couple of 'em talked and I say, "Jim, this is no good.  We need to take this evidence back.  We got three years of black soldiers dying."  We carried it back.  They did a investigation and all those folk got paid, all those folk got paid.  Just one--
Speaker 2: Their families got paid.
Speaker 1: One person that had enough sense to say, this ain't niggers drinking.  There's a pattern to this.  Someone who wasn't G-2, who wasn't intelligence.  He was just my friend.  And so, you start seeing things and you start unwinding it.
Story_ID: 560232
Speaker 1: And then when I got out the [U.S.] military, I went to Chicago [Illinois] looking for Jim Ellis.  Now, I never been in a big city.  I didn't know you couldn't go to Chicago--I had a brother living there and didn't have a address or phone.  I just thought, like St. Louis [Missouri].  You go to St. Louis and say, you know, Carbondale [Illinois], anybody seen Mary Jones.  I didn't know you couldn't do that in Chicago.  So I get to Chicago, and I finally find Jim Ellis.  And that's when I start getting into black nightclubs.  And that's where I start learning how to be a comic, not learning how to be funny or swift or clever, but stand there flatfooted and--
Speaker 2: You were also working in the post office at that time?
Speaker 1: At the post office, yeah, and that was fun 'cause you just, you didn't do no work.  You just worked to keep from working, and I'd done that in college [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] too.  And with the college dudes from Michigan, well, we'd race the college dudes from Illinois and Michigan and all that kind of stuff.  And but I had a lot of good friends at the post office, and that's where I'd test out my stuff, you know.  And I just worked three nights a week, Friday, Saturday and Sunday.  And I wasn't funny.  I mean when you--you get there.  Being funny with some soldiers, trust me, but standing flatfooted and standing there talking to people.  And it was, you know, a real small nightclub.  You could get in, beer was thirty-five cents, no charge at the door, and you could get in and stay for three shows.  And that's where I developed three different shows.  They had a guy named Guitar Red, that to this day there's not a guitar player on the planet as good as him.  And they had shake dancer, Liz, the Body Beautiful [ph.].  And, you know, black folk didn't wanna hear what I was saying.  I ain't never used profanity--my second language is profanity.  I never cursed on stage.
Speaker 2: Never did?
Speaker 1: For a reason, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And what was that reason?
Speaker 1: I was born in 1932 and ain't been another cuss word invented since I was a little boy.  So why would I wanna limit myself to something like that.  It had nothing to do with respect for nobody.  America ain't got respect for they self.  Priests ripping off little boys, and then somebody gonna say, cussing is disrespectful.  You got to be out of your mind.  And these the game.  But this is this protocol that they have handed down, this nonsense stuff, you know; don't cuss in front of women and all that bullshit.  Well, if you talking about equal rights, you know, why you wanna put yourself in a position that a man in the office is getting ready to tell a dirty joke, he can't tell it 'cause you there, you putting a strain on him.  And this goes with the territory.  And another law I had, if I didn't walk in that club with a woman, I didn't walk out with one.  That's my job, that's my steel mill.  And I always respected the folks that walked in that was paying my salary.  And so I just laid there and developed my way, not little old stupid jokes, but read the paper and get up and balance the stuff out.  And then a funny thing start happening.  I was at the Esquire [Esquire Show Lounge, Chicago, Illinois] where I was making five dollars a night, fifteen dollars a week, three nights a week.  Then all at once the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] crowd heard about this strange, and then Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], and it was so many white folk lined up at that club, you know, in a all-Negro neighborhood that they had decoy homicide cops that would work overtime to sit there, outside just to make sure didn't nothing happen to none of them white students.
Story_ID: 560233
Speaker 1: All right, so let's go back to where we were.  You are in Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I'm in Chicago, and--
Speaker 1: Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] students standing in line to get into this little, small club [Esquire Show Lounge, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah, because, you know, I was doing satire.  I didn't know.  I was just--and it was only one person that was out there.  That was Lenny Bruce, one of the eighth wonders of the world.  I mean he was--and they killed him.  And his, I mean he would do stuff like--he went to play London Palladium [London, England], and Scotland Yard said, you know, "Everybody think you crazy, but if you say anything about the queen, we shutting you down and throwing you in jail.  We gonna give you a good whooping."  (Unclear) That white boy was coldblooded.  He walks up on the stage, his opening line--place packed.  "Any of y'all out there aware that Queen Elizabeth gave Winston Churchill the claps."  They ran up and shut him down.  But that was Lenny.  And he was the first one that had a Negro musician that played with him.  He wasn't a singer.  He just--and he'd do all the racial stuff, which was brilliant.  He start getting bigger in death than he was in life, and they used Hollywood to shut him down.  Dustin Hoffman, who was--he didn't know, played the Lenny Bruce story ['Lenny'], and when you left there, if you didn't know Lenny, you'd think he was a racist because the stuff he had going with the black guy, the way they wrote it, it was like--and that was, this country's produced three comedic geniuses.  The first one's Mark Twain, and the other two I'm a name, you shouldn't even be able to mention they name within ten years after you mention Mark Twain.  That's far ahead he was.  And Lenny Bruce and Richard Pryor, the three top--two of 'em self-destructed.  Mark Twain, because he was writing, and if he wrote something, nobody--so you could tear it up and rewrite it.  But these folks invented on stage.  So in order to get my genius, you have to get the sawdust that's on the floor.
Story_ID: 560234
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where do you place yourself on that list?
Speaker 2: Nowhere, nowhere, that's like trying to place yourself with God.  Nowhere, nowhere.  And I don't let nobody place me there because if you're a brilliant brain surgeon, and you know what a brilliant surgeon is, and somebody try to lie and make you and you the best, you know, I know where I sit on the thing.  I mean I made it big because they didn't expect Negroes, and the white folks would write articles, "Jesus Christ, he's, he's, wow."  It's like if your daughter or granddaughter became president of Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], they would start talking about how brilliant she is as if though to say, oh, this could a happened a long time ago.  They just wasn't that smart, and I wouldn't let them do that to me at all.  And so when I came through, I was married [to Lillian Smith Gregory].  I didn't fool with white women.  Now, let me tell you why this is important that I'm telling you this.  I'm in the biggest nightclub in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], okay.  My opening act was [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson, second behind her was Cannonball [Cannonball Adderley] and his brother [Nat Adderley], then I came out.  They made so much money there.  So now, I leave, and I'm going to Freddie's [Freddie's Cafe] supper club in Minnesota, Indianapolis--Minneapolis [Minnesota].  So I get there, and this white guy come and pick me up at the airport and he is cussing and mad.  I don't know what's wrong with him.  "Son of a bitch, he don't know me that well."  So I said, "Let's pull over, man, let's have a drink."  He said, "You just left the Crescendo [Los Angeles, California]." Say, "That white thug called me today and said, 'Not only are you gonna make a lot of money with [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory, he don't fool with white women.'"  This is a white man's (unclear) with another white man who he don't even know.  And my thing about, you know, white women, that ain't that I don't fool with white women 'cause of my love for black women.  I'm scared of white women, you know.  I carried a white girl to a movie when I was at SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois], and the whole--see how this chair is moving?  The whole row of seats was shaking like this here because I remember all the stories about, you know, cutting the black man's penis off, cutting his nuts off, stick it in his mouth and all that kind of stuff.  And, and plus, I've always been the type that whatever white folks say is cool.  I did--and that's why I never smoked a reefer in my life.  I smoked cigarettes, four packs a day, drank whiskey, you know, anything he said was, you know, chase booty, whatever he said was okay, was okay.  And anything he said wasn't okay, and so--
Story_ID: 560235
Speaker 1: And then one day when I moved up the ladder, and then I'll go back to Esquire club [Esquire Show Lounge, Chicago, Illinois].  I'm sitting in the--I'm the hottest thing in the country, hottest act, before me, no black comedian was permitted to stand flatfooted and talk to white folks.  You could sing, you could dance, but you couldn't talk, and thanks to Hugh Hefner, it didn't never happen before, okay.  So I'm kicking, man, I'm the hottest thing going.  A white woman's assignment, she comes in from The New York Times to write about this genius.
Speaker 2: What year is this?
Speaker 1: I don't--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I don't remember years.  Early '60s [1960s].  So I get off the stage and I go to the table, give an interview and some white folk coming in for the next show got mad, cussed out everybody and left.  "I told you I didn't want to come here." Say, "That nigger screwing that white woman."  So I carried her to my dressing room.  I said, "I wanna tell you something and this will never happen to me again.  You don't even know me.  You here on an assignment.  You are here making your living interviewing me, and I got to suffer.  I had to lose some customers that's paying to see me because they filthy mentality think me and you are screwing."  And so from that day on, I always had a white boy that traveled and he would sit with 'em.  You ain't messing up my family and my livelihood on your job.  It ain't your fault, but that's how messed up the country is.  So now, I'm at this club and start getting a little feedback, a little feedback.  I read the Chicago Tribune, get on the phone and just talk about how silly it is.
Story_ID: 560236
Speaker 1: And then, now I book the largest Negro nightclub in the world was Herman Roberts [Roberts Show Club] in Chicago [Illinois], brand new.  So it meant it had modern stuff in it, more modern than Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada].  Like if they build a Negro hospital or African American hospital now, it'd be more modern than white hospitals because they have the new technology.  But the next white hospital will top it off.  So I, I'm at Herman's [HistoryMaker Herman Roberts] place, lovely guy, man, lovely.  He just--and I'm kicking, man, I'm kicking, whew, making that twenty-five dollars a night.  Now, I'm married.  My wife [Lillian Smith Gregory] comes into the Esquire club [Esquire Show Lounge, Chicago, Illinois], and I'm on stage.  So they ask me to come over.  Her sister was in from--not her sister, she wasn't talking, about eight of 'em at the table.  One of the sisters came in having a birthday party, and so they said, "Let's go out and hear this new comic everybody's talking about."  So then we talk, and so I say goodbye, and so another sister came in town, and so they came out the next night.  So we sitting down talking, and so I asked her, I say, "Where you from?  You (unclear), yes."  "You in school?"  Said, "No, I work at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]."  I say, "I'm over there every day.  I'm on the track team over there.  I never seen you," you know.  Say, "Well, let's have lunch some time," you know.  So I happen to bump into her on campus.  I might have been walking past her all along, didn't know her.  So we spoke, we had lunch.  So I was telling her about what I was trying to do as a comic, and how hard it was, you know.  And meanwhile I didn't know that a Negro comic didn't work white nightclubs.  I just had certain rules that if I performed in this outfit, I never wore it in the street.  When I walked up there, everything I had on had never been anywhere but in there, and never wore the same suit for the second show.  Everything was pressed.  So I was just telling, I said, "I ain't making no money."  And she don't even know me.  She said, "You need some money?"  I said, "Yeah, I need some money, I always need some money."  And she said, "Well, well, I'll meet you here in the morning around nine o'clock."  She go to the bank and give me three thousand dollars.  I don't think it's that much money in the world.  And I've always kind of wanted to be a little pimp too.  I loved it.  So she didn't see me no more 'til after that ran out.  I was telling all my partners what a fool I ran across.  So I get broke again, and I ask her and she give me like two thousand five hundred dollars.  Then another time twenty--another time I asked her for some money, she say she didn't have no more.  And I went to (unclear), "What do you mean you ain't got no more?"  "I gave it all--." "You that crazy, you give somebody all your money.  You got to be some kind of fool."  So I carried her to the movies, got her pregnant.  And she know I ain't never wanna be married, never wanted no children.  (Unclear).  So I go by to see her, just, I don't know why, just god force, and I go by to say hello, six months, I hadn't seen her in six months.  And she said, "I'm glad you came by.  I was gonna call you tomorrow.  I'm going to Cleveland [Ohio] tonight."  I said, "When you coming--?" She said, "I'm not.  I'm going to Cleveland home for unmarried mothers."  I say, "Why?"  She said, and I come out of one of them homes, you know, if you get a woman pregnant, you marry her, you know.  So I said, "We'll get married, you know."  So we get married, and I take her to St. Louis [Missouri].  She lives with my sister and then the baby's born.
Story_ID: 560237
Speaker 1: Things don't get no worse.  So I said, "Well, you might as well come on up here and starve with--." So she [Gregory's wife, Lillian Smith Gregory] moved up, got her job back at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  So that's all we had was her check, you know, 'cause I ain't never believed in working.  And one day when it scared me, it was like thirty-seven [degrees] below zero.  That was before they had wind chills.  It was just straight.  So I called my friend.  I said, "I think this woman is gonna go to work."  And we lived about one hundred fifty blocks from University of Chicago.  I said, "I think she's gonna go to work, but I'm a ask her do she want me to go with her.  It's so cold.  If she say, yeah, I'm leaving her."  So I said, "Baby, it's so cold out there, baby, come on let me, let me just go stand in the bus with you (unclear) go to work."  Said, "Oh, no, you don't have to do that."  So I had to get some binoculars 'cause I used to get them 'cause that was the opera, you can look at--and so I get on the phone and call my man, and say, "Man, she's over there standing in the bus stop, them nylons," (laughter), "skirt, all them, open toe shoes, she got to be a fool."  And so one day I told her, I said, "I do not want to be married to a working woman.  I don't even date working women, you know."  I don't wanna have nothing to do with a working woman 'cause eight hours, they tired when I see 'em (laughter) and evil, mean, mad.  I'd be too.  You see women at the airport, man, plane, miss the plane, and they be mad.  What do you think they're doing after eight hours?  So I sit down and I talk to her, and I said, "I wanna tell you something, and I don't wanna be married to a working woman."  I said, "So, I need you to start thinking about quitting."  "Well, what are we gonna do?  How we gonna pay the rent?"  "I'm gonna be the biggest thing in the world, baby.  Don't even worry about that."  So I finally convinced her, man, to quit.  I'd just bought me a brand new Jaguar.  She came home, said, "I just decided I'm gonna give 'em my resignation."  I said, "What do you mean?"  "I'm quitting."  "No, I don't mean now.  I mean let's discuss this.  I'm talking about a eighteen month plan.  Are you crazy, woman?  Quit, what? Who gonna feed this baby?  Who gonna--?" She said, "Well, I thought you meant--." "No, baby, I mean just the intent.  Just let me know when you gonna, don't worry about a thing, you know."  And then we would talk.  See, you can talk when you don't get married for love.  Love is scary.  I love you, baby, if I can't have you, ain't nobody gonna have you.  There's, something sound wrong with that.  In between her, and the Civil Rights Movement, I learned it ain't about love, it's can you be loveable?  And when you loveable, I'm safe with you and you safe with me.  This other stuff is, is a game, you know.  And so, so I'm married to a woman don't drink, don't cuss, ain't never drove a car, you know.  And I do all of it, you know.  And so one thing leads to another.  So now I'm down at this--so then I feel so bad, I say to her one day, I said, "You really want this work, huh?  I mean you really want this to work."  So there was a big debate, did I have sex with her the first night I took her out or the second night, and she swear it was the second night.  So after the children got grown, I said, "We gonna let them decide the debate."  I said, "I had sex with your mother the first night, she said the second night.  I want y'all to--." "What difference do it make?" (Laughter) And so, them babies be born.  I don't know how that photographer get in there.  They be talking about paparazzi, look, they get in that maternity ward and take pictures before they wipe all the stuff off the baby.  And then women, they got the little round things they send them babies, Mr. and Mrs. Dick Gregory.  I said, "Baby, do not send my picture out with them little ugly looking things, look like little animals.  Do not send my picture out."  Oh, she got all, (imitates crying), "I can't believe you."  So now the children grown, I find all them pictures in the drawer, and I show 'em to her.  "Ma, you didn't send this to nobody, did you?  Could you, how could you do this?"  I've been trying to tell this woman, these little ugly things, you know.  So it was that type of relationship.  So then I said to her one day, I said, "You really want this to work, don't you?  Okay, well, here's what we do.  I'm a tell you a secret.  If you ever repeat it or ever act like you heard me, then be ready for a fight."
Story_ID: 560238
Speaker 1: I said, there are no black men in America.  It's a game.  I don't care how much money, how little money, how much education, how no education, we're reduced down to boys.  We'll fight for a country, come back, cop will shoot his brother in the back, and he won't get his gun.  He'll go all over the world killing people and can't even pronounce the country you're on.  But when a cop come and shoot your mother and I didn't, I didn't have an example.  I got a ninety-two year old woman in Atlanta [Georgia], they killed, and then went and got this thug out of bed to say he'd bought drugs, and thank god for the black minister and her daughter that said, we know this is lie.  And they worked it and found him.   He (unclear) and held a press conference, and said, "I lied.  I was in bed.  They came by and told me, we in trouble.  We just killed a woman.  And we need you to help us."  And he's the one that said that he had bought drugs.  Now I was with James Byrd's son.  Now, to show you how things have changed, when they killed James Byrd [James Byrd, Jr.] in Texas, before they had identified who the black man is, they had arrested the three white guys.  And when they changed the trial--and I'm against capital punishment under any circumstances, but there was a black man, that was a jury foreman that pronounced, read the verdict.  So now me and Martin Luther King's [Martin Luther King III] with James Byrd's son.  And we talking about going up to demonstrate that they don't electrocute the white guy.  The one white guy turned evidence no he never was threatened, but the other two.  So I asked him, I said, "Talk to me, man, where were you when it happened?"  "I was in the [U.S.] Army or the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps], I was at Camp Lejeune [Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune, Jacksonville, North Carolina] or some place, military training."  And I said, "Then what?"  "Well, they told me and I came home, and went to the funeral."  "Then what'd you do then?"  "I went back."  "And then what?"  "Then I went overseas."  "See combat?"  "Yeah."  I say, "Now, just frame this now.  You a black man.  Your daddy is killed by white racist thugs in America, horribly.  You drop your gun and come back to the funeral, go back, pick it up to kill somebody."  Boys.  That's all we are is boys.  Now, we can play the game.  We can play all the games we wanna play.  And that's why I have to feel so sorry for the black sister 'cause she don't know she married to a boy.  You know, the two most powerful forces in the history of America has always been the black woman and the black church.  Ninety-eight percent--now, the Civil Rights Movement is the greatest movement in the history of planet, including the Jesus Christ movement, in the history of the planet.  What nobody talks about is 98 percent of the people in the forefront of that movement had minister, reverend in front of their name before they had Ph.D.  And that movement was 85 percent women because the men had to work.  The weekends, they'd fill the church.  It was the women that filled them churches up in the daytime.  And so when you stop and think about, you know, they can come in this house right now and arrest all of us--now, they'll be sorry tomorrow.  But they'll do it tonight.  They will do it tonight.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 560239
Speaker 1: And so when you stop and think about what she go through 'cause she think, and I assume the reason we're 4 percent black men, the most feared black man on this planet in history is a black American, male, because he know what he's done to me, and I just keep coming, and I keep coming.  He know all the stuff he stole from me and this scares him, so he reduces it from here to my penis, and I went for it.  And I always thought when I was growing up--and like I said, I wasn't around no white folks 'til I went to SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois], and I was growing up thinking all white boys had little bitty pee wees, and eventually mine would touch the ground.  I realized I was late bloomer, but I wasn't giving up on it, and I got to SIU and the first time I ever been in the bathroom with a white guy.  And we in the showers, man, we're on the team.  I said, wow, man, I saw Leo [Leo Wilson].  I said, "Leo, I gotta call my mama [Lucille Gregory], man.  Do you see that white boy in there?  Man, they made me think all white boys little--Jesus Christ, what a (unclear)."  And so all those myths.  And that, you thinking, if I'm as good as this white boy convince me I am, how come my old lady in divorce court.  What's that about?  And so it's this whole game that they play.  Then they take a Flip Wilson, who black folks and white folks loved, and what did they do.  They gave him a show ['The Flip Wilson Show'], defaming the black woman and the black church.  I'm seventy-five years old.  I ain't never met no thing like that woman he's supposed to be and ain't never met a preacher like Leroy [Reverend Leroy], and yet we thought that was funny, huh?  We thought that was funny.  But could he get on there doing the same thing about the Catholic church and a nun.  It's like the rappers, those gangster rappers, said, "Well, what we doing, we just rapping our--this really happened.  This is experience."  You know how many black folks falling for that crap.  I said, well, when the priest gonna get up and rap about ripping off little boys' booties, huh?  When is the mob gonna get up and do rapping about all the judges and cops that they killed?  Why you got to be the only one controlled by white record companies?  What's this about?  Out of all the brilliant, black music writers, two years ago, the number one song in Hollywood, 'It's Hard Out Here Being a Pimp' ['It's Hard Out Here for a Pimp'].  And I got on the radio the next day and I opened up my song singing, (singing) "It's hard out here being a pedophile priest, especially when all the boys going to the police, now, the priest know he going to the jail.  He gonna be in trouble 'cause the brothers don't use no grease."  Now, let me see if I'm a win.  You know, and it's these games that because we've been messed up from crap passed down from my mama's daddy's, daddy's, daddy and didn't know we been raised by fools.
Story_ID: 560240
Speaker 1: Look in the Bible and see if you see any word pertaining to this, other than wisdom.  So this white boy who controls you, he can't grade wisdom.  If he could, he'd build a pyramid.  So he switch it to intelligence and smart.  He can give you a test on that.  And we don't see through it, well, I don't blame, I can understand that.  But I see through it.  That's why it aggravates me to even discuss certain things with folk.  He even put the game down, and I was born into it, and never had no reason to challenge it.  And so when you stop and think about, you know, that two of the most important things in your life in America is your God and if you're a Christian, your Jesus, and money.  And those two most powerful things, I can't look at and see nobody look like me.  And Jesus Christ ain't nothing but a sex symbol.  Man, Jesus Christ, I ain't gonna say black.  If he was a white boy, short or wide nosed, bumps on his back and a hump in his back and bumps on his face, wouldn't nobody be (unclear) sex symbol.  And if you look at him when he's on the cross, he's still a sex symbol.  He wasn't under no stress.  He looked just as fine then, man, as he did--you know.  These are games they play.  Now, I'm not saying the story ain't true, but don't give me that one--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --because when I'm sitting over here looking at where he was born, there wasn't no white folks.  So, okay, one white boy slipped through.  I can handle that, but now, you gonna give me twelve disciples.  They not just European, they English.  Where'd them names come from in Jerusalem, Peter, Paul, Mary, Joseph, huh, Matthew, except the one that killed Christ.  He a Arab Jew.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Is that scary.
Speaker 2: Judas.
Speaker 1: He a Arab Jew.  The other twelve was white boys.
Story_ID: 560241
Speaker 1: And so I'm saying that, my mother [Lucille Gregory] used to say, "If the white racist police pull you over, behave yourself.  Don't talk too fast and don't talk too slow."  Well, I heard my wife [Lillian Smith Gregory], during the Atlanta child killings [Atlanta Missing and Murdered Children cases; Atlanta Child Murders], saying to my children, "If you see a white man look strange, run."  I said, "Hold, hold, wait a minute, wait, oh, thank god, I'm, no, no, no, no.  Let me tell y'all something.  Don't run from no--I got a lot of white friends that might be coming here to Plymouth [Massachusetts] to see me, and you gonna run from 'em 'cause you--I'd rather see y'all dead than scared."  I said, "Never teach 'em that, never again, okay."  And so you stop--now, my mother said, "The white police, in some perverted way, keeping me alive."  Here's the problem.  I'm driving down the street tonight.  She's a black detective, and you a black detective.  Y'all pull me over.  I got lip for you, "Hey, how come you niggers ain't around with them drug dealers."  But I don't have lip for a white boy.  See how that work, here.  Anytime you teach your child to be polite with filth, you have violated God.  They the scum of the earth.  He as soon kill you as look at you.  But behave, yes, sir, no, sir.  But when you two pull me over, "How come y'all ain't out working with drug, how come y'all."  But mama never told me how to react when two black cops that ain't planning on shooting me in the back of my head pull me over.  And so when you look at that, how it elevates and it's there, and we just--we've covered it up so much.  If you buy a brand new house and it got ten layers of paint on it, and you want to take it to its original, you just don't scrap it.  You'll mess it up.  You gotta take each layer off.  And that's what we have to do now, and then we develop.  You have to take each layer off.  There'll come a day that children will resent their mother and father for going to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  Howard University is named after a white general [Oliver Otis Howard] who became famous for killing Indian [Native American] children and the most prestigious black university in the world is named after that thug.  My god, are we out of our minds.  But that's (unclear) 2007.  We supposed to be sophisticated and still tolerate that filth.  Well, show me a Jew that'll tolerate a Jewish school named after Adolf Hitler because that's been passed down.  And that sickness is there, and somewhere it's gonna reverse.
Story_ID: 560242
Speaker 1: Now, you are becoming worldwide, famous and certainly an icon in this country--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --you are, you're using your familiar face and voice now to begin to address the Civil Rights Movement.  How did you come to that or did you just feel it was a natural transition (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I, no, I have a vested interested.  This is me.  When I bought my first Rolls Royce, I didn't buy it for my family, my children.  (Unclear), they get a Rolls Royce and they won't have it.  I never wanted rights for my children.  I want it for me.  If I get it for me, they have it.  It's theirs to lose.  That's a cop out.  You have never seen another human being on this planet that run around talking about, they want something for they children, huh, 'cause I'm not gonna do it.  Never--have you ever heard people talking about, "Well, well, how come the young folks, how come y'all don't let the young folks in the movement?"  Well, what is that about?  Queen Elizabeth, at the rate her family lives--her mama died at 104, she ain't stepped down and let Prince Charles have it.  That boy will be senile and half dead by the time--but let's look at this young thing.  We'll find a cure for cancer one day.  It won't be through young folks.  All these fine planes and all this war game that's being made up there, young folks.  See, this is a cop out.  And we not even aware of it, you know.  And so go back now and look at Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], Dr. King, when he moved into the movement, he was twenty-six years old, married, a wife and a family.  Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] was thirty-four, and I was thirty-four.  Abernathy [Ralph Abernathy] was damn near ready to get old age pension.  And Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth], he was, damn, he was beyond.  So where did this myth come from of young folks.  That's a myth that we have created.  And then this whole trickery piece, thirty-one years ago--well, it wasn't, it was twenty-something, a white guy came to me.  He said, "I got a white dude here, if you could help him, he gonna be the biggest thing in radio."  So we sit down and talk.  He's talking about who's the number one conservative guy in the big radio, talking about the white guy--what's his name?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Rush Limbaugh.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Rush Limbaugh.
Speaker 2: Rush Limbaugh.  Rush Limbaugh had a black producer for thirty-one years.  He's further left than that.  See, that's the ignorance of white folks and black folks in America.  It's a game they play, huh?  Clarence Thomas was a lieutenant in the Black Panther Party, okay.  And he decided I can go over here and play this game, huh.  And he's old, ugly, wide nosed, thick lip, kinky hair, thick jaws.  He can't be no hit in no black community.  He go over there, he king.  But you got to play the whole game.
Story_ID: 560243
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And isn't it a danger- I was gonna ask, wasn't it a dangerous game.  We saw what happened to King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  We saw what happened to Lenny Bruce.
Speaker 2: Nah.  It don't make any difference--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --if you a boy, you know.  The amount of people that--the dangerous game is for you to send a son or a daughter to Iraq, but that don't count 'cause white folks sanction it.  If white folk don't sanction it, then we, even when we make like we--but there's a universal force that blesses me that I go to University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri], a school I couldn't go to when I graduated [from Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri], couldn't stay in the town at the height of my track career.  And two years ago, they bring me in, they give me a honorary doctor's degree of law.  So I go in, some black guys, head of the, dean of the law school.  So I get up there that day.  It's outside, and they put the hood on me, and I say, "I guess things is changing."  I said, "I never thought I'd see the day I'd let a bunch of old white men with robes on put anything around my neck."  So that night, we at the brother's house.  We kicking back.  It's hard to sell Negro stuff 'cause they so uninformed, you know.  I said, "You know, Clarence Thomas is a double crossing--he'll pay for it, all of 'em pay for it at the end."  They say, "You don't have to tell me."  I said, "No, you don't (unclear)."  He said, "Yes, I do."  I said, "What do you mean?"  He said, "Me and Clarence Thomas was in the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] together.  I'm the one when he derived this plan, he brought it to me, and I read it," (laughter), "and said no way."  So he's on the [U.S.] Supreme Court.  And the brother legitimately, huh.  And Thurgood Marshall was a government agent.  And the only reason I didn't put it in my last book, I had so much dirty stuff in there that white folk were doing, I didn't want them to bring that up to the top.  Now, when it came out, I'm surprised that Juan, [HistoryMaker] Juan Williams, his book on Thurgood Marshall ['Thurgood Marshall: American Revolutionary'], read it.  He talks about Freedom of Information Act [Freedom of Information Act of 1967].  And Thurgood Marshall's family said, well, he just did that to convince Hoover [J. Edgar Hoover] that it wasn't no Communist in the Civil Rights Movement.  How many people died because of those reports you was turning--oh, man, when the history comes out, huh, it is vicious and awful and nasty, okay.
Story_ID: 560244
Speaker 1: I tried to tell Malcolm [Malcolm X].  Malcolm was beyond, I told Malcolm, that's why, Malcolm he, (unclear) some whiskey or something.  I tried to tell him that Alex Haley wasn't no writer.  He came out of naval intelligence, and they setting you up Malcolm.  On page twenty-two of the book, this is Malcolm talking--see, once I'm with you for X amount of years, and then we kill you, nobody assumes that stuff was changed.  On page one hundred twenty-two, they say, I'm the one that told Malcolm, Elijah [Elijah Muhammad] about Malcolm.  I'm the one who told Malcolm about Elijah.  I said, wait a minute.  I go to Elijah.  He's my neighbor around the corner from me, taking the book.  I said, man, "They must be trying to get me hurt."  "Nah, man, don't worry about it."  I said, "Let me tell you something, man, I love Malcolm and I love you.  My relationship with you, I would tell you something on Malcolm before I tell Malcolm something on you, you know."  Now, here's what they did.  They took Alex Haley, who ain't never wrote a newspaper article in his life, hooked him with Malcolm, but Alex got world renowned by the articles he was doing in Playboy magazine, which he wasn't doing 'em.  The senior editor, Murray Fisher, now is renowned.  Now, let's just look at some simple deductions.  'Roots' ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family,' Alex Haley] outsold every book on the planet at the time.  The TV show ['Roots'], the movie 'Malcolm' [sic. 'Malcolm X'].  It's public domain.  If you went to see how much royalties the book, the movie and TV is bringing in last year, it'd be close to $15 million.
Story_ID: 560245
Speaker 1: Don't you remember--see, the one thing I can talk now because the Internet, 'cause see my whole thing is that my truth don't have to be validated by fools' ignorance, and I ain't never cared about it, ain't never tried to prove nothing because I can hang out with the folks who know even if they doing it.  I'm the one that released the pictures with Ron Brown in the bullet, with the bullet in the back of his head.  There never was a plane wreck.  They killed all them people 'cause Ron Brown was gonna come back and Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was going to jail.  And Ron Brown told him, "Before I go to jail, me and my son [Michael A. Brown], I'm taking all y'all down, huh?"  Where'd I get the pictures?  The white folks that did the autopsy, huh, brought 'em back to me.  It hurt me because it show you how free white folks are.  They life and job is on the line, but they said we know one person we can take this to and get, no press would take it.  And so I derived the Armed Force Institute of Pathology [Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Washington, D.C.] did the autopsy.  I went to they headquarters at Walter Reed [Walter Reed Army Medical Center; Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Washington, D.C.], and I could see that they decided they wasn't gonna arrest me.  And so I took the tape, the crime tape that we put around the building.  Said here's the criminal, and ran across 16th Street on Christmas Eve and stopped the flow of traffic, and (laughter) I got arrested.  Now, when you arrested [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory, you got to say why you was in jail.  That's the only way that got out.  And so this has been my life.  You just, you put it out there, and the truth will stand up on its own.
Story_ID: 560246
Speaker 1: There's a white guy asked me, say, "You scared of us killing you?"  I said, "The god I pray to every day, if he can't protect me against thugs and hoodlums like y'all, I'd be the first one to admit that I'm praying to the wrong god and I'd help y'all pull the trigger."  And so, when you look at where this go and my vested interested in it, it's for me.  Let me tell you a sad story, man.  I showed you the story of, as black as I am--now, I don't have to be validated by nobody 'cause I do stuff that black folks don't--just me and my wife [Lillian Smith Gregory] know the stuff I've done.  When I hit big, as long as I scuffled, in every one of my contracts, they said if there's a Negro newspaper--this is back in '61 [1961], if there's a Negro newspaper within a hundred miles of where I'm working, if you advertise in a white paper, you got to advertise in that Negro paper, or you have violated my contract.  Two, when I would hit town, I would go to the Negro barbershop.  And it's easy when you're a hero.  Hey, baby, you--hey, man, my man, hey.  Who's cool in here, So and So.  I said, "Man, I'd like to give you five hundred dollars for you and your wife to come down at the club where I am tonight.  And you the barber."  I said, "Don't act like you don't know me, and tomorrow we'll hook up."  I go and ask them how did you get treated?  Did they treat you like you, did they put over in the corner.  I know they gonna treat you okay if they know you my friend.  I did that all the way around the country.  You know what it's like, man, to be on the top of the world, top of the world, man, bigger than--.  And in Baltimore [Maryland], they come and said, "Would you work the penitentiary?"  I don't know the penitentiary segregated, this whole Baltimore system segregated.  I don't know this.  So I say, "Sure, man.  It'll be great."  So I'm there on a Saturday afternoon.  I'm getting ready to go on, and I said, "How come the black folks are sitting over there off."  He said, "Oh, our systems is segregated."  I said, "I can't work it."  "Well, Mr. Gregory [HistoryMaker Dick Gregory], you have no choice," say, "we've been talking about for a month you coming, and they so excited.  If you don't work, there'd be a riot, and if we integrate it, it'll be a riot."  I say, "Okay, let me handle it."  So I go out, and I said, "I have a dilemma.  I'm living the good life, man, I make more money than I ever made.  I'm happy, I do whatever I wanna do, never have to worry about nothing.  But I came here today, and I didn't know this penitentiary was segregated.  You don't eat together, you don't sleep together, you don't work together.  I don't work segregated.  Your warden have convinced me that if I ask y'all to integrate, there'd be riots and killings, and I don't do the show, it'll be riots and killings.  I'm a compromise.  I'm a count to three and I'm a ask y'all to integrate this building or I'm not gonna work, but I'm a come down.  Give me three to come down and sit on the front row and die with y'all."  And they screamed and hollered and yelled, and they came across and happy and screaming and hollering.  And from then they integrated the whole system.  Nobody have to know that.  That was my life.
Story_ID: 560247
Speaker 1: So I don't wanna hear no black folks, white folks telling me some crap.  I know what I've done and willing to do.  And when you take on this CIA [Central Intelligence Agency], it was me and Mark Lane's book ['Code Name Zorro'; 'Murder in Memphis,' Mark Lane and Dick Gregory] that caused them to have a Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination investigation.  And so when you look at, you know, our heroes like Thurgood Marshall, there will come a day they will not be heroes.  When you look at Alex Haley, now, just use common sense.  When Alex Haley died, do you remember they had to auction off his farm to pay his debt?  Do that sound like anybody that got royalties?  Don't you know if you got a book out there that's selling millions of dollars a--and you owe me some--the dumbest lawyer in the world got enough sense to attach your royalties.  And the sad person, the big loser in all of this was Margaret Walker, the black Ph.D. that's been teaching at Tennessee State [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] for thirty-five years.  She had a Ph.D. when white folk couldn't spell it.  And she'd go in the federal court with the rest of 'em and talk about how much stuff they used out of her book.  'Jubilee' [Margaret Walker], 'Jubilee,' huh, and (unclear) where that punk was born, okay.  They threw her out of court.  You know who they didn't throw out, the guy that wrote 'The African' [Harold Courlander], white boy.  The federal judge made them pay him seven hundred fifty thousand dollars and then chastised 'em, said, "The stuff you took out the book, you didn't even change it."  And John Rawlins [ph.], the Englishman, paid him six hundred thousand dollars 'cause Kunta Kinte came out of his book.  But when it comes to the black woman, huh, but I'm a say this again, with all of that fame and money, how could he lose anything and they had to sell the farm.  So the, the stuff comes through.  All of it will eventually come out--
Story_ID: 560248
Speaker 1: It's Booker T. Washington.  There'll be some days will come that his name will never be able to be on a black or white high school.  I mean, and to show how vicious and racist The New York Times was (laughter), Booker T. Washington talked all that old crazy talk, "Well, we, we don't need to be doctors and lawyers, chemists, we just need to be carpenters."  The New York Times did a front page editorial on how this great Negro, great emancipator, that talks one thing about the plight of the Negro--and they wasn't saying this to help us, but when he comes to New York [New York], he flaunts his white women, New York Times, front page editorial.  Now, let me tell you how he died, man.  A white dude invited him with his conservative, saying what white folks wanna hear self, to come and speak in Upstate New York.  A Negro couldn't stay in a hotel in New York then so he stayed in this white dude's house.  This white boy claim he caught him at three o'clock in the morning, peeping through the keyhole at his wife and beat him so bad, he died two weeks later at Tuskegee, Alabama from that whooping, okay.  Now, all this will come out.  Now, let's look at Tuskegee, and then we'll go back.  When you say the Tuskegee experiment, you think of what?  Syphilis.  See how clever they are.  That was the United States bureau of health [U.S. Public Health Service] experiment that took place at Tuskegee, is that clever?  'Cause if you was in Russia and you heard about this experiment at Tuskegee, you'd say wait a minute.  What they complaining about?  And then when Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] invited me and black folks, when they apologized to the black men that was still alive, I didn't go because I said, what about the black woman, and no black man or black person said, what about the woman?  If you my wife or my girlfriend and they inject syphilis into me, you got it too, huh.  It's different if I knew it.  I didn't know it, and we gonna apologize to the black man and not the black woman.  What kind of game is that?  And we haven't demanded that they do.  And so as long as we keep saying the Tuskegee experiment [Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis in the Negro Male], my little grandchildren hear that, they say, let me look this up, Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  And here's this thug that, that said black folks mentally disqualified to be doctors, not to be doctors, be carpenters and laborers.  Well, let me tell you something, I go to Tuskegee, and I see a picture, man, that just blows me away.  I see a picture of all these Model T Fords [Ford Model T], all these Model T Fords.  I learned a long time ago how to be careful, how you ask questions and respectful.  So I said, I know somebody can explain to me--and I'm outraged, why all these Model T Fords is here when he gave all his money to--Ford to Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and white institutions, and the way he felt about Negroes and Jews, whew, can y'all explain this picture?  And I know you can.  Said, "Yes, George Washington Carver and Henry Ford were very close friends."  And George Washington Carver invited Ford down for a meeting, and said, "Mr. Ford, I'm doing this research on plants."  And he said, and at that time, that's when they made cars, one at a time.  He said, "But if you took this research and got your engineers to study it, and if you went back and put a factory together with the same principle as the way these plants do, you can manufacture--," and that's why all over the world, when they talk about mass production, they call it, the plant.  It come from that black man, George Washington Carver, at a school with another low down thug said that all we qualify to do is--and so when you stop and look at Eli Whitney, how can he invent a cotton gin when he ain't picked no cotton.  He came down to Virginia for a vacation on this rich, white woman's plantation and saw this brother out there with this strange box.  He went back to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and put a patent on it, the proof to it (laughter) in federal court.  It's public domain (laughter).  Well, she sued him (laughter), and it came out as this Negro did this, all of that will.
Story_ID: 560249
Speaker 1: It's safe to say that because you have not feared harm coming to yourself or others trying to discredit you, you've been bold in speaking truth to power--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you hit it, you hit it--
Speaker 1: --all of your life.
Speaker 2: Yes, not all.  I kind of say when I was in Chicago [Illinois], when I was for sale, Daley [Richard J. Daley] wasn't buying, and when he was buying, I wasn't for sale.  You know, you elevate to certain levels.  I mean I never, all my life I hadn't realized if you put a gun and a bible in the same house, the gun cancels the Bible out.  I mean I went with King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], but I didn't believe in that crap.  Man, my hero was John Wayne.  John Wayne say if you right and they wrong and they won't listen, kill 'em, get your guns.  But I went with King because the vested interest.  You know, I don't see John Wayne liberating me, and while we talking about John Wayne, let me tell you something because you gonna see what's gonna happen to these gangster rappers and these thug entertainers.  At one time, the hottest drawing movie star on the planet was Stepin Fetchit, and that was because he had two audiences.  He had the Negroes, 'cause that's all they gave us.  We accepted it with no thought, and the white folks thought that he portrayed us the way we supposed to be portrayed.  He was a handsome, nice looking guy.  He had that black slick head.  That was a rubber piece they put over.  His hair was gorgeous.  He was a pimp.  He had like twenty-four white women hustling for him Hollywood.  The nigger was so big, wouldn't nobody mess with him.  He had fourteen Bentley, way back in the '20s [1920s], but he could roll his eyes and, ah, ah, ah, Mantan Moreland.  Well, he was so big he looked around to his wardrobe boy, says, "How long you been here?"  Say, "I been here six months."  Said, "Well, who told you about the job?"  Said, "They had, somebody at Metro Goldwyn Mayer [Metro Goldwyn Mayer Inc.; Metro Goldwyn Mayer Studios Inc.] said you was looking for a wardrobe boy," and--he said, "What's your name?"  Said, "John Wayne."  He said, "You been here six months, huh?  What you wanna do?"  He said, "I wanna get into movies."  Said, "You having any luck?"  He said, "Nah, I can't--." "Give me a piece of paper and pen."  He wrote a letter to the president of Metro Goldwyn Mayer, and that's how John Wayne--
Speaker 1: Got started.
Speaker 2: Huh, now, meanwhile, Stepin Fetchit's dying in Chicago at the city hospital 'cause he has no money.  John Wayne heard about it and flew in and put him in the most expensive hospital.  He died.  His son, his son, got to looking at them old movies that his daddy made, got drunk, got in the car and drove 'til he hit a tree and committed suicide.  That's gonna happen to these gangster rappers' children and grandchildren when they listen to that filth.  It's okay now, but when you take it out of context, it won't be okay, and that's the price.
Story_ID: 560250
Speaker 1: Let's go and recount, because you've been out on albums and books and documentaries and a whole host of media, let's go in your--through your albums.  'In Living Black and White' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, first let me say this here--
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: --I was the first talk record to sell over a million, legitimately, but I mean, you know, Redd Foxx sold millions, but that was under the cover because of the type of stuff he had in it, but he was--but I was the first legitimate, recognized to sell over a million--
Speaker 1: To go over 1 million.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right, 'In Living Black and White,' what inspired you to do that?
Speaker 2: I don't even remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, how about 'East and West'?
Speaker 2: Well, that was just because I was, the best, the number one nightclub in New York [New York], and the number one nightclub in California was the hungry i [San Francisco, California], and I just named it 'East and West,' and I think the cover, I was on one of them trolley cars.  That's all.
Speaker 1: 'Dick Gregory Talks Turkey'?
Speaker 2: Just a conversation of turkey, man, you know, talk turkey to mean truth.
Speaker 1: All right, 'The Two Sides of Dick Gregory'?
Speaker 2: That was serious and funny.  Here's what this is, let me tell you about this here.  Here's what this is, let me tell you about this.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'Dick Gregory Running for President'?
Speaker 2: That was a bootleg, you mean the record?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That was a bootleg record that white companies put out, but they was giving me PR [public relations], I didn't say nothing about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'So You See, We All Have Problems,' now you got serious.
Speaker 2: That was the saying, that's when I was talking about Frankenstein, where they took a dead man and took him out the ground and took him to the lab and ran all kind of juice through him, and he backed up on them and burnt the lab down and killed them all.  And I said, you took us over there in Africa dead and brought us over here and made a monster out of me; and let me tell you the horrible thing about Frankenstein.  I went to the movie and I was scared of Frankenstein who was the monster [sic.], but I was a grown man until I realized, you know who Frankenstein was scared of?
Speaker 1: Who?
Speaker 2: The mad scientist, Bela Lugosi [sic.], and I didn't have enough sense to be scared of who the monster is scared of.  Man, if I'm scared of the monster, and there's somebody who the monster is scared, man, I better get out of here.  And that's how I developed that.  One day, you white folk gonna be the Indians [Native American] and you gonna be the monster 'cause it travels.  It goes from one--
Speaker 1: Cycle to cycle.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 560251
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let me tell you about perception, perception, perception.
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: I wanna ask her a question, just, not--I'm on camera, but you don't have to be.  You got $10 million sitting there and if you can name two African Americans that have ran for president of the United States recently, you get the $10 million.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Fulani [Lenora Fulani].
Speaker 1: Fulani.  Okay.  You're looking at the only African American that ever ran for president in the history of America.  They ran in the primary.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Um-hm, well I knew you ran for president, 'cause I knew you ran for mayor and for president, but I'll let you ahead (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But see, but see, no, I say that to say, (unclear) I just wanna do that to say perception, huh.  They ran in the primary.  They never ran for president, but they put that out there because it helps us on a worldwide--the biggest benefit of Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] is the United States government that can convince the whole world, see how wonderful Negroes have it in America.  And they got them believing he's running.  While we doing this, here's what we missed.  Daddy Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] was president for four years.  And then Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] came in for eight.  Eight and four is twelve.  Then baby Bush [President George Walker Bush] came in for eight--and I'll explain that later, and that's twenty.  If Hillary [Hillary Rodham Clinton] win, that's eight, that's damn near thirty years, two families controlled this country, and we so ignorant, black folk, we don't even see a dynasty.  We don't even see a con game.  You Republican, I'm Democrat.  You liberal, I'm conservative, and they have ran the greatest democracy of independent, two families (laughter), thirty years if she wins.  Now, that's how, that's how you put Americans to sleep, and that's the whole game, you know.  And my right to vote, my right to elect don't mean nothing if I don't have the right to select, huh.  It's a game they play.
Story_ID: 560252
Speaker 1: And so when we sit here and talk about black men in jail, that's a lie.  You ever been to a concert lately or--you see how many black men at the concert.  And they talking about black women, if the black man in the jail, he gay.  That's some ol' ugly sister that wouldn't have a man if she was the only woman on the planet.  That's a game.  But once you buy into that--now, here's what we need to talk about, Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]--if there could be anybody on the planet more eviler than the devil, it's him.  That's why you know all black folk going to hell.  Six hundred and fifty thousand black men went to jail under his watch, huh, which brought the total to 1.5 million.  South Africa never had that many black men in jail.  Can you believe how un- how filthy black folks hearts are and they don't know it.  They don't know it.  I mean that's scary.  Clinton wiped out welfare and didn't give a replacement and gave Lockheed [Lockheed Martin] a hundred, billion dollar contract to train welfare mothers.  Now, before the Internet, I couldn't have said that 'cause everybody would say that's impossible.  And I don't know of no black person on the planet can come somewhere in America in a black neighborhood and outdraw Clinton (laughter).  And so when you stop and look at this whole jail thing.  Let's say for simple reasons, between Washington, D.C., Richmond [Virginia] and Baltimore [Maryland].  Let's say ten thousand black, predominantly men go to jail every year, just for mathematical purposes.  Now, where's the jail located?  In rural white America.  Where's all the jobs left?  Rural white America.  So if it wasn't for that game, them white folks would a been revolted.  They build a $140 million jail.  That mean it takes $200 million a year to run it.  So when they got all them Negroes down there in jail, where you think they buy the bread from?  The city?  Or you think them people--where you think the socks come from?  Where you think the shoes from?  Where you think all the services?  Where you think the doctors that service them?  You think they send up to the large city?  So not only do you take my pain and put white folks to work, but what's worse than that, ten thousand, just a round number.  So in ten years, that's what? A hundred thousand.  Every ten years don't they have a census?  And them Negroes get counted with them rural white folks.  So that takes a hundred thousand population from the urban city, and it waters down our Congress folks, huh.  And we don't even see that.  So now, they get X amount of [U.S.] Congress, plus some black folks, they get, the school money is based on that, health money's based on that, mental health, services is based on that.  They get it down there, and I lose it up here, and we ain't even dealing with that because all you got to do is say, look, everybody that go to jail from Washington, D.C. that was registered here, when you have the census count, they have to be counted here.  That solves that, it solves that.  And it solves that, and then we start working on, but wait a minute, if we create the jail population, then we need to create some jobs for the folks that's back here, hm.  So let us start making some bread.  Let us start getting some contracts to service.  We aren't because we so busy being ashamed.
Story_ID: 560253
Speaker 1: I went to Michigan, University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  I just went there 'cause of a black brother, friend of mine.  I get there.  I'm the morning, the breakfast speaker, the luncheon speaker and the evening we on a panel.  And the place is packed, and they was paying, heavy money.  The title was Urban Violence.  I say, "First before I say anything, let me say that Brother Love [ph.] over there, you the only reason I'm here, after I found out how nasty this was."  I say, "Now, I'm a excuse you young white folks, but you old black folks who like to talk about urban violence is me.  Have y'all ever heard of the St. Valentine's Day Massacre, you ever heard of the mob?  Were they located in rural areas or was they located in urban America?  Every major urban city.  They would kill cops, judges and anybody who got in they way, and now, all at once, y'all are stupid enough to come here and wanna reduce it down 'cause Negroes will let you, to urban violence is me."  My god, did you ever read the book or see the movie, the 'Gangs of New York' when the Irish went crazy, and they went up to a hundred--they was mad at Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln].  "We don't wanna lose our lives, to free some niggers," and they went up to Harlem [New York, New York] that night and lynched twenty-nine black folks.  Now, regardless of what you say I'm doing in the ghetto, I ain't never went in a white suburban neighborhood and lynched white folks.  So what's this game about?  So when they called Abraham Lincoln, the governor.  They says, "You got to send--." Now, they wasn't talking to protect the Negroes.  They talking about protect New York [New York], "You got to send the [U.S.] Army in here and the [U.S.] Navy."  You know what Lincoln told 'em?  "We can't.  Yesterday, was the Battle of Gettysburg.  We've just finished counting our dead." Said, "Mr. President, I don't care about your dead.  If you don't send 'em, you can write New York City off the list of American cities."  And had he not sent in the Army with they wounds and all and the Navy to sit out there and bombard those Irish, New York wouldn't exist.  And now they convince black folks that I produce the most trifling little things in the history of the planet.  And we fall for that.  That's the games they play.
Story_ID: 560254
Speaker 1: And you're still speaking to power after all of the, these years (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, we--I mean knowledge is just--I mean 98 percent of my audience is white folks.  And the white folks will turn this around.  You see the worse thing that ever happened in the history of this country pertaining to white folks was the 1968 election in Chicago [Illinois], 'cause that was the first time in the history of America, white folks saw white folk getting beat.  They never saw that.  See, if you go to the movies, they don't have beatings in movies.  They have whooping, a fight, a fight, not a whooping, not a beating, just a fight.  And that's half sexy and half (unclear), but not--and they saw that.  And then a funny thing happened.  If you go back to the Depression [Great Depression], the one person that never had to worry about getting their raises was cops.  After 1968, cops had to invent a new word called blue flu.  They had to fake like they had flu to take out in order to get raises.  And if you look at 1968, before that, the number one bumper sticker in America was support your local police.  After 1968, them bumper sticker started disappeared, you know.  The white boys were becoming the new nigger and the new Indian [Native American] at the same time.
Story_ID: 560255
Speaker 1: Let me just ask you about some of your books.  If we can begin with something that, it may not be your best seller, but it's certainly your most well known, 'Nigger' [Dick Gregory].
Speaker 2: It's a best, 7 million copies, sells 1.5 million copies every year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's one of the few books that came out in 1961 [sic. 1964], that you can go to the bookstore today and order it.  And if they don't have it there, they'll have it there in two days, you know.  It--now, it's never been on The New York Times bestselling list (laughter).  Hey, that's scary.
Speaker 1: But you had a message that resounded with a number of people in that book
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --still is, to this day.
Speaker 2: What was that message?
Speaker 1: That message, that we're all niggers to a large extent (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, nah, let me tell you what that was about.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I decided, you see, Doubleday [sic.] didn't understand my genius.  They just thought they was dealing with another comic and another entertainer.  So they gave me a multimillion dollar contract, a million in advance to do a book.  But they wanted a humor book.  They wanted the white folks to buy this book and read about this humor.  So my contract didn't say that.  So I did a book on black folks, but I didn't want a black writer because I didn't write this book for black folks.  I wrote it for white folks, to find out what we go through, but I didn't wanna write it, in the only way I know how to write in that heavy black.  So I looked around to find a white guy with The New York Times, and I said, "I need you to--and here's what I'll do.  I'll give you 50 percent."  Now, nobody cuts a book deal and give any, "I'll give you 50 percent of the upfront, and 50 percent of the royalties.  I need you to travel with me, and I need you to write a black man's word, but I want 'em to be white so white folks will understand."
Story_ID: 560256
Speaker 1: Let me just back up one minute.  Now, I didn't know this at the time, that I know now.  The two most important books out here, that's the cause of the end of slavery, it wasn't [President] Abraham Lincoln nothing.  It was Mark Twain's book 'Tom Sawyer' [sic. 'The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn'] and Harriet Beecher Stowe's books, 'Uncle Tom' ['Uncle Tom's Cabin'].  Now, remember, Harriet Beecher Stowe, she was writing books for white folks.  Black folks wasn't buying no books.  Ninety percent of white folks had never owned no slaves.  They didn't know what slaves went through until she read the experience of Uncle Tom, and it changed, that book.  Now, go back to Mark Twain, and his genius is--Mark Twain was born on Halley's Comet.  Halley's Comet comes every seventy-five years.  When Halley's Comet came back in seventy-five years, he died on Halley's Comet.  That's how special.  Mark Twain wrote stuff about Christianity that can't be released 'til five hundred years after he dead 'cause he said these ignorant Christians will dig my bones up and stomp 'em cause one day you gonna have to ask yourself a simple question.  How come there're no atheists on death row (laughter).  What is it about people that don't believe in God, don't kill folks?  But these are scary things that don't nobody wanna, wanna talk about.  So if you go back, you have to drift all the way back to that era.  See Mark Twain's claim to fame is he was the first white writer that refused to write in Old English.  And if you go back and look at all his books, he said, "I'm writing in midwestern America, poor white boy dialogue 'cause that's who I am, poor white boy dialogue."  And so if you go back then, black men didn't have no names other than take the master's name, nigger.  "Come here, nigger."  And if thirty of us over here, all of us looked up and came 'cause you was talking to me and I didn't know it, you might kill me.  So here's what Mark Twain did.  He gave nigger a name, huh, that never had.  Here's, this nigger is named Jim, huh.  And that had never happened before.  Out of all the slaves, he takes one and give him a name.  Here's Nigger Jim.  Now, you know, white folk gonna buy it, Nigger Jim.  And if you go back and read that, which most black folks haven't, you see that when Jim, Nigger Jim was talking to the white boy, they wasn't talking as master to slave.  They was just kicking back.  It's the first time, it was black and white had a human conversation.  That's how clever he was.  Jim wasn't out there--they was fishing, he wasn't taking that white boy's fish hook and putting the bait on it and we catch a fish, clean it and cook 'em.  They sitting there as two--it had never happened before, in the history of America.
Story_ID: 560257
Speaker 1: Now, I didn't know this at the time.  I said, wait a minute, and I had no intentions of naming the book 'Nigger' [Dick Gregory].  So we go to Doubleday [sic.] and, man, they're outraged.  They are outraged.  They, their money, they want--.  So they said, "Okay, Mr. Gregory [HistoryMaker Dick Gregory], here's what we do.  We'll let you think about it over the weekend and just, we'll accept the book, but name it something humorous."  And what did they want?  They wanted this book to be in the windows and white folk come by and see it and buy it and not know.  So I got home and I said to Lil [Gregory's wife, Lillian Smith Gregory], "I'm not gonna trick white folks for 'em."  I said, "I'm a name it 'Nigger'."  I say, "I'm a take this nigger snake out the closet and defang it."  That's what that was about, defanging, the most well used word in America, but not public.  I'm a bring it out in public and defang it.  And all this debate going on about nigger now, that's an insult, and I mean--I'm amazed at how stupid and ignorant black folks are that I didn't know being black.  But can you imagine, see, first the N word, can imagine there's not one Negro that have done the research to see where it came from.  Where did the word come from, huh?  Who invented it?  White folks.  Why?  After the O.J. Simpson trial.  See, white folks really believe O.J. Simpson did that.  Now, let me just run this down and then we'll come back.  O.J. Simpson's mama and daddy is so filthy and disgraceful--not his daddy, Nicole Simpson [Nicole Brown Simpson].  They asked, the press asked Nicole Simpson's mother [Juditha Anne Brown], "When was the last time you talked to her daughter last night?"  She said, "About eleven o'clock."  He says, "Oh, how can you be so precise on the time?"  Said, "Well, me and my husband [Louis Brown] was eating in a restaurant a hour and a half from the house.  So we left there at 9:30.  We couldn't a got back here before eleven."  That don't fit because the timeline don't work.  Do you know to this day, none of the top researchers have been able to get those phone records?  They're under lock and key, under national security now in Dallas, Texas, okay.  The second thing is the Russian spy satellite just happened to been over California and filmed the whole murder, not intentionally.  They was just there.  I'm with a KGB whose brother, guy brother was second in command at KGB.  He say, "I watched it."  That's the highest Russian population in America is Seattle [Washington].  He told me, he said, "You know, we turned these film over to the state department [U.S. Department of State].  We haven't heard from 'em yet."  If you remember, O.J.'s thing, they said Nicole Simpson put up a hell of a fight 'cause she had skin under her fingernails.  When they checked, the skin was white and the blood wasn't O.J.'s.  Do you know that never was entered in the trial?  Now, because of Mark Fuhrman and the nigger, nigger, nigger, nigger, white folks believed that it was that word that swayed the jury to believe that the LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department] set him up.  So they went out to say, let's change the word.
Story_ID: 560258
Speaker 1: Now, let me tell you about this here.  And I don't even debate with black folk.  I know they crazy and ignorant and just, just, you know.  If I get on TV today and say, "All you hoes out there stand up," and you get upset, you a whore; I didn't call your name.  If I, I tell black folks, all you niggers, if you get mad about that, and I say all you billionaires, how you gonna--you won't get mad about that.  How you gonna get mad 'cause somebody call you a nigger but don't get mad 'cause somebody called you a billionaire.  You could never be a nigger, but you think you a nigger, but you were never a billionaire.  And so when you stop and think about, can you imagine Jews look up one day and decent Germans feel so bad about what Hitler [Adolf Hitler] and them Nazis did to the Jews.  They changed the word from swastika to the S word, and the Jews go along with it and concentration camps to the C word, hm?  Can you imagine when the Jews got upset with Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], he said, what?  Hymietown.
Speaker 2: Hymietown.
Speaker 1: And if you ask them today what he said, they would tell you he said, what?  Hymietown.  They won't say the H word, will they?  Ain't that funny, ain't that funny?  They'll tell you what Jesse said, and I'm not saying (unclear).  If someone called a Jew a Jew bastard, they wouldn't get on TV and say he called me JB, huh.  But we are sucker enough to go for that because we crazy.  We unintelligent, we love white folks more than we love ourselves, and whatever, when that little boy, Mark Richards [sic. Michael Richards], said nigger at the Laugh Factory [Los Angeles, California], and he said, "Nigger, nigger, nigger, nigger, I'll stick this fork up your butt."  That was a gay thing, man.  Out of all the things the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] has ever done, they never cut a black man's dick off and stuck it up his butt; they stick it in his mouth.  Evidently, this boy had a bad experience, like I have a bad experience with a white woman today and I get up on stage tonight and start lambasting white folks.  It ain't got nothing to do with my hatred for white folks.  And I just got double--he got double crossed by a brother.  Now, shut that off for a minute and I'll tell you something.
Story_ID: 560259
Speaker 1: The baddest dude in the Civil Rights Movement, nasty filthy.  It wasn't Bull Connor or Sheriff Clark [Jim Clark].  It was a white boy named Al Lingo [Albert J. Lingo], head of the Alabama state troopers [Alabama Department of Public Safety].  He'd ride (unclear) horse with a whip.  He'd ride that little thing and whoop us with that whip, man.  Brothers see him and run.  So we waiting on Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] to sign an executive order at twelve noon to federalize the Alabama National Guard, federalize 'em 'cause the state had brought 'em out to keep us from going across the street to the restaurant that was downstairs under Shelton's [Robert Shelton], head of the Klan's [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] headquarters.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: He did it under false pretense that he would, we would die, create so much violence.  So we waiting on Kennedy to sign the executive order at twelve noon.  So I'm standing here, and King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] here.  So Al Lingo looked at him and said, "Nigger, when that nigger loving president sign that executive order, and you walk across this line, I'll blow your nigger brains out."  Now, am I understanding that America done tricked us and we so stupid, I'm supposed to repeat this today and say he said to King, "N word, when that N word loving president sign that executive order and you walk across this room, I'm a blow your N word brains out."  The word is nigger, nigger, nigger, nigger, nigger.  And you might as well get over it because it's some folks out here like me that ain't gonna let y'all hide it, ain't gonna let white folks sit here and reframe history because what day will they change lynching to the L word because they uncomfortable.  And ain't it funny when Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and everybody flew out there and hugged this white boy and said, "We not gonna use the word."  Well, wait a minute, can white folks, can black folks create a situation where you volunteer.  How come it got to be this white boy that all at once you say you ain't gonna say the word.  When Richard Pryor came back from Africa, and I was with him, and he said, "Man, I learned so much over there, man.  I ain't never gonna use the word, nigger."  I said, "Man, you can use the word nigger.  I can never be a nigger.  When you gonna stop calling my sister a black bitch, huh?"  That's the framing.  And so when you stop and think about how they can run and put they stuff down, but it's the same thing with Jesus Christ (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 560260
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let me interrupt you and ask you this question.  NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] recently buried--
Speaker 2: They fools.  They should have buried the N word.  They fools.  Is that the same NAACP that gave the little guy [R. Kelly] with the videotape of him peeing on a fourteen year old girl, gave him an Image Award [NAACP Image Award]?  Give me a break, huh.  Is that the NAACP you talking about.  And look, the NAACP made me.  We wouldn't be where we are today, and you think about them, NAACP, ninety-eight years ago.  It's a game they play, huh?  Where do they get they contributions from, huh?  Who, who send, who pays--
Speaker 1: Corporate America.
Speaker 2: Well, then how good they feel about you gonna bury--they should have buried the N word, huh.  This is a game.  Let me tell you something, as long as the gays hid in the closet, right, they could never be school teachers, huh, they could never be cops (laughter).  They could never be lifeguards.  When they came out of the closet, huh, and say, I'm gay whether you like it or not; live with it, huh?  And now you mess with one of 'em or call him a homosexual, now you got a lawsuit.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But now they want me to hide the whole--and it's just a, it's not gonna work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's gonna make a whole lot of black folks feel good for a few minutes.
Story_ID: 560261
Speaker 1: 'Children of the Struggle,' one of your documentaries [sic.], tell us the story you were trying to get across to America.
Speaker 2: Well, there was a lot of children out here, as evidence with Birmingham [Alabama], but it happened all over.  You see, if I'm driving down the street tonight on the highway and I see a car flip over with some white men in it, when I jump and run to that car and try to turn it over, it don't make no difference if they Ku Klux Klan [KKK] or citizens (unclear) nature under God, that's how you react when you in a live situation and so the white folks that had never thought about how black folks was treated.  Those pictures, man, of those dogs and the fire hoses, just shocked, shocked America, and what helped was the Cold War 'cause Russia could use that as propaganda, but even black folks.  We had black folks living in New York [New York] and Chicago [Illinois], see stuff like that before and so it just, that, that whole thing of the children of the--we used to slip--and when I say children, I'm talking about Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] and Rap [H. Rap Brown; Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin].  They wasn't nothing but little punks, man.  When we went into Mississippi, they came to me and they said, "Greg [HistoryMaker Dick Gregory], we got to ask you something, man."  Said, "You gotta kind of tone your stuff down or we have to ask you, don't come back."  Who would ever believe them little punks would end up as radical as they were.  But the police chief and the sheriff say, "You rich, nigger bastard."  "Your mama's a rich nigger bastard."  I say, "I tell you what you do."  Matter of fact, I showed you that in a book somebody just wrote not too long ago about my reaction in Mississippi.  I told the sheriff, I say, "I tell you what you do.  You go to Chicago and go through my mansion and come back and go through yours and you'll see who the nigger is," you know.  And that was just my attitude.  If you gonna die, let's die, let's go.  And at nighttime we had a team of young folks that would go and slip into the undertaker at night, the Negro undertaker, because what they would do, they would kill black folks and bring 'em to the Negro undertaker who was scared and make him bury 'em.  So we had to go and count and find out how many folks was there, and those were young folks that was doing that.  And it was the young folks that chastised the police 'cause the black folks, even when they wanted, they wanted to do it in a box, a certain way.  And they were there, man, well, they--now, in, when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] got killed, what's that little thug group, groups, the gangs there, the names were the--those were government provocateurs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You see, here's what happened there, and then we'll go back.
Story_ID: 560262
Speaker 1: I'm getting ready to ask you a question about that anyway, 'Murder in Memphis' ['Code Name Zorro'; 'Murder in Memphis,' Mark Lane and Dick Gregory], the book that you did--
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah--
Speaker 1: --with Mark Lane?
Speaker 2: --but before that let's--
Speaker 1: Oh, this--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's good.  That's 'Murder in Memphis,' that's good.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But before that let's go to when Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] called my house--
Speaker 1: Okay, Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy]--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: --or the president?
Speaker 2: JFK.
Speaker 1: JFK.
Speaker 2: Called my house and asked me don't go into Birmingham [Alabama] tomorrow.  I wasn't there.  I was out in the street getting drunk with my partners, man.  I get home at five o'clock in the morning, and my old lady [Gregory's wife, Lillian Smith Gregory] mad.  She ain't never raised her voice at me.  "You gonna call the president back.  He's called here twelve times."  "Baby, please.  Okay, I'll call him."  And that's when he said, "Please, Dick [HistoryMaker Dick Gregory], don't go to Birmingham today 'cause Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is wrong."  I said, "As wrong as he is and as right as you are, I would die for him.  I wouldn't die for you.  I'll be there."  Now, what he meant by that was two things.  One, because of my popularity around the world as an entertainer and the respect I had, that I was the only one could force him to send in the National Guard.  Now, here's the reason he didn't wanna send in the National Guard, and this is when I really--I've always had respect for King but it went up 10 billion times.  Kennedy had made a deal with Alabama, George Wallace and the City of Birmingham to give the State of Alabama $90 million, the City of Birmingham, $60 million and what they had to do was put legislation through that no police chief in a city with a population over so and so can be a police chief without taking a civil service test.  Well, Bull Connor couldn't read or write.  So that was the clever way, and plus, he wouldn't want nobody to know around the world he couldn't read or write.  That was the clever way.  That was a done deal.  That was gonna happen in nine days.  Some way King found out about it and jumped 'em, and thank god he did because that's what switched that whole, that whole piece around.  And so that's why they were not wanting him to go.  And that's why they called that a double cross, but it was just clever war strategy.  And it was the people physically looking at what they were doing.  Now, I go to jail the first day with 'em.  And I get in jail.  They had like three thousand five hundred people there.  When three thousand five hundred people go to jail, we control the jail.  Man, we were sitting there laughing and talking and having fun and demanding they--and the youngsters wouldn't let 'em close the door.  And so they went and got Bull Connor, and Bull Connor ran back there.  And I opened up that door and jumped out on him and the only thing that I'm alive now 'cause when he knocked me unconscious I fell back in the door.  But I put my arm up, hoping he would break my arm with the baseball bat, and he hit me in my head.  And it was that--'cause I spit in his face, looking for a whooping 'cause when you whoop Dick Gregory, then the president's forced to send in the [U.S.] Army.  And that's what that was about.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So you just had clever things you was doing, and what have you, and that day, that famous picture of me sitting there with my arm in a sling and the whole bit, that's what forced them to send in the [U.S.] military.  And they was just outraged 'cause they didn't wanna alienate the South, all them southerners control powerful committees and all of that.
Story_ID: 560263
Speaker 1: So they was planning--when Medgar Evers was killed, I knew I was gonna die that night 'cause I could see it on they face, the little smirk, "Hey, Mr. Gregory [HistoryMaker Dick Gregory]," so I told Medgar, I said, "I think they gonna hit us tonight," man, and a funny thing happened, man.  The church was packed.  It was hot.  They said, "Your wife [Lillian Smith Gregory] need you to call home immediately."  I said, "I can't leave.  I got to watch this mess that's going on here."  He said, "Oh, it's very important.  I think your son is sick or something."  I said, "Well, she know what to do."  He said, "Nah, nah, your son's dead."  I said, "Ain't nothing I can do about that, man.  This is--."  Now, my son died and saved my life 'cause I knew--see, you couldn't stay in hotels.  They was gonna ambush us going to his house, but my plane was late getting there, and I didn't get to take my luggage to his house.  So when I get ready to go to Memphis [Tennessee] to get that late plane out, I didn't have to worry about going by his house.  I hugged him at the airport and said, "Well, I guess you have to take this hit by yourself, but let me just tell you something, brother.  It would a been a pleasure to die with you."  This man has not got his just due.  But who cares?  He will.  Nobody in this movement had to deal with what he had to deal with every day with them heathens down there.  And, and so the reason they just prosecuting De La Beckwith [Byron De La Beckwith] just recently, out of all the places in the planet to build a new post office, Kennedy bought his land to build a new post office on.  And that's where he got the money to hire the lawyers to defend him.  So it gets vicious and nasty, you know.
Story_ID: 560264
Speaker 1: How about 'Murder in Memphis' ['Code Name Zorro'; 'Murder in Memphis,' Mark Lane and Dick Gregory]? You and Mark Lane had a very close relationship (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah.  We kind of knew that the government put the hit down, but we decided to--see, it was first named, 'Code Name Zorro.'  We had enough evidence to know that Hoover [J. Edgar Hoover] and the government did it, but we didn't have the hard facts.  So when we got the hard facts, on (unclear), we came out with 'Murder in Memphis.'  That's just, 'Code Name Zorro' 'cause that was King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] code name, in the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] files.  So whenever they said, Zorro, they was talking about King.  So what we were gonna do was put the book out to force--we also, we didn't care nothing about Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], but to get $5 million to have an investigation, that racist [U.S.] Senate and [U.S.] Congress wasn't gonna put up that.  So that's why we hooked it together and calling it Kennedy-King assassination investigation--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and they had a chance to go through.  Well, here's what happened, Raoul, one of the three tramps that was on viaduct shooting at Kennedy, and, man, it was about ten or twelve people was killed that day, about thirty some injured.  But that's what you can do when you control the press.  They was shooting, the manholes was opening up, and they was coming up with--now, here's the interesting thing about this case.  Kennedy turned down Elm Street--that's where he was shot.  But Kennedy's procession was not due to go down Elm Street until thirty minutes before it was ordered to.  So how did Lee Harvey Oswald know six weeks in advance to get a job at the book depository on Elm Street?  So those are just--but you start off with the premise that we know the government.  We look at this is a government hit.  Now, we got to sit and convince my grandmother.  And so that's what we set out to do.  So going in, doing the investigation we knew Kennedy was shot--I mean King was shot from the bottom down, not up because if you saw Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] and everybody pointing up, that famous picture.  Well, remember the guy leaning over King was a undercover black cop with the Memphis Police Department, okay.  He's the one that got everybody pointing up because if a shot come down in this house now, what all of us gonna do?  Hit the floor, right?  Ain't nobody gonna be standing up pointing to the--that was to make everybody think it came from the second floor.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well, a very--two interesting things happened that night.  And then you got to fast forward and go up to three years ago.  Back then in 1968, ol' redneck, nigger hating, fire captain across the street from the Lorraine hotel [Lorraine Motel, Memphis, Tennessee], fire station two, sent all the black firemen on another assignment, out the neighborhood.  Now, he's--old man, arthritis, asthma, bad heart, getting ready to die so he wanna get on the (unclear) to Jesus.  Christians are beautiful when they get old.  So he came in and testified for us that that day, some government agents came in the fire station, said, "How'd you know?"  "They showed us the credentials, and said, 'We'd like to go up to the top floor and run surveillance on the Lorraine hotel.'"  They asked him on the stand, said, "What'd you do?"  Said, "We let 'em in."  Said, "Well, what else?"  Said, "Well, I led 'em upstairs to the roof." Said "Did they have any equipment?"  Said, "Well, they had canisters, some of 'em look like it had film in it; some looked like it could a been a rifle."  And he said, "And then what happened?"  Said, "Well, after King was shot, they left," you know.
Story_ID: 560265
Speaker 1: Well, now, when the shot rang out, a cab driver, Phillips [ph.], we call him, cab driver fifty-eight, he heard a noise, but he didn't know what had happened.  So he got out of his cab and he saw this white guy jumping over this concrete fence about three inches, three feet.  So he didn't know what happened.  So he followed him up to the corner and noticed he turned left and got in a Memphis police cruiser.  Well, all at once, now we know King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is shot, King is dead, and the press is there and the police is there, and he's telling 'em what he saw.  Four hours later he dead, say he committed suicide.  They say the woman in the Lorraine hotel [Lorraine Motel, Memphis, Tennessee] on the switchboard, when she found out King was, she committed--look if you ever been in a hotel, the switchboard don't know what go on.  They isolated from--they killed her so couldn't no calls go out, okay.  Now, here's the story, whenever we went into the South, we didn't stay in black hotels.  We stayed in white hotels, and the reason was, most of the local people was scared to stay in white hotels 'cause of they jobs.  So when we came in, we killed two birds with one stone.  We didn't get to demonstrate, but the public accommodation bill was there.  We stayed in white hotels.  King always stayed at the Holiday Inn.  And the ol' people come, then you integrated and you'd make your dah, dah, dah.  Well, all at once the day he's getting ready to come back, this runs on Memphis radio, all of 'em, the black stations.  "Don't do as I do, do as I say do, to the black, honorable, decent folks in Memphis, Tennessee, Dr. King had told y'all to boycott white businesses, but he, himself, is staying at the Holiday Inn."  That was Hoover [J. Edgar Hoover]--we know now, under the Freedom of Information Act [Freedom of Information Act of 1967].  So now, all at once the, King is going to Poor People's march [Poor People's Campaign] and [U.S.] Congress is outraged.  "You can't bring that violence here," and then King said something to shut it down, said, "We have never had an act of violence.  It's white folks jumping on us."  And, man, that just, say, "We have never, in none of our marches have we ever been violent."  So then that's when they had to set up the Memphis, and I can't think of them little thugs' names, but they were the gang who were government provocateurs.  King was just due there for one day.  When they start smashing and breaking windows, the folks got King out of there.  And when they got him out of there, then that's when the whole world was told that wherever King go, violence.  And so he couldn't deny--so he had to go back a second time to prove that he could lead a march with no violence.  And that's when they were set up.  Now, we have a document that the 111th, the 189th military intelligence, 111 [111th Military Intelligence Brigade] will kill God.  They vicious, they probably drugged out.  We got the documents--we knew, but we have the documents now to prove that the 111th went into Memphis on April--I mean on March the 28th and came out on April the 12th, went in before King.  They were the ones that, in case everybody missed, they was supposed to take it out.  What they did, they gave a little old thug white boy, a little peon gangster that had a (unclear) in the flophouse there by the Lorraine hotel.  And he rented out those buildings to white folks.  They gave him a hundred thousand dollars to find someone to put the hit on King.  Now, they don't know that was just the decoy.
Story_ID: 560266
Speaker 1: So Lee Harvey Oswald [sic. James Earl Ray] is from St. Louis, Missouri [sic. Alton, Illinois] and so dumb that he didn't know what I'm telling you now until I interviewed him, that never in the history of his life a crime, been in jail thirty-four times, had he ever committed a crime that within thirty minutes after he was apprehended.  So all at once he gonna pull off the crime of the century, and they couldn't find him damn near for eighteen months.  Now, here's what happened.  He's in the Missouri State Penitentiary [Jefferson City, Missouri]--now, this is how dumb these white boys, he's, works in the bakery.  They bake bread for the Missouri State Penitentiary and all the other juvenile mental hospitals, colleges, everything that the state runs, they bake bread there for within a hundred mile radius.  The guards put the bread in tin breadboxes and it on the trucks.  Two white guys walked up to James Earl Ray in the yard and say, "James, how'd you like to escape from here?"  And he said, "Yes, yes, when we going?"  Now, can you believe this now?  He said, "Oh, we not, you are."  And he never saw through that until I'm interviewing him.  Some white boys who you don't know gonna say, how'd you like to escape, man; say, yes, when we going? (Unclear) So the day that he escaped, the guards were putting the bread in the tin cans in the truck, and they can't tell the difference between a body.  He's in one of the cans with a row of bread over him.  He said, after the car takes off and go down the highway, he get out and he noticed they forgot to lock the door.  Plus, they doing about eighty miles an hour, and he scared 'cause he can't jump.  And just when he get ready to panic, he say the truck pulled off the highway to a weeded area and stopped.  He jumps off, the truck takes off.  He walks out to the highway, and a guy honks, "Hey, buddy, you all right?"  "Yeah."  "You need a ride?"  "Yeah," he gets in the car.  This is Raoul, one of the third tramps that was shooting Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy].  So he's there and they talking.  And he said, "Well, where you coming from?"  Now, you just got out, and you just escaped from jail, right?  He said, say, "You working?"  He said, "Nah."  Said, "You need a job."  He said, "Yeah, I'm looking for one."  Said, "Well, look here, let me tell you something, you look like a pretty honest guy.  I'm a tell you this, we run guns from here to Canada, big time, good money.  You wanna be part of that, you know, we can talk about it."  So now, he's doing all of that, right.  Now, when the U-2 plane was shot down over Russia, and Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] was embarrassed because the law was you're supposed to commit suicide.  And they was upset over that 'cause in a Christian society, you're not supposed to commit suicide, but they knew he had and Ike went on TV and said, there is no U-2 planes.  Well, Khrushchev [Nikita Khrushchev] double crossed him, and he didn't commit suicide and they captured him and they ran him down Red Square [Moscow, Russia], and we were the most embarrassed nation in the world.  So they sentenced him to jail.  Well, the greatest spy that ever been captured in the history of spying was the Russian spy, Abel [Rudolf Abel].  So we had him here.  So we made a deal.  You give us Francis Power [Francis Gary Powers], and we'll give you Abel.  So they made a switch on the bridge, and the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] agent that made the switch on the bridge got Francis Power and he delivered Abel.  He ended up being the warden of the Atlanta federal jail [United States Penitentiary, Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia].  And thirty days before Lee Harvey Oswald escaped, he ends up being the warden at the Missouri State Penitentiary.  Now, let me tell you something, never before in the history of the Missouri State Penitentiary, had anybody ever escaped except James Earl Ray and nobody's escaped since.  Now, James Earl Ray's job was to go into Memphis [Tennessee], take some guns, pick up some guns and go to Canada.  He went under the name of something Galt [Eric Galt].  James Earl Ray, the deal was he didn't know that King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] would be killed.  They would kill James Earl Ray, the cops.  Well, James Earl Ray noticed his tire was getting flat, a slow leak, so he left to go get it fixed.  They didn't know he wasn't there.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: The shooting came down.  He's not there.  He see all the squad cars, ambulances, fire trucks heading over that way, and he asked somebody about it and they tell him.  And he said, "Oh, my god, let me get out of here."
Story_ID: 560267
Speaker 1: Now, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] agent who we talked to, when they found James Earl Ray's car, now remember, Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed in '63 [1963].  This is in '68 [1968], when they found James Earl Ray's car, there was two phone numbers.  Now, the guy who they accused of killing Lee Harvey Oswald was, what's his name?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Jack Ruby.
Speaker 1: Jack Ruby which is Jack Rubenstein, a petty mobster that had murdered some folks for the union in Chicago [Illinois] and did some time in jail.  So in 1968, when this FBI find the car, they see these numbers, so he decide to call.  And the first number he called was the Dallas [Texas] number that Jack Ruby owned the little girly house where they dance and pull of they clothes and stuff.  So Mark [Mark Lane] asked say well, "Did you turn the numbers in?"  He said, "No."  "Did you tell the FBI about the call?"  He said, "No."  Said, "Why?"  He said, "'Cause if they knew I knew that, they would a killed me."  This is the FBI agent, huh, saying that.  So now, what happened was they, they found a beer can in front of the flophouse with James Earl Ray's fingerprints on it.  They found the radio that he had in the Missouri State Penitentiary [Jefferson City, Missouri] with his serial number on it, and they found a gun with his thumb and palm print on it in a blanket, somebody dropped right in front of the--so they claimed that in his haste to get away, he dropped this.  So now, what happens is now they're in trouble.  James Earl Ray, this little dumb white boy with no money ends up getting busted in London [England] on his way to South Africa, huh.  Well, nobody asked, well, how'd he get over there and how'd he get a passport?  When we checked, there were five passports of him, of five different Canadian men his size, his height, his weight.  Now, how'd he get that clever, five passports made up, okay.  So now, here's the problem, Britain's law is very tight about ex--
Speaker 2: Extradition.
Speaker 1: Extradition.  Only thing that you arrest them for is the only thing you can try 'em for and you have to promise us that they will not be executed.
Story_ID: 560268
Speaker 1: Well, they got a problem because James Earl Ray was arrested for jail break, not for killing King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  So now, they have to get some evidence to send to Britain to prove that he shot--well, the woman on the second floor, Grace Stephens [Grace Walden Stephens], one of the sad stories of my life, man. Old, snaggle toothed, redneck, hillbilly, ignorant white woman.  She saw a guy run past her.  So they decided that she's the one--see that was the decoy guy to prove to everybody that King was shot from the second floor.  But they didn't know she was gonna come out and saw this guy run past her.  So they said, here's what we'll do, we'll have her identify this picture.  So when she identifies--this was James Earl Ray, and that goes to Britain, and they bring him over for killing King.  They show her the picture and say, "That's not the man.  That's not him."  So they leave.  They come back and say, "We're very sorry we didn't approach this right."  He said, "There's ninety thousand dollar reward up for the killing of King and eventually it'll go up to 3 million.  All you have to do is identify this picture and the ninety thousand you get immediately," and this poor woman living in a flophouse, common law to, her common law husband [Charles Stephens] for thirty years, and then thirty years when we get to checking the records, we find out that nineteen times she's been in the hospital for broken bones or fractures where he have jumped on her and beat her up.  That's the atmosphere that she lived under.  But she said to the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], that's not the man, who just promised her ninety thousand dollars and eventually it could go up to 3 million.
Story_ID: 560269
Speaker 1: Dick [HistoryMaker Dick Gregory], not only are you legendary for speaking out power, truth to power and--
Speaker 2: Before we do that, let me finish up that, the Memphis [Tennessee] thing with you.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, yeah, go ahead.
Speaker 2: So they show her James Earl Ray's picture.  She say it's not him.  They tell her how much money is involved.  And she said it's not him.  They come in to see her husband, who the day King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed, he was so drunk he was unconscious down and resting on the floor.  He don't know what happened.  They came in and they said to him, two FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] agents and Memphis homicide, "Hey, Stephens [Charles Stephens], how come you, where's your new Cadillac?"  He, "What do you mean new car?"  "Oh, come on, you know what I mean, all that money y'all--." "What money?"  He says, "Come on, man, your wife saw the guy that killed King, and y'all 'bout to get all that reward money, but she just won't identify him.  She know who it is."  "Well, wait a minute.  I'll go up there and take care of this."  So he go up, said, it's not him, big argument.  He beat her up right there.  He come back down, he say, "Don't worry about it.  I'll--." Two days later, three FBI agents, two homicide guys showed up.  "Grace [Grace Walden Stephens], get your hat and coat.  Go with us."  They carried her twenty-two miles outside of town.  Now, imagine that you all run this mental hospital, and you have no idea that a FBI agent and Memphis cops would lie to you.  They bring 'em in.  They have a meeting.  They said she's homicidal.  She goes through these hot and cold, ups and downs.  She even think she witnessed the murder of Dr. Martin Luther King.  Now, is that enough to convince you?  They checked her in there, eleven years she stayed there.  So we sitting with some white boys in Europe, kicking back, having fun, agents, talking about experiences.  So I said, "Let me tell you something, man." I said, "The wildest experience I ever had in my life this ol' redneck, cracker, nigger hating white woman that had an integrity that she refused to say it was James Earl Ray, and this haunts me."  This is just, say, she still in the mental hospital.  So, we all sitting there drinking.  That white boy's hunting stuff comes out of him.  "Let's go get her out," (laughter).  My whiskey talk, let's get her out.  So we meet in Memphis, man.  And then it dawned on me, said if we get caught, I'm the one going to jail, man.  So I say, "Here's what you do.  Y'all go and handle it--you know the deal we got, can't be no killing, no killing."  I'm out of town.  I'll be back in Chicago [Illinois].  This was on a Friday night.  Mother's Day was on that Sunday.  Let me tell you, when these boys come at you, they showed me the architect plans on that building, when it was built, how many bricks, how many doors, how many windows, the floor she's on, how they gonna get in, crawl down the--what bed she's in.  So they go in.  And they get her, right.
Story_ID: 560270
Speaker 1: Here's the story.  She [Grace Walden Stephens] laying there eleven years.  She assumed they coming to kill her.  Now first thing she said, "I'll tell you now what I told you then, that's not the man."  Is that a story?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Is that a story?  And so--
Speaker 2: Sticking to her guns.
Speaker 1: --they take her out, huh.  They zip her to California.  And the guys called me, and I said to my wife [Lillian Smith Gregory], Saturday, I said, "Tomorrow's Mother's Day.  I won't be here."  We was gonna plan this big thing.  I say, "I'm going out to California and just hug a white woman that ain't never had a baby in her life, but exemplify what God meant motherhood is supposed to be about."  And I went out there, just to hug her and tell her, say, "You have really made a difference, and my courage that there's people on the planet."  I said, "You know how many niggers I know that would have volunteered to that just for the money or just for fear."  So I said, "I don't know where you came from.  I mean I could never look at you and know you have that--I mean that kind of money."  Now, here's the trick that we got to work on.  They, here's what they did.  They got her husband [Charles Stephens]--see, after they committed her, they got her husband to say he saw it and on the strength of him identifying it, they could give that to--okay.  And then some kind of way, he got a lawyer two years later and went in court 'cause they didn't give him the money.  And we got the deposition where he said all of it was a lie.  He didn't see nothing and the whole, whole thing.  But that's, that's one of the fine stories of my life being on the planet.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So that's where we were with that (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 560271
Speaker 1: You've been involved with a number of things, speaking truth to power.  And, but you've also been an entrepreneur.  I think one of your most famous enterprises has been the Bahamian Diet [Slim Safe Bahamian Diet].
Speaker 2: Bahamian Diet, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes.  And how did you decide to get into this to help, to get into the nutrition business, to help Americans live as the--
Speaker 2: I really didn't.  I was worried about world hunger.  So I created a formula to deal with world hunger.  And see, hunger puts so much, starvation, so much strain on the human body that the brain produces a hormone that's three hundred times more potent than commercial morphine.  That's why when you saw the picture, details, with the babies with the flies all over 'em, and they said, they too weak.  No, they too high to give a damn, and the next time you see starving people, if you look at 'em real close with no emotions, they smiling, underneath that.  That's that--now, running is a violation of God, and that's why runners use a word called the jogger's high.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: They don't know what they saying.  Running is so bad for the body, your body produces a morphine that one hundred fifty times more potent than commercial morphine.  And so, now, I know that.  So I put the formula together.  That's why they tell you after people have starved for so long, they will reject food because I got to reject food to keep this high.  Obese people, obese people, obesity is so hard on the human body, it produce that drug.  So people, when they say, I can't, I can't stop eating; I just have to have it.  That's the high.  Your brain will not give you that drug unless you eating.  But if you stop eating, you lose the right to get that drug.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The brain is mean, man.  You know, these little wipes that people use to wipe the germs off their hands, they know that women, pregnant women that use that, the baby is born with no immune system because the brain picks up that you got something on you that's protecting you.  So it shuts it down.  Just like if I tell you, I need to borrow thirty thousand dollars, and tomorrow I hit a $700 million lottery, I don't, you ain't gone--I don't need the money.  Well, the brain works the same way.  They pick up this stuff you putting on will protect you, so it shuts the immune system down, and them companies are so powerful that they can just keep it out there knowing what it's doing.
Story_ID: 560272
Speaker 1: So what I did, was I put this formula together for starving people.  And then I went over to Ethiopia and I guess I carried about thirty-seven people with me, all the top people in the Civil Rights Movement.  So Hollywood's become a multi-trillion dollar industry because of stunt people.  And so my life has always been if you can create an ethical stunt to get the attention.  So I said, well, here's what we're gonna do.  We're gonna take some trucks over.  What's the best trucks?  So a guy said, Toyota [Toyota Motor Corporation], and said then Toyota is good because they have a company there in Nairobi [Kenya]. And so I made a deal to buy one truck.  Some way General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] heard about it, and said, "For every one truck you buy, we'll give you ten."  Shoot, hey.  So, and a funny thing happened.  A guy calls me.  He said, "Mr. Gregory [HistoryMaker Dick Gregory], a General Motors truck wouldn't last in Africa five days 'cause there's no roads."
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Toyota.  So I called 'em and said, thanks, but no thanks.  Now, we get over there.  I'm gonna present this truck to the, the starvation relief foundation.  That's to get me into the top officials in (unclear).  So I get there, and I get the shocking news, my truck won't be there for two weeks.  All the press is there.  So John Bellamy said, well, what you (unclear).  I said, "Watch this."  So I go over to the Red Cross [American Red Cross], same type of truck we got.  I said, "My man got something in a bag over there he gonna give you."  I said, "Just peep at it.  I'll tell you about it later."  I say, "It's three grand [$3,000] in there.  It might be four [$4,000].  I didn't count it, but it's at least three.  If you loan me your truck for fifteen minutes, that's yours, not to the organization, to you."  You know what we did.  We took our signs, put it on that truck, had the whole ceremony of giving it to 'em (laughter), all over the world it went out (laughter).  We gave the truck back, gave him the title to the new one that was coming in.  Now, we go into the hospital.  Dr. Demasi Hoptee [ph.] was dean of the medical school.  So we go there to meet him.  The day we get there a medical (unclear), had committed suicide.  So he's busy working with that, and he finally comes down.  And I tell him, "You know, we have a formula that can wipe out starvation."  And said, "We'd like for you to put it in your hospital here."  So what happened is they were dying so fast, the folks they was bringing in, in order for you to have your child in that hospital, the mother had to stay and sleep on the floor so they could never be blamed for foul play.  That's how fast they was dying.  The eighteen people that we took and they was all out the hospital in six days.  They say it wiped out all other kind of diseases, which I didn't know at the time.  But now we got the scientific data on it.  While I was there, I noticed something, that starving people have a bloated belly and a bald head.  If you go to Kennedy Airport [John F. Kennedy International Airport, New York, New York] or LaGuardia Airport [New York, New York] tomorrow and watch the business executives come through, they got a bloated belly and a bald head.  So I said, wow, man, there's two ends to malnutrition.  There's one where you eat a lot, but the nutrition's malfunctioning, and there's another where you don't eat enough.  One's at this end and one's at that end. So I just added some more stuff to it and used it for weight loss.  That's how, that's how I came up with it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: And then I named it Four X [Formula Four X].  Well, if you go back fifteen years ago, the number one prophylactic, the most expensive one, you could buy prophylactics three for fifty cents, the Four X was costing like four dollars.  And that was the one made out of sheep skin and had the little lubrication in it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So when I got ready to name it, I said to my man, let's America on.  So we named it Four X (laughter).  The Four X formula--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And that's what that was about (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Story_ID: 560273
Speaker 1: I'd like for you--you have ten children?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I think I've already told you Missy [Miss Gregory] is--Miss is my favorite (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: That's number nine, I believe.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But just briefly, give us a description of, starting with the oldest one and going to the youngest one (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The oldest one is Michele [Michele Gregory].  She's the only one I let go to a white college.  We lived in Plymouth, Mass [Plymouth, Massachusetts], and there were no white--no black churches in Plymouth.  So I refused to let any of 'em go to church.  We taught 'em about the universe, but I refused to have a white minister stand and talk to my children about sin and hellfire and never mention racism and sexism.  Something's wrong with that.  So, so I said to 'em, I said, you know, "Y'all all going to--."  Now remember, there are no black folks.  My neighbor, across the pond from me was the Steinway piano [Steinway and Sons] heir.  Up the hill from me was the Ocean Spray cranberry.  And they say, "We not going to black college [HBCU].  We going to--," and I got ten brilliant children, you know, that there's not one white school in America they wouldn't have been able to get into.  First, I had the money, plus who I was, and they could so--
Speaker 1: How did you happen to Plymouth?
Speaker 2: Well, wait a minute, wait, wait--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My wife [Lillian Smith Gregory] got upset 'cause they was rebelling.  I said, "Well, the last time I checked, I think I'm the only one working in this house."
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So then that was the law.  Michele was the best girls basketball player in the State of Massachusetts.  When she, she's forty-eight years old now, so when she graduate getting ready to go to college, they didn't have that Title IX case that went up to the [U.S.] Supreme Court with black colleges, if you're going to have a boys basketball, you have to have a girls.  So no black college had a--and so, I said, against my better judgment, I'll let you go to a white college 'cause she went to play ball and that's the only fool I got in my house, the one that went to the white--I tell her if you didn't have two Ph.D.'s from the London School of Economics [London School of Economics and Political Science, London, England], you'd a been in a mental hospital.  Trust me.  And so consequently, what happened is, she got into one white college after another, and she--the first time she was in the Deep South where she really understood for the first time.  So she ended up going to LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] 'cause I had a white coach who was a friend of mine there, and she didn't like so she went to another school.  And she graduated from there.  And so she said, "Well, now, since I've finished these white colleges with all these A's on my transcript, what do you suggest I do now?"  I say, "Well, you ought to go to the London School of Economics where they taught Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] how to be dirty."  And so two weeks later a application came out and said she was accepted.  So I called her.  I said, "I got to fly to Louisiana and talk to you, you little punk.  Explain to me how you got in this quick?"  You know what she said? She told her teacher at the school that had taught at the London School of Economics, the conversation she'd had with me.  So here's what she wrote. She says, "I've been in college four years now.  I made straight A's the whole four years, but the last two years' A's is stronger than the first two years because the first two years I was more interested in basketball.  The last two years, all I've been interested in is eco- ."  And that alone, just that brilliant letter like that--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --they, and the rest of it was--.  So she said, "What do you think I ought to major in?"  I said, "Sex harassment at the workplace."  This is where this is fixing to go to.  Well, there'd never been anybody had a degree in sexual harassment, so what would take two or three years, took her eight because when you're cutting a new thing.  So right now, if she came in court to testify for you right now, she's the only world authority on the planet.  So there's nobody else they can bring in, and she's teach- she teaches at one of the universities in New York, but all summer--she just came back from Prague [Czech Republic] yester- tonight.  She goes all over the world lecturing and, to major universities on sex harassment at the workplace.
Story_ID: 560274
Speaker 1: And then I had a white friend of mine ask in Plymouth [Massachusetts], said, "You know, I'm with the state education bureau, you know that, and you ought to see the interest they have in your children all over.  People come trying to--what is it about black colleges [HBCUs] that you want your children to go to?"  I said, "Well, one, when you stop and think about if you wrote down one hundred world renowned African Americans--." Now, you can't lie on this one, ninety-eight of 'em would be a product of black colleges.  Is that scary, man (laughter).
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Not Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], not Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], not MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], but black colleges.  Now, that one, you can't cheat on.  Ninety-eight percent of world renowned African Americans was a product of black colleges.  And that's because in my subconscious mind, what made me not want 'em to go to white colleges is I went to Southern Illinois [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois].  And when that professor puts his foot up on the chair and start reminiscing with his childhood, I get up and leave 'cause there's no way you can sit there and look out at me and see me and I remind you of your brother's son or your grandfather.  And all them experiences you talking about, I don't relate with 'em.  So I didn't want them there and the subconscious mind.  If somebody downstairs right now is plotting to harm us, your subconscious picks it up now because I, we're fouled up, it might not go through.  Well, all that racist, crazy stuff that go on in them white colleges, and you pick it up.  You not aware of, of this is what's happening.  So those were the reasons.  And so she's the first one.
Story_ID: 560275
Speaker 1: And then Lynne [Lynne Gregory] was the second one, and she--I remember her and Michele [Michele Gregory], we was in the street demonstrating against Daley [Richard J. Daley], and she was three and Lynne was two.  And when the--remember when the cop snatched her.  I had one of 'em in my hand and lap and one had the other and the cops snatched both of 'em up and put 'em in the paddy wagon.  So when they got me, the white cop telling me as he taking me to jail, say, "You got to be a low down dog to let your two little babies--." I said, "Let me tell you something, white boy," (laughter), I wish my mother--no, he heard my daughter say, "Oh, dad, we in trouble," you know.  And he said, I said, "I wish my mother [Lucille Gregory] and father [Presley Gregory] would a got me in a situation and I was two years old and I'd known I was in trouble.  The world would have been done changed a long time--I didn't find out we was in trouble 'til just, after I got grown."  And so, she's, she's back in school now.  She's working on her Ph.D. in Boston [Massachusetts].  And then I have Pamela [Pamela Gregory].  I kind of thought she was smart, but she decided she was gonna go to Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and get her Ph.D. in--she got her master's [degree] at the black college [HBCU] in Virginia--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Hampton.  And got, she got her under, and her master's and she was going there to work on doctor's degree in spirituality.  I said, well, you can't use none of my money.  Now, if you wanna go to Harvard and get a doctor's degree in theology, that's okay, but Harvard do not know nothing about spirit (laughter).  So she owns part of a health food store, and I never thought I'd see anybody that know more about putting together stuff together than I do, but she's there.  And then she owns a piece of company that do colonic irrigations.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And she just, I mean, this the first I ever talked to her in a long time was a couple of weeks ago.  And the stuff she, she knows now is just totally incredible.  And then I have Stephanie [Stephanie Gregory].  My wife got real upset 'cause she went to college--my children were so starved for black folks they went to college.  They never came home for spring break or during the summer.  They just stay there enjoying they self.  And she end up marrying a professor.  And my wife, my wife was really upset.  "And Greg [HistoryMaker Dick Gregory], he's older than you."  I said, "So what," until he came home for Christmas with her and got ready to go to bed and told me goodnight, Pops (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I told Lil [Lillian Smith Gregory], I said, "I know what you mean now," (laughter).  So, and she's still in Delaware.  She finished Delaware State [Delaware State University, Dover, Delaware].  She still down there working, something.  I don't know.
Story_ID: 560276
Speaker 1: And then there was Miss [Miss Gregory]--no, before her, it was Gregory [Greg Gregory], my son.  Now, it was very interesting because I named him one name, Gregory, not Gregory Gregory, Gregory.  Some strange people showed up to visit us.  There could be anybody on the other side of the state department [U.S. Department of State], that's them.  They came to visit and said, "You can't name nobody one name in America."
Speaker 2: You mean there's a law against it?
Speaker 1: There's laws and then there's laws.  And the tone of the way somebody tell you something, you don't ask is there a law.  And I say, "Well, his name is Gregory."  They said, "Well, you can't do that."  I say, "Well, I'm getting this from the Bible.  Everybody's name in the Bible is one name.  Two names show ownership."  If I marry her and she takes my last name, I own her.  If I open up a shop say, Gregory's Auto Shop, I'm the owner.  Peter, Paul, Mary, Jesus don't have two names.  Nobody in the Bible, nobody had two names back then.  What I didn't know is they can never hook him up for a crime.  They can never run a trace on him because it would cost millions, see.  You cannot get on a plane without two names.  That's the computer, okay.  You cannot have a jail record without two names.  That's the computer.  Legally, to get a social security card, you can say Master Gregory.  When my wife [Lillian Smith Gregory] used to take him to the University of Chicago clinic [Chicago, Illinois], can you imagine all them white folks over at the University of Chicago, one of the most expensive places in the world, and they come out and they say Master Gregory.  All them white folk got to look at this black woman with this little black boy get up and so you can legitimately call me master, but you can't change my name.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so he, he's the one I was saying is cracked out.  And he drives truck, right, owns a piece of the trucking company.  So he get busted at the truck stop.  And he said, well, "My punishment is gonna be--it's November, my trial don't come up 'til January.  I'm just gonna stay in jail to January."  You don't have to worry about that (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Because that's six--
Speaker 1: I said call your, call your sister who's the prosecutor in Brooklyn [New York] and tell her just to check into it and see what happen.  So he called me up Tuesday, he said, "They threw me out of jail."  I said, "Why?"  He said, "They couldn't prosecute."  I said, "They can't hook your name.  And they can't look at past records.  They can't look at nothing."  And I said, "What you gonna do?"  He said, "Well, they coming to pick up the truck.  It was a government--they coming to pick up the truck."  I said, "They can't do that.  It's, it's--have them fax a note to the company that all charges have been dropped, and they wouldn't dare file you with the lawsuit," they got 'cause they picked up his truck and went back out.  But he's probably one of the foremost authorities on blackness.  I mean he knows it.  He knows the penal gland, and he knows what--
Speaker 2: This is Gregory.
Speaker 1: Gregory, that all black folk came from that star up there called Sirius.  And I don't wanna get into that 'cause--but he can put his hand on your head and tell you what part of Sirius you came from.  I mean it's just, it's just criminal what he knows about, you know, that.
Story_ID: 560277
Speaker 1: And then there's Miss [Miss Gregory].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: She went to Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida].
Speaker 2: That's number six.
Speaker 1: And she said, well, "Why do, why you want me to go to Florida A and M?" I said, "They got a good band," (laughter), you know.  And see my, my thing is I sent my children to school saying they got truancy laws, but it's a game.  They got a law that say if your mother and father don't put you in school by the time you're five, we can go to jail.  But if you starve to death at four, the most they do is take the rest of the children away, but we can't go to jail.  So it must be something so bad with schools that they have to put you in there to control you.  So y'all go to school.  Forget all that bullshit about learning and this and that.  Go to school the same way you would go to a movie, enjoy yourself and don't disturb the people sitting on both sides of you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so she finished Florida A and M.  And then she went to Georgetown law school [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: On graduation day, Lil [Lillian Smith Gregory] and I are there, and they said, "Miss Gregory," and the two white folks that were sitting next to us, not knowing that we knew her, they said, "You know, she's the only one they call Miss."  That guy said, "Well, her father must be a wealthy African king that gives a lot of money to the school here, and that's why they call her Miss."  So then she, she's in New York.  She's one of the lead prosecutors in Brooklyn [New York].
Speaker 2: In Brooklyn.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 560278
Speaker 1: Okay, number seven, following--
Speaker 2: That was, we got Miss [Miss Gregory]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Steph [Stephanie Gregory] and Gregory [Greg Gregory].
Speaker 1: Let me read 'em off to you, Michele [Michele Gregory], Lynne [Lynne Gregory]--
Speaker 2: Pamela [Pamela Gregory].
Speaker 1: Pamela, Stephanie, Gregory--
Speaker 2: Paula [Paula Gregory].
Speaker 1: Paula.  Okay.
Speaker 2: She's Pamela's twin.  She, she's one of the few that stayed at home.  See I advocate that, that anybody can get ten children out of college like I did.  I got 'em out the house.  You gotta be a genius to do that.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And then we moved to a place too small for all of 'em to come back to.  So they booking Christmas now.  "Ma [Lillian Smith Gregory], who's home for Christmas, who's, who's coming in?"  And so I, let me set it right there.  And so what happened is, we--so she, she went to Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] and finished there.  And then she, she stayed home then.  And that's when the computer thing was breaking big.  So she start doing all kind of stuff on computers like from--and then she runs a big medical center there in Plymouth [Massachusetts].  And then the next one is Ayanna [Ayanna Gregory].  She's a, she finished Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and then she start teaching.  And she writes music and poetry just incredibly, the genius she is.  But it's the type of stuff that a hundred years from now, you'll look back and the messages will still be there.
Story_ID: 560279
Speaker 1: And then Yohance [Yohance Gregory].  He, he's so funny.  He won the science award in Massachusetts.  See, when we lived there, when we first went there, Massachusetts public schools was better than most of America's white folk, private schools.  That's not true today.  And so the teachers let him get into the contest just to promote his mind.  He was in grade school.  And he won it.  And so they want him to go to the national, but the law had to be changed 'cause Massachusetts said high school.  So they can change the law for anybody.  That's the power of white folks, but except the mother and the father have to sign that they want that to happen for them.  And I refused to sign.  And I said, "Son, make like you didn't win that.  What day is the final competition for the nationwide?"  He said, "Such and such."  I said, "Think you can win it?"  He said, "Yeah."  I said, "If you wasn't in it, what would you be doing that day?"  He said, "Playing soccer."  I said, "Play soccer.  We don't need white folks to validate you, and that's one of the things y'all got to learn."  I don't need white folks to validate me.  I don't need to The New York Times to validate.  I don't need The Washington Post to validate me.  I did a thing where I talked about the first eight presidents of the United States was black men.  Oh, The Washington Post went crazy, and then one day, they found out that [President] George Washington was the ninth president of the United States.  The, the, John Hanson, the first president, who the John Hanson Highway [U.S. Route 50] is named after.  America's birthday is July the 4th, 1776.  Washington didn't become president 'til '89 [1789].  Nobody wanna touch that, see.  And these guys were Moors.  Now, John Hansen was dark.  The other ones was mulattos.  The Moors flag is a cherry tree, you know, out of Africa into Northern Italy and Spain.  That's what it means when it says George Washington chopped down the cherry tree.  So then they wanted to do a long interview with me.  I do not need no interview with y'all to apologize or go through that whole game cause I'm not stupid enough to believe I know that and the major news media and the world don't know that.  You, as just a dumb ordinary reporter might not know it.  But I'm not stupid enough to believe, I know that and y'all don't know that.  And so he played soccer.
Story_ID: 560280
Speaker 1: A white friend of mine there told me, said, "One thing you have to do is take him [Gregory's son, Yohance Gregory] out of the public schools or his brain will be damaged."  They said, "We never seen a mind like his."  So I brought him in, and I talked to him.  I said, "So, we're thinking about letting you go to Phillips Academy [Andover, Massachusetts]."  I said, "Now, let me tell you something.  That school have produced twelve presidents--that's before the Bush boys, the old man [President George Herbert Walker Bush] and the son [President George Walker Bush]."  I said, "At one time, 98 percent of the folks who ran the Fortune 500 went to Phillips Academy."  I said, "But I also want you to know that your sisters, four of your sisters, qualified to go there, but I don't trust 'em 'cause they're a little flaky.  But I'm a have your brother, Christian [Christian Gregory], watch you, and if I see you kind of--I'm a snatch you out."  Now, it cost us twenty-two thousand dollars a semester to send him there.  And at that time, Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] just cost nineteen thousand dollars a year.  And so he went there, and second year, made headlines in The Boston Globe.  He shut the school down, and it was kind of interesting, you know, this school, you go and you do the music appreciation, the Gregorian chants.  And he asked the question, "Is this where music started?"  So you telling us that all of them Africans, thousands of years before there was Europe or any of that, they didn't hum.  And so they organized (unclear) and shut the school down until they got in the curriculum.  And then when he finished there, and they were standing in line--now, it's kind of interesting now about these type of people, these rich folks and control.  I told him, I said, now, America has no good schools and no self-respecting white person would ever send they child to Phillips Academy.  And that's crap.  I said, but when you go there, look for three things.  If they have a soda pop machine, one soda pop make your bloodstream ten thousand more acid than God meant for it to be.  If they have a contact sports, nobody in their right mind will ever let a child of theirs play contact sports.  I mean if you look at all these computers and all that stuff, that don't touch nothing.  This is my brain, yet I'm a let my brain hit somebody and bump it.  And three, homework is a violation.  And one of the things he said to me, they had all three of 'em there.  One thing he says to me, he says, you know, these rich children come here from Europe, the biggest hassle they got, they never had homework.  And if you a brain surgeon, I gotta be stupid, man, to have you take some, some operations home and do it in your basement.  Your basement is not conducive to do brain surgery.  So the average house is not conducive to homework.  You got places you can go and they bring in tutors and this and that.  And so he finished there and stunned everybody when he went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and took two other students with him from there.  It was interesting when me and his mama [Lillian Smith Gregory] went to his graduation.  I don't fool with the schools because as a black, male celebrity they just totally overlook a black woman.  "Oh, [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory," and I never let 'em do that.  You have to deal with her.  You cannot deal with me.  She's the boss.  And I don't need to sign nothing.  What she say go.  So we go there, graduation, and it's interesting.  They form a circle and nobody gets their name called, and you realize that's a poor thing.  I finished high school, I finished college.  They got to call--them white folks don't care.  What they do, they form a circle and it's like three hundred students graduating.  And if you the last one to get your diploma and you the first one over here, her diploma starts with you and it goes all the way around and they, they thing is, every student that graduates with you touch your diploma.  No names is mentioned.  And then the next one, until it goes all the way around to the last one, which comes this way.  The interesting thing is, these little punks managed to graduate from high school, the parents is there from all over the world, man?  And they got they little, their little picnic baskets with champagne and stuff in 'em for the children (laughter), for the children.  They sitting there, partying down (laughter).
Story_ID: 560281
Speaker 1: And so, and then--that's nine, right?  And Christian [Christian Gregory].
Speaker 2: That's nine.  Christian is, the ten.
Speaker 1: Christian is the, yeah, he's--he was happy.  He came to me one day when he was eight years old.  And he's just so kind and sweet and pleasant.  He said, "Dad--," and I never let 'em come to me.  They always had to go through they mother [Lillian Smith Gregory].  And he said, "Dad, Ma told me to come tell you something."  He said, "But you gotta understand what I'm fixing to tell you on this teacher, she, she didn't mean for me to hear it.  I was on the playground.  And I came in back in to get something, and I heard her telling another teacher, 'Christian so dumb, sometimes I think he's not a Gregory.'"  That's a hell of a thing for a child to hear.  But kind enough to know she was saying it to him.  She was saying (unclear).  So he asked me, said, "Why am I so dumb?"  (Laughter) Well, you dumb, you dumb, you is some kind of dumb.  But if the house caught on fire, and I could run out with one person, it would be you 'cause if it snows, you clean the snow.  If the lawnmower is broke, we know you did it 'cause you the only child in here that would do stuff like, would help your mother.  I said, but let me tell you something, your oldest sister, Michele [Michele Gregory], will be home from college in two weeks.  She love children, follow them everywhere, follow her everywhere she go this summer.  And everything will change.  He was eight.  The next time we have a conversation, he thirteen years old, and I'm running through the house, to run to get in the car and go to the airport.  He put his foot in front of me.  He said, "Dad, how'd you know if I follow Michele all summer I'd start making straight A's?"  I say, "The day you was born all the wisdom that ever was and ever will be (unclear)."  The difference between a A and a F has nothing to do with smartness, intelligence is not--it has something to do with discipline.  And she's the most disciplined person I know.  That's why I don't care that much for her.  I can't stand--especially black folks.  I can't stand black folks that pay they bills on time.  I don't understand why you wanna be validated by a white, racist, evil system, but we do.  And, and he finished Morgan State [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], teaching school and loved it.  And I said, "I need you to do me a favor, some awful mess is fixing to come down in this country and on the planet.  And I need you to go to chiropractor school and learn how to be a chiropractor so at least one Gregory will understand the human body."  And he did.  It was rough because he hadn't prepared his self with the certain chemistry and stuff.  And he went, and now he's one of the better chiropractors in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: Oh, I may have to go to see him.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 560282
Speaker 1: Now, the hardest question I'm going to ask you and that is how would you like to be remembered?  What would you like your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't.  I mean I'm not saying I wouldn't.  I don't care.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't care, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If I had to say, put one thing on my tombstone, it would be simple.  "He had no hidden agenda," you know.  You see, the people who's in charge of remembering you, if they like you, they would lie.  I can't lie to--I had a group in Canada, wanted to have me as the father of the year, to come down.  They paid for the speech, and I said, I can't take it for two reasons.  One, I think Father's Day is bullshit.  And I think one day when women get serious about who they are, they will shut this system down until Mother's Day comes on a fixed day in the month.  See, Sunday is crap 'cause you don't affect the economy, the commerce.  We could've had King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther  King, Jr.] birthday ten years ahead of time if we'd a taken it on a Sunday.  And the folks said, we said, no.  We wanna interfere with the commerce.  There is no day you can celebrate on this planet that's more important than Mother's Day.  And yet it's on a Sunday, and so--and I said, and the other reason I couldn't accept the Father's Day, I said, you know, when you have a child, you have created another god.  And the universal god says, I want you to make another me.  And it don't ask you what color, how much education, how much money, how little money.  Where do you live?  Who is your mama, who's your daddy?  And I said, so I have been privileged to create god ten times, and I never had one affair with my wife [Lillian Smith Gregory] to create god.  I was just ripping off the booty, man.  Now, there are people that will not have sex for no other reason but to have a child.  And I said, now, that don't bother me.  What bothers me, I've never owned a car that I didn't study and find out the year, the make, the model, the down payment, the insurance, the monthly notes.  When I got to look myself in the face and realize I put more planning into owning a car than creating God's new life, that's scary.
Story_ID: 560283
Speaker 1: And so, I mean I have reached a point now where, you know, you can't give me nothing from celebrity status, I mean I know how I made it.  It had nothing to do with talent, it's bullshit.  If I'm stupid enough to believe I was the funniest thing to come through, when I think about all the Richard Pryors a hundred years ago that died a horrible death because of this vicious system, when I think about all of the funny folks, man, all of the--one of the foremost authorities on marching music is this, whatever that guy's name is, if he'd a been black, he wouldn't a been--when I think about all them Broadway plays in the '20s [1920s], all the music scores for the Hollywood, if they'd been black, they wouldn't a been there.  So, so don't tell me that we just producing this.  We've always, there was no place for them.  And so the way I describe it to my children, they come and say, "Daddy, who are you?  Everybody, everywhere we go, they be talking about [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory and--." I say well, let me put it this way.  I say, "Let me tell you how I made it."  I say, "You're in a big auditorium and somebody comes to the door with guns, and they shooting at everybody.  And it ain't but one way out and you don't believe in killing.  So we decide we gonna rush the door, not to get them, to get out.  When you rush the door, they hit some and they miss some.  I, as a successful black person while they was shooting you, they missed me.  So my success is owed to all of them black folks that was taking that bullet that I missed."  And so I said to 'em, "So, when I look in the back of my pants, I see all this blood over my pants cuffs, and I thought I was shot.  But I realize it's the blood of the people that got shot.  And even now, I still look at the back of my cuffs and it's blood still on it.  And so until I get all this blood off of me, and I can only do that by being part of this struggle and saying thanks to the people that died."  And so that's my, my whole piece and my whole philosophy.
Story_ID: 560284
Speaker 1: And there's another thing that I kind of live by, and that is I'm seriously a believer of God.  All this other stuff, I don't.  And I'm seriously can tell you, I don't understand what God is.  I don't understand a 747 [Boeing 747], but I ride on it.  I have faith that them white folk ain't gonna spend that much money on something that might crash.  And so there's a whole god force that, when you look up and see a star, there are 400 billion stars up there, and each star has over a thousand planets on it, bigger than planet Earth.  And the same system that put that together put me together.  Wow, man, what a gift.  And when you stop and think about two months ago we detected a energy, and they found out that 244 million years ago--you know about that right?
Speaker 2: Light years, yeah.
Speaker 1: A sun in another galaxy exploded 244 million years ago, and that energy's traveling a speed of light, one hundred sixty-eight hundred thousand miles a second, and it just got here two months ago.  You know how far that--and so I said, that's the--and you know, it's interesting when Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] say, "I am somebody," it's just sad that you have to be told that because I got here the way everybody else got here, a penis went in a vagina and ejaculated and out of that ejaculation 500 million sperms came out and the one responsible for me, like the one responsible for you, outran a half a billion sperms and got there first, so I don't need nobody to tell me how special I am.  I mean if we had, go to a restaurant tonight and out of a half a billion restaurants, I'm a take you to the best one, you in for a hell of a meal.  And so that's who we are.  Didn't no one sperm come out and slowly stroll up the fallopian tube.  And so if you look at rain--and one of my grandsons live in the same apartment complex I live in when I'm here, and I said to him, I said, "Look here, it's raining, look at that rain. See that rain?"  I said, "That's not just one big sheet of rain.  That's trillions of raindrops that comes together, and it look like it's just one."  I said, "But we live across the street from Rock Creek Park [Washington, D.C.]."  I said, "Come on, let's go.  I wanna show you something."  So we go over to the water, and when you go to the water, you see the raindrops.  You can see the raindrops, bloop, bloop, bloop, bloop.  And I said, now, when these raindrops hit the ground, they have one job to do, is to work they way back home to the river, to the stream, to the ocean, to the lake, to the pond.  The day you were born, you had one job, when you come out your mother's womb, is to work your way back home.  Now, the interesting thing is, it isn't but one road.  Queen Elizabeth make $360 million every twenty-five--just interest on her money, but she on the same road going home that my welfare cousin is on, at home.  That's all.  And it don't say how many degrees you have, how much money did you make, do you have a criminal record?  It's working your way back home, and the only qualification to get to that big door is say you better be as clean when you come back home as you was when you came out your mama's womb.  You had no hatred, you had no bitterness, you had no slickness, you had no hostility.  You had no meanness, hatred, nothing.  And when you come back here, you better be that pure.  See, now, there was a time when the road was clean.  The road messed up now, all kind of filth laying on it.
Story_ID: 560285
Speaker 1: I say when I was eight years old, my mother [Lucille Gregory] loved these psychic readers, like most black folks that we knew.  So she took me out of school one day and she said, "Mother Poole want me to bring you to her."  And I'm saying to myself, I'm so embarrassed.  That stuff is so ignorant, "And told me to bring you at twelve noon.  She don't know you.  She said, 'Do you have a son named Richard [HistoryMaker Dick Gregory]?'  Said, 'Yes.'  'Bring him.  I need to tell him something.'"  So I go at eight years old with this fraud.  And she said, "Richard," and I said, "Yes, ma'am."  Said, "I see a star in your forehead," and say, "you might not understand what I'm saying, but the world won't be the same because of you."  And she said, "And I'm not talking about America, I'm talking about--," and say, "money, god, you'll have so much money one day, it's almost like another country."  Say, "But I see, before it happen, I see this brown briefcase."  I'm eight years old and, so I never give it another thought.  But one day I'm working this little black nightclub, the Roberts Show Club [Chicago, Illinois], and I'm kind of getting a little play.  So ABC was doing a thing called 'Walk in My Shoes' about racism and what black folks have gone through.  So Alex Dreier was one of the big news guys there and national.  So he told them, said you need to go out and film Dick Gregory.  So they came in for two hours.  Wow, this is it.  I'm looking at it, man, less than two seconds.  But when I found out TV, millions of letters came in about this Dick Gregory.  That's how powerful TV is.  So they were so appreciative of what--remember I'm still in the nightclub making ten dollars a night, they bought me this brown briefcase.  Trust me, when CBS, NBC, ABC buy you, you got one, and I thought about what that old black woman told me about this briefcase, and I said, wow, god, I wish she was alive so I could tell her, I'm sorry.
Story_ID: 560286
Speaker 1: And so in that Herman's--Roberts [Roberts Show Club, Chicago, Illinois], two things happened to me.  One was negative.  It didn't bother me.  On Thanksgiving, they brought in Count Basie, and Count Basie heard my first show and said, "I'm not working with him.  White folks, white folks don't wanna hear this shit he talking about.  He must be crazy."  So Herman [HistoryMaker Herman Roberts] came and told me, say, "Well, I'm a pay you, but you don't--," he told, and I said, "You don't need to pay me."  And I say, so I cried all the way home, man, and six months later I was the biggest thing.  I never, this is about the second I've ever told this (unclear) 'cause I wasn't trying to say, hey, hey, hey or look what happened.  That was, it was my--and every time he would see me, he would kind of, but I would never let him feel bad about that.  And the other thing in Roberts Show Club and had it not been for that, I wouldn't be here talking to you tonight, remember this is the most gorgeous black nightclub on the planet.  Everybody came through there, Negro.  So I'm sitting next to Billy Eckstine.  We at the bar.  Billy drinking.  Now, I love Jack Paar.  I looked at Jack Paar every night for five years, and the only night I couldn't see him 'cause I was working on Friday, but that was his night off, they did reruns.  And when Jack Paar would go off, I'd go stand in the mirror 'til five o'clock in the morning and make like I was on the Jack Paar show ['Tonight Starring Jack Paar'].  And Billy Eckstine, and you have to understand how I loved this man, and Billy Eckstine say, "(Unclear) damn, Jack Paar, racist bastard," and man, I almost jumped on him.  I said, "Jack Paar, what's wrong--?"  He said, "Man, don't you know he ain't never let a nigger sit on the couch."  And, you know, as long as I watched that I never noticed that.  So, so I went home, I didn't say it to nobody.  I didn't, got so humiliated.  I never told my wife [Lillian Smith Gregory] or nothing.  Now, I'm at Roberts and they bring in Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.], Count Basie, Joe Williams, Sarah Vaughn and bring Nipsey Russell in.  I never heard of Nipsey Russell.  But he, and all the white folk come out for that first show in the whole town, the mob, judges, everybody, you know.  So Nipsey was the house, and I told Herman, I said, "Herman, see if you can keep him all year, 'cause if this the big show and I don't get to play it, then I don't wanna work for you anymore."  Is he, (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yep, go ahead and finish.
Speaker 1: And so I said, he said, "Well, Greg [HistoryMaker Dick Gregory] how about being the emcee?"  And to this day, after I emceed, you ain't got enough money in the world to pay me to emcee a show.  That's just the bad taste I had in my mouth.  So I emceed it, and a old black guy working there at Roberts, old black guy, like the little handy man, he said to me, said, "Come here, son."  Said, "If you got five hours on stage to be funny, or you got five seconds, you just water it down, it's called a capsule.  That's what doctors do when you get sick.  They give you a little bitty pill, but it heals the whole body."  And so I heard him, and I went out there and a little, small rap in between.  And Hefner [Hugh Hefner] was sitting there.  A white comic named Irwin Corey refused to work seven days a week.  And Hefner brought me in, and that was the first time.  Now, I didn't know nothing about downtown.  I don't hang out with white folks.  Now, I don't pan around them.  That's not them.  That's me.  So I didn't know nothing about downtown.  So I had my last quarter to get all I knew.  They paying me fifty dollars.  Man, I multiply fifty dollars times seven.  I didn't know it was that much money in the world, although I was just working one night.  So I got off the bus at the wrong place, and I don't know where the Playboy Club [Chicago, Illinois] is, so I'm asking people.  It's a blizzard, and about eight blocks away, I see this huge sign, Playboy Club, and I'm running, and I'm looking at my watch.  I have to be there at eight o'clock.  I don't know that they rented that Playboy Club out to a southern, the room I'm in, a southern, white male frozen food convention.  And the guy who runs the Playboy Club was waiting to tell me I didn't have to go on.  When I hit that door, I asked the doorman, "Where's the Carousel Room?"  He say, "Second floor, to the left."  Now, I don't know this white guy is the Playboy Club, and he was waiting there.  I pushed him out the way, ran up, jumped up on the stage and start talking at eight o'clock.  At two o'clock in the morning, I was still talking.
Speaker 2: And the rest was history.
Speaker 1: The rest is history (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right.
Story_ID: 560287
Speaker 1: So, now I'm at the Playboy Club [Chicago, Illinois] and because of the way that audience was handled, Hefner [Hugh Hefner] brought me in for two weeks at two hundred fifty dollars a week.  The Playboy Club was probably the most powerful club in the history of the planet because Hefner had a book that went worldwide, and it was the intelligent, elite white folks who read it.  So it was only one Playboy Club in the whole world then where people brought keys from all over the world, 'cause it was just a--I mean you wasn't in if you didn't have a key to the Playboy Club.  You might not never get there, but at least you a member.  And I'm working there and a guy came in from Cape Kennedy [Cape Kennedy Air Force Station; Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Cape Canaveral, Florida], one of the science writers for Time magazine.  And he said, "I'd like to run over to the Playboy Club," and I said, "Well, we gave all the tickets out--." "But there's a Negro comedian over there named [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory, and every--his people have been calling me asking me to interview him."  Now, he didn't mean, they didn't mean for a interview, said, "Why don't you just go over and tell 'em who you are, Time magazine, and you wanna review Dick Gregory's act."  Now, he's a scientist.  He walked out of there so impressed, he did a story, and I made the cover of Time magazine.  It comes out in New York [New York] on Sunday night.  Jack Paar read it.  They called my house Monday morning.  "Dick, yeah, this is So and So, So and So, Jack Paar's producer.  Have you seen the story in Time magazine?  Well, it's just Jack--well, he wanna know can we get you on the show tonight."  I said, "No, I don't wanna work the show.  I know you think this is a game. Somebody--."  I said, "No, I believe you.  I don't wanna work the show."  "Why?"  "'Cause the Negroes never sit on the couch."  And I hung up and started crying.  Now, I had never told my wife [Lillian Smith Gregory] this.  I just knew the Jack Paar show ['Tonight Starring Jack Paar'], it was, I'd made it, and I told her what happened.  And while I'm telling her this, the phone rang again.  Now, it's Jack Paar.  "Dick, Mr. Parr, how come you don't wanna work my show?"  I said, "'Cause the Negroes never sit on the couch."  "Oh, well, well, come on in.  You can sit down."  Just like that.  I went in and I sat down.  Now, I didn't know that if you don't sit down you don't become one of the family.  I sit down and my salary jumped from two hundred fifty dollars a week to five thousand dollars a night.  That's the power of that show.  So many people called in that night to NBC, the circuits blew out in New York City, and they said the letters that they sent--now, think about this, white folks was sending letters, 'cause I'm sitting there talking about my children.  And they said, we didn't know black children and white children act the same.  Well, what would they know, you know?  My mama [Lucille Gregory] worked for 'em.  She ain't gonna discuss her children with them, you know.  And so all of that whole piece, and I can take that back to Billy Eckstine.  So when you look at that, just little bitty, the whole universe and just one little, bitty piece of something breaks, and then two other stories we'll be through.
Story_ID: 560288
Speaker 1: Because we forced St. Louis [Missouri] to integrate the sports, there was a guy--now, our sports was mean, man.  We had Dr. Hudlin [Richard Hudlin] who was the tennis coach.  And we were the only Negro school [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] in America because of the integration as far as, was playing white tennis players.  In U-City [University City, Missouri] where the rich Jews lived, man, but, I mean, and Hudlin knew how to teach it, and we have the experience.  So that's something you got to do at a high level all the time.  Well, in Virginia, there was a guy named Arthur Ashe, all Negro school, good tennis player, and he graduated and somebody said, you need to go to St. Louis to school because it's the only place where Negro schools play white schools.  And that's what got him there.  See you go back to them denying me that little record and we forcing them to integrate, and that was the only system where black folks was playing white folks.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And then another incident happened in 1964.  They was having the Olympic tryouts for the Olympics at Public School Stadium [St. Louis, Missouri] where I set the record.  And so I got on a plane and flew back from San Francisco [California] where I was working and I said, I stood in front of the place and asked the Negro athletes to boycott the Olympics [1964 Summer Olympics, Tokyo, Japan] until we got civil rights legislation.  Man, they wouldn't even look at me 'cause the white folks spit at me, couple of 'em called me a Communist.  So that evening, I get back on the plane to fly back to San Francisco, and I was so dejected.  Man, I just felt so bad, personally.  Four years later, two black men in Mexico balled up they fist and about four years after that, a book came out by [HistoryMaker] Harry Edwards.  It said, everybody that asked me how I got the idea, he said, "Well, I lived in East St. Louis, Illinois, which is across the river from St. Louis, Missouri.  And this day, my father said, 'You're not going to school today.'  And he said, 'They got the Olympic tryouts at Public School Stadium.  So you gonna stay out of school.  I'm a take you over there,'" and he said, "and I went over, and I saw [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory standing there with a sign, and that's where I got the idea."  And then what I learned from that is, that there's a universal god that say, "I choose you.  I don't need you.  I choose you to go plant this seed, and I defy you to determine when harvest time is gonna come.  I defy you.  That's my wind, that's my rain, that's my twelve o'clock sun, that's my cool breeze at night that make that crop grow, and ever since then I know that all you're used for is to plant the seed, and the rest of it is--," and I don't know anything that could a happened that day that equaled because all around the world, the symbol of poor, oppressed people is a clinched fist.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 560289
Speaker 1: And so you grow, you learn and you see things, and then it's kind of interesting because what happens over here, you don't know why.  When you think about George Pullman who invented the Pullman porters, and the Pullman car, he decided that the rich folks that rode trains would be happy to have a sleeping car, dining service, top.  So he went to London [England] and got the train makers to put a train together for him.  So then he decided--that happened right during Reconstruction when the blacks--which is a hell of a thing.  I'm your slave and all say I'm free, and I'm a have to come back and ask you to work for me--can I work for you?  And so he decided that what he wanted was tall, nice looking, jet black men with pearly white teeth.  And that's who he hooked, that's who he brought in for the porters.  And another thing is, you know, if you're black the white folk don't relate with you.  So if I'm in bed with a chicken or my wife's sister or the dog, who cares about you seeing it.  And that set up a whole new agenda for black folks because you had blacks folks being the town crier, telling us what was happening in California, what was happening here, what was happening here.  And if you look at that echelon of black folks who went to college that made a mark, you know, they fathers was, was dining car porters.  Thurgood Marshall's daddy [William Marshall] was a porter on the train.  And now, when they went south, there was no hotels they could sleep in.  And there was no restaurants they could eat in.  So when they went south, the black folks, they rented rooms from them.  And the folks fixed the food.  In Montgomery, Alabama, for years they, there, living with the black families, they was like family.  Well, when the movement hit in Montgomery, the Montgomery Improvement Association that went all over the world, what was happening there, the viciousness, the craziness.  And they sent millions of dollars from around the world, checks, cash to Montgomery Improvement Association.  Now, think about this, them black folks could not put that money in banks in Montgomery, Alabama 'cause first they would say you didn't put that in.  First, they'd say you stole it.  They gave that money to sleeping car porters to bring north and put in the bank and bring the receipts back when they came back.  So who would have ever believed way back then, that connection would a worked.  So when you just sit and you look at this universe, one thing leads to another and another leads to another.  And that's what, that's what makes it fun.
Speaker 2: Okay, we've covered everything.  Thank you very much, [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory--
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: It has been a very interesting evening (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Pleasure.
Speaker 2: And what you've imparted to all of us will be long remembered after all of us are gone.
Speaker 1: Oh, it'll be fun.
Speaker 2: Thank you very much.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
