Story_ID: 578233
Speaker 1: Okay, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am could you please state your full name and spell it for us please.
Speaker 2: Yes, it's Shauna, S-H-A-U-N-A, Marie, easy spelling, basic spelling, Graves, G-R-A-V-E-S and it's Robertson, R-O-B-E-R-T-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June 22, 1958, Salt Lake City, Utah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and ma'am what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a judge, county judge at the Salt Lake Justice Court.  I am the county's presiding judge at this time.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March the 15th, 2008 [March 15, 2008].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're in my home and welcome to my home we're glad to have you, tried to feed you a little bit, but you weren't hearing that, you're welcome.
Speaker 1: In Salt Lake City right?
Speaker 2: In Salt Lake City.
Speaker 1: Okay
Story_ID: 578234
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five light-weight 'People' magazine-ish type questions that we all are compelled, we are compelled to ask everyone and they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My favorite food is collard greens.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: That's a hard one.  I don't know that I have a favorite, 'cause there are many and so I, I don't have that one for you.  I don't know maybe the Southern Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't have any energy around it.  That's my favorite phrase.
Story_ID: 578235
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --and your father's side of the family--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: -but, we're gonna start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Augustine, A-U-G-U-S-T-I-N-E, Coleman, C-O-L-E-M-A-N, Morgan, M-O-R-G-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Place or birth is Fort Worth, Texas, August the 29th, 1919 [August 29, 1919].
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about your mother's side of the family  How, how far back first of all can you trace them?  Do they go back to, can, can, are there any stories from slavery?
Speaker 2: I can go back pretty far.  In fact, I have a genealogy chart, so we can go back I think right past my great grandparents.  I think that would be as far as we could go back.  I know that they came to Marshall, so I can go back about probably nine generations.  They lived in Marshall, Texas, at first and then went and settled in Fort Worth and stayed in Fort Worth and in fact I was the first generation in my family born outside of the State of Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, they go back to Marshall, Te, Texas.
Speaker 2: Marshall.
Speaker 1: Now is this back in slavery days now or you take, take 'em back that far?
Speaker 2: I think we can go just to the end of slavery.  So, I know that they were there during slavery, but I don't know, you know, if that was, if Marshall was the first place they came to.  I don't know how many people were enslaved in Marshall, but I know that we can go from Marshall forward.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You don't know if they came with, if they came from the east some place or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or from the South or?
Speaker 2: That part I'm not sure of.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Are there any stories about, from that side of the family about slavery or reconstruction or turn of the century what was going on?
Speaker 2: Nothing that I can remember my mother talking about.
Speaker 1: What did your ancestors do?
Speaker 2: Well, like most people my grandmother kept other people's homes.  She cleaned other people houses, wealthy people in the Fort Worth, Texas, area, and for awhile my mother did domestic work also, but then at some point in time decided she needed to do a little different, so she became part of the dietetics unit at the veterans hospital here locally and did that until her retirement.
Speaker 1: So, she was a dietician--
Speaker 2: Um-huh.
Speaker 1: --at vete, at the VA?
Speaker 2: The VA.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she have a chance to finish school in Te, in Texas or did she finish here or?
Speaker 2: She took her GED here.  Prior to that, she had only gone as far as the eighth grade, but again saw the need to advance and want to do a little something different, so she actually took her GED here in Salt Lake City [Utah].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 578236
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your mother [Augustine Coleman Morgan] or what motivated her to migrate to Salt Lake City [Utah]?
Speaker 2: Well, there were four of them, friends, all coming from Forth Worth [Texas] headed towards Los Angeles [California].  They stopped here to work of course.  During that time, Ogden, Utah, was a railroad town.  There were lots of military instillations in the area.  There were the coal mines which were very close in Price [Utah] and in Wyoming and so they came here to work.  Work was good.  And her friend went on to Los Angeles and he stayed in Los Angeles until he died, Mr. George Hines, and my mother stayed in Ogden, Utah, and stayed here in the state until she died.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Can you give us--now are there--so there--would she talk about what Ogden was like to her after coming from Texas?  I guess Utah would be very different from Texas.
Speaker 2: It was different, but, but Ogden was a pretty, was a hotbed.  There was a lot going on in Ogden.  You had, you know, the porters and waiters.  You had a big railroad community and so there was a, there was a pretty well-established African-American Community not far from the railroad station, so although it was certainly smaller it wasn't home, but it was, there was a lot happening in Ogden at that time.
Speaker 1: Now, other people have mentioned Ogden, to us during this visit to Utah, what was the black community of Ogden like?  I hear it's gone now.  You really can't find anything anymore.  It's, it's has been developed over--
Speaker 2: There's still a few.  There, you know, there's still a few, but where this would have been there's, there's very little.  There, there are still some churches.  There are still some old families there that have stayed in Ogden and remained in Ogden, but you had a lot of social clubs, a lot of night life.  Ogden was a booming, booming town, more like a little San Francisco [California] type of an area--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and a lot went on in Ogden.
Speaker 1: So, would the major black vaudeville acts show up there, you know, like what they call the "Chitlin Cir, Circuit" acts and that sort of--
Speaker 2: You had, you had all, yes all those that showed.  You had, my mother said you had Nat King Cole and you know so you had all of those individuals that came on the "Chitlin Circuit" came through Ogden, so it was, it was a whole different place.  It was more the place for African Americans than Salt Lake City.  Salt Lake City's black population grew probably in the '50s [1950s] or so, '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s], but prior to probably the 1960s the real hotbed in the state of Utah for African Americans would have been Ogden, Utah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  You put it better than anybody else.
Story_ID: 578237
Speaker 1: Okay, let me ask about your father's side of the family.  Can you, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: George William Graves and I don't know a lot about my father's side of the family.  I know that he was born and raised in Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Do you know when he was born?
Speaker 2: I do not have the date.  I don't, I don't know a lot about, about George W. Graves.
Speaker 1: Do you know what place in Kentucky?
Speaker 2: He was born in Louisville, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Okay, Louisville and you know what year, what year?
Speaker 2: And I'm, I'm guessing right around the time of my mother's birth--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so probably 19, probably 1922 or so.
Speaker 1: Was he a little younger than your mother?
Speaker 2: Just yeah a year or two.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, about '22 [1922]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'20 [1920], somewhere around there.
Speaker 1: Now, do you know about his ancestors and what they did?
Speaker 2: Don't know a lot about him.
Speaker 1: Did you ever meet your grandparents?
Speaker 2: On my father's side?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: No.  I met the, of course I met my grandmother on my mother's [Augustine Coleman Morgan's] side.  I didn't meet my mother's father, Wallace Coleman, was deceased by the time I was born.  Of course I knew my grandmother, Ms. Martha Scott.
Speaker 1: Okay, well what did you father do for a living?
Speaker 2: He was in the [U.S.] Navy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when my mother met him he was in service stationed in San Francisco [California] and was later stationed in San Diego [California], and I remember having contact with him up until about the age of eight.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: After about eight or nine I lost contact with him.
Speaker 1: Well, do you know if she had a chance to finish school?
Speaker 2: Couldn't tell you that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so very little on him.
Speaker 2: So very little.
Speaker 1: Now is there a story in your family or did your mother tell a story or your, or about how your, you and her, her father, I mean your, your father and she met?
Speaker 2: She met.  No, she, she didn't talk about that a whole lot.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, so I take it that the relationship didn't, wasn't very, didn't sustain itself?
Speaker 2: No in fact in my life there were two major male figures.  My mother did marry Norman D. Morgan, who worked for the Post Office, retired from the Post Office, and I think Mr. Morgan came into my mother's life when I was still a toddler.  So, for a long time I just assumed that Mr. Morgan was my father, and in fact he asked my mother several times to allow him to adopt me, but my mother thought that it was very important that I retain my name even if I didn't have that connection with my father and that was a little bit of a sore spot between the two of them, but Mr. Morgan was in my life until, until I was grown--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then the other major male figure was my godfather how as a, a big part of my life.
Speaker 1: Now what was his name?
Speaker 2: Frank Crosby and my god, and my godmother was Jayne Mae Crosby and they were definitely surrogate parents, had a tremendous amount to do with my up grow, upbringing, and I think to a large extent helped to shape where I went in life.
Story_ID: 578238
Speaker 1: Okay, now just back to your father [George William Graves] for a second now was your mother [Augustine Coleman Morgan] in San Francisco [California] for a while, is that how they met 'cause if he was--
Speaker 2: Now, I don't really know.  Now my mother was truly a traveler.  My mother went everywhere, so exactly where the two of them met I don't, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: You were born in Salt Lake City [Utah] but--
Speaker 2: I was born here.
Speaker 1: --okay because Salt Lake City is a pretty far piece from San Francisco--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --is it on the train route?
Speaker 2: Salt Lake City?
Speaker 1: No, San Francisco, does, is that the terminus for the train going west from here?  I mean from, from Ogden [Utah] or something or?
Speaker 2: It would have probably been Los Angeles [California].  It wouldn't have been San Francisco.  It would have, I would have been come and gone, but you could go that way because you could go up through Reno, up through Nevada.
Speaker 1: I was wondering what would bring a sailor to--
Speaker 2: To Ogden.
Speaker 1: --Salt Lake, to Ogden, or, or a woman from Ogden to--
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: --San Francisco?
Speaker 2: San Francisco don't know.
Speaker 1: So, they'd have to, okay.
Speaker 2: I don't have--
Speaker 1: So she never, she never-- --that I should have filled in those gaps.
Speaker 2: She never, you know, you never asked about how they met?  Okay, so, okay, so now tell us about your stepfather?  Where was he from?
Speaker 1: I don't know where he was from--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but he, as I said he lived here.  He worked for the Post Office and my mother and my stepfather had a very interesting relationship.  They stayed together for years and years and years, but they would part and he would go back to Ogden and stay in Ogden and then they'd make up and he'd come back and he'd be with us for a period of time, but as I said he was, he was a part of my life until I was, probably until I went off to college.
Speaker 2: Okay, wha, wha, what happened then really he just?
Speaker 1: Well he and my mother ultimately divorced, but they were both, it was late in life for both of them and then probably about five years or so after that he passed away.
Speaker 2: Okay I see, okay now let's see well, maybe I can get into your godparents a little later on.  Now, when you think about your--well I'll ask you now who was Frank Cro, Crosby and, and Jaime Mae?
Speaker 1: Janie Mae.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Janie Mae Cro, Crosby yeah.
Speaker 1: As I said they were my godparents and very colorful couple.  They owned a club in the Red Light District called the Lone Star and because of them I knew everybody.  I was just brought up around everybody.  I knew the pimps, the prostitutes.  I knew the clothes boosters.  I knew the church people.  I knew everybody because everybody came to the Lone Star.  They bootlegged liquor and were older.  They were an older couple and had never had children, and Mrs. Crosby took a liking to my mother when my mother was pregnant and asked my mother if she could be my godmother, so I, I stayed with them on and off for long periods of time.  They were very, very helpful to my mother, and I was very close to the two of them, very close.
Speaker 2: Okay, hum.  Now, they had a club called--were they from Te, Texas too?
Speaker 1: No, they were not from Texas.
Speaker 2: Yeah I was wondering with a Lone Star club--
Speaker 1: Lone Star.
Speaker 2: --it has, you know Te, Texas being the Lone Star State I wondered if they--
Speaker 1: I don't, I don't, I don't know now he might have been.  She was from California.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, you know I, and I haven't thought about that, you know, about that connection, but that is possible because that was the, that was the name of the club--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Now did the club attract big-name acts and that sort of thing or was it more--
Speaker 1: No, it was a smaller club--
Speaker 2: Small club.
Speaker 1: --so it had pool tables and pinball machines and a bar and you know that type of thing.
Story_ID: 578239
Speaker 1: Okay, all right now when you think about your parents, your mother's [Augustine Coleman Morgan's] personality and disposition and, and talents and your, and whatever you might know about your father [George William Graves] and, and what you know about your godparents [Frank and Janie May Crosby] and stepfather [Norman B. Morgan] who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think it's probably a combination of my godfather and my mother.  I think particularly early on my godparents had a lot to do, as I said my godfather was older and he would talk to me in a very interesting way.  You know he would sing as opposed to say to things to me he would sing things and, and he'd say--
Speaker 1: Can you give us an example of?
Speaker 2: Yeah he say, (singing) I'm gonna move way on the outskirts of town, you know things like that.  He'd say and I don't want no uncle Newby's [ph.] hanging round, and you know I'd wonder what he was tal, and now Uncle Newby, these were real people, Uncle Fenny [ph.], Uncle Newby, you know friends of theirs that I knew and of course what was behind that was he didn't want stray men around and he say I don't what you to be a plain Jane and so he'd say those kinds of things and a child that's three, four, five years old that leaves quite an impression.  And he spent lots and lots and lots of time with me, so I was always an old child because this old man--he died when I was thirteen, so from the time I was born until the time I was thirteen most of my time, my free time, was spent with this old man.  He took me shopping, you know he brought my--, he would even buy groceries and bring them to my mother's house.  He would pick me up every day and take me to elementary school.  He would buy my clothes.  He would and, and, and for him, you know, the only boyfriend that I needed to have was him.  So, my daddy was my boyfriend and that was it and I stayed pretty, pretty much on the straight and narrow, but in a very old, very mature way.  I always had a pretty mature thought and I think I got that from him.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right now do you have--now what community did, did you live in when you were growing up?  Was there a name for the community?
Speaker 2: We lived in Central City [Salt Lake City, Utah].
Speaker 1: Okay, Central City.
Speaker 2: Most black people lived in Central City.  We lived in several places in Central City, but we stayed in the Central City area until I was in the fifth grade and then we moved to a working class community called Rose Park, and I lived and stayed in Rose Park and owned a home in Rose Park until I moved here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: To this, to this home.
Story_ID: 578240
Speaker 1: All right, now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: How early?
Speaker 1: Oh, the earliest thing you can think of or if it's not something like that maybe you know, we'll just ask another question.
Speaker 2: I have lots of childhood memories, so that's why I said how--
Speaker 1: Okay, but--
Speaker 2: --early do you want me to go back.
Speaker 1: --but was there, is there a first one, is there an earliest one, the first thing you remember remembering?
Speaker 2: The first thing I think I remember as a child had to be when I was probably three and I had a sister who was cooking at the stove and pouring some grease into a container and spilled the grease in my eyes, and, and I remember things being frantic and them wrapping me up and trying to get me to the doctor to, you know, to deal with this thing that had happened to my eyes.  I think that was probably my earliest, my earliest memory.
Speaker 1: Did you suffer any damage from, from the grease really?
Speaker 2: There was a problem with my tear ducts, and they had to go in ultimately and open up my tear ducts and do some things like that, but there wasn't very much scarring and it, it wasn't too bad.  I think it was more drama, you know, than anything else, but I remember things with my sisters, my, my sister seemed to be always injuring me, some sort and another. I remember one time my sister took a blanket, and again I must have been probably about three, four at the most, took a blanket and was, you know, taking a blanket up in the air and the blanket hit a chandelier and it fell and cut me and I still have the scar on my arms, so that they had to do lots and lots and lots of stitches.  So, those were my earliest, my earliest memories.
Speaker 1: Okay, how many sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I had two.  They are both deceased.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: I was the baby.  I had two sisters and one brother, and they are, they're all gone unfortunately.  My sisters were in a horrific car accident in 1964 when they were fifteen and sixteen and of course I remember that very vividly also.  One was dead on arrival, and the other as a result of the injuries became a quadriplegic.  She lived until 1976 and passed away in 1976.
Speaker 1: That, that's pretty bad.  How old were you, you know?
Speaker 2: I was, it was in '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was six.  I believe I was six, five, about getting ready to turn six.
Speaker 1: That's got be, you know, devastating I guess for a little ki, well you know, you're a little kid and then--
Speaker 2: But again the trauma.  You know what I remember was the drama.  I remember going to the hospital.  My mother [Augustine Coleman Morgan] had her at a rehabilitation establishment in Roy, Utah, and I remember traveling to Roy a lot.  I remember how distraught my mother was, but then again I had my godparents [Frank and Janie May Crosby] who were the stabling force, truly the stabling factor in my life, so they just took control and I stayed with them and maintained my time with them and then later on my mother brought my sister home and my mother and I took care of my sister for many years.
Story_ID: 578241
Speaker 1: Okay, now we always ask this question.  Can you describe for us the, you know, I guess the house that you, you were in the longest, grew up in the longest and, and what, what was some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The house we lived in the longest was again the house in Rose Park [Salt Lake City, Utah], and it was, it was pretty important to my mother [Augustine Coleman Morgan].  It was the first home that she owned and what happened was she was a domestic again for a woman who was fairly well to do, Ms. Harriett Moyer Jones [ph.] and Ms. Jones called her Augie [ph.], and she said to her Augie it's, it's time for you to buy a house and I wanna help you do that and so she gave my mother the down payment, my mother found a modest home in Rose Park.  She offered to furnish it for her.  My mother said she didn't wanna go quite that far, but she was a wonderful benefactor to my mother.  Had three bedrooms, two baths, a kitchen and a dining room and living room, nice sized lot, so we lived really for poor people we lived fairly well.  A rambler style home, about twelve hundred square feet, large backyard, big beautiful pine tree in the front, a working-class neighborhood.  I had all kinds of friends in terms of race and ethnicity and, you know, religion, wonderful community.  But they were also a fair amount of African Americans that lived in the neighborhood, so I had aunties pretty close.  I had my Aunt Ferdella [ph.] across the street and Mama Sue around the corner, Ms. Taylor down the street and my brother lived around the other corner, so I was surrounded by people all the time, lots of love, lots of, lots of care.  You know I never remember being alone or frightened or if my mother came home and or if I, I was home alone and my mother wasn't there I always had some place to go, so, my childhood was, looking back, pretty special.
Speaker 1: Okay, what about sights, sounds, and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Of growing up, what I remember about Rose Park was the birds.  You could always hear the birds chirping in the morning, and we had grapevines that grew along the back fence and you could, you know, see those birds picking those, those grapes and the other thing, of course, I remember was at that time we had a clothesline, so we would wash the clothes and you'd put the clothes on the clothesline with the old-fashioned wooden pins.  My mother refused for a long time to get an electric dryer because she liked the smell, you know, of the clothes and the dryer was, those sort of things that, that I remember.
Story_ID: 578242
Speaker 1: Okay, now was, was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, church was a huge part of growing up.  Interestingly enough I joined the church when I was six.  I was baptized at the age of six and at that time my mother wasn't a major churchgoer, but for whatever reason I've always loved the church, and so ultimately I brought my mother back to the church.  Church was a major part of my life.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: At that time, I went to New Pilgrim Baptist Church and then when I was 17 I joined the Calvary Baptist Church, but early on I belonged to Pilgrim and prior to New Pilgrim I actually belonged to New Hope Baptist Church, so I was Baptist, but I had different people who seem to like me for whatever reason pick me up and make sure that I got to church and so brought people into my life that stayed into my life, Dr. Albert Henry, Mrs. Annie Adams who did my hair.  You know, all of those people were members of the church.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you get a chance to exercise in some leadership as a youth in, in church?
Speaker 2: Exercise some leadership.  I don't know if I was much of a leader.  My, my name when I was little was, was Ms. Prissy, so I don't know that I led a whole lot.  I think I probably stayed to myself, but I always did things like speaking, singing.  I was always a member of a choir or, you know, those types of things, and of course that's where we learned to lead is in the church.  That's, for many African Americans that's, that's where you learn your leadership skills.  That's where you learn your speaking skills.  That's where you personality is formed and formulated is, is in the church.
Story_ID: 578243
Speaker 1: Okay now what about school, now what, what school did you start at?
Speaker 2: It, well in, in grade school--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --elementary school you wa--I started at Jefferson Elementary School [Salt Lake City, Utah] and as I said when I was ten or so we moved to Rose Park and so I went to Matheson Elementary [School, Salt Lake City, Utah] for two years, and then after that went to Northwest Junior High [School, Salt Lake City, Utah] and then West High [School, Salt Lake City, Utah].  Graduated from West High in 1976, went on to Arizona State University [Tempe, Arizona].
Speaker 1: Well, now I wanna go back a little bit now.
Speaker 2: You wanna go back, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, West High School okay, so let's go back to grade school did you have a favorite subject in, in grade school and did you like grade school?
Speaker 2: I liked school period. I, I've always loved, and I think my favorite subject was history.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it remains so today.
Speaker 1: Now a lot of people recoil at history and a lot of people now are--history seems to bounce off of them, so, so what happened to you where you were, you know, really liked history?  Did you have a good teacher?
Speaker 2: I don't remember my grade school teacher, but what I remember was the first time I had an opportunity to travel and travel brought about my love for history and so you know they just went hand-in-hand.  I wanted to know about places.  I wanted to know about the world, so I read a lot.  My mother [Augustine Coleman Morgan] had encyclopedias and world books and so I just enjoyed everything about history.  And, and I said I still do.
Speaker 1: Is there any particular aspect of history that you're most fascinated with?
Speaker 2: I think I like, I like some ancient history, what would be considered ancient history.  Always interested in the history that involves African Americans - when we came to this country, what we did in this country, our lives in this country, so, I like both of those, both of those periods, probably post-Revolutionary War and then some ancient history.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you have a good history teacher in grade school or high school?
Speaker 2: I don't really remember my teachers in grade school, so I assume they were good.  Now, I did have a good principal though.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Had a fabulous principal.
Speaker 1: --now this is the principal of which school?
Speaker 2: In, at Jefferson Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was the principal's name?
Speaker 2: Mr. Baxter and what I remember about Mr. Baxter was Mr. Baxter was from Scotland and I still have a relationship with Mr. Baxter today by the way.  But, Mr. Baxter would come around once a month, and he would dress in his traditional wear and he would play the bagpipes and he would go from class to class playing those bagpipes.  And when we moved to Rose Park oddly enough Mr. Baxter lived in the neighborhood, and I met Mr. Baxter's son and daughter.  John Baxter and I today--John is a, is a judge also.  He is a municipal court judge and when I, when on to the bench in 1999 his father sent me a wonderful picture and a card.  But I followed that music and loved the Scottish bagpipe music today.  When I had an opportunity to visit Great Britain, I made sure that I went to Scotland that I looked up his, his crest and his pattern and all of those things because I remember Mr. Baxter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 578244
Speaker 1: Now any other teachers, now you went to Matheson Elementary School [Salt Lake City, Utah] and that's when you moved, is that when you moved?
Speaker 2: That's when we moved to Rose Park.
Speaker 1: Okay Rose Park and then North End Junior High School.
Speaker 2: Northwest.
Speaker 1: Northwest, okay.  Northwest Junior High School [Salt Lake City, Utah].  Were there any memorable teachers or mentors there?
Speaker 2: I had three teachers that were memorable, Gail Delipiante (ph.) was my art teacher and what was memorable about Gail was that Gail was the first African-American teacher that I had ever had and so of course she was a wonderful role model.  I had a music teacher, Ms. Shaumway (ph.) who was the first person that ever asked about voice and you know, started to shape my love for music and singing.  And I had an English teacher, and I don't remember her name and she was the most difficult teacher I ever had in life, but probably one of my most favorite teachers.  And the reason I loved this English teacher was because I used to go home every day and tell my mother that I didn't like her and I thought she was prejudiced and all those kinds of things, and my mother used to say to me no matter whether you like her or not she has something that you need, so you need to figure out a way to get that from her and I, I remember that and she was very difficult, but I learned a lot and I realized that she was tough because she wanted you to learn what it was she was teaching, but I think those were probably my favorite teachers in junior high school.  In high school [West High School, Salt Lake City, Utah], I had good teachers.  I had a Ms. Heaton (ph.), the newspaper teacher, you know I had lots of wonderful teachers in high school and I had other African-American teachers by the time I got to high school, but my favorite teachers really I started to have a love for teachers in junior high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, now were you involved in various clubs and activities in junior high school and high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, I, yeah I started singing in junior high school, so I did everything that had to do with, with singing, the glee clubs and those things.  By the time I got out of high school, of course I kept that up and was a member of West High Acappella and then was a member of the 'Red and Black,' which was the West High Paper, so I kept you know, kept, kept the love of those things.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was, was popular cul, did popular culture exert a great influence on you, popular music like Motown music or I don't know if that was coming around when you were--?
Speaker 2: Certainly it was.  It, it, had a, it had a big influence, but I've always liked all types of music, so of course I loved all of the music of the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], and I had, you know for a long period of time I had older sisters, so I knew you know all the groups, but my mother liked jazz so I was very familiar with jazz.  And coming up in junior high and high school in this area you were exposed to things like country music.  You know we were required to know how to square dance, so I have the love for country and western music.  We were required to know something about classical music, you know, so I have a love for Bach and Beethoven.  I love the opera.  I love the symphony, so I love it, I love it all.  I have a deep love for gospel music, which is what I received at church, but I don't care what kind of music you name I probably, I probably like it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: To some extent.  Ev, everything but, you know, I'm, I'm not a big metal fan or I can't go that far, but other than that probably--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Probably have love for it.
Story_ID: 578245
Speaker 1: Now, now what about--now you grew up in the age of television.  Was that a big par, part of growing up or, or the movies or?
Speaker 2: No, I've always liked the movies.  I've never been a big television person per se.  I watched some television.  My favorite show growing up was 'Perry Mason' (laughter).  That was my favorite, the old black and white 'Perry Mason' and I still watch those.  They come on here during the weekdays and so I still watch the old reruns of 'Perry Mason,' but other than that I can't think of anything that I watched on TV.  I wasn't a big television person.
Speaker 1: You never watched 'The Defenders' or did you ever-- do you remember that one, B.G. Marshall and Robert--?
Speaker 2: I didn't, I didn't watch that, you know I liked 'Batman' and I liked 'Julia,' remember with [HM] Diahann Carroll.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So I liked those kinds of things, because of course that was the first time that we saw an African-American woman in a lead role in network television and so I was sensitive to the time, so I liked those things that you know involved African Americans, 'cause I liked Flip Wilson, remember he had the variety show and so I liked those kinds of things on television.
Speaker 1: 'I Spy' with Bill Cosby.
Speaker 2: I Spy--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: All right, so did you--now you were a singer too right in the chorus in school?
Speaker 2: I sang.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I sang, I still sing some.
Speaker 1: So did, did the 'Perry Mason' show inspire you to--did you think, did you have a vocation in line when you were in high school about what--
Speaker 2: You know and I, I've been asked that several times and wondered about that, and I, I think that probably did have an influence.  I didn't see it as an influence at first, you know, but thinking back I think somewhere in the back of my mind, you know, I thought about that.  Of course, Perry Mason was the person that always won and always had the person on the witness stand crack and I can remember my legal career when I had my one Perry, Perry Mason moment, you know, I, I though back to that, so I'm sure it had an influence.
Speaker 1: Now, now did you, could you imagine yourself in those days as a lawyer, you know the one female character in 'Perry Mason' I remember in the cast was Della Street--
Speaker 2: Della yeah.
Speaker 1: --yeah, Della the--she was like the legal secretary, but could you imagine, in those days could you imagine yourself as a lawyer?
Speaker 2: Oh certainly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Certainly, I, I mean I imagined myself as lots of things.  I think the first thing I wanted to be was a sports reporter.  I loved sports and I think that was the first thing that I wanted.  I had a penchant for journalism, but I, I imagined myself as, you know, whatever I wanna be.  I don't think I ever had any doubt that whatever I wanted to do I could do and I always had that kind of support.  This community, in this community you had that type of support.  You always had people pushing, and the thing that I liked about being born and raised here was not only did I know the pimps and the prostitutes and the people in the Red Light District, but I also knew that there was you know a doctor, a dentist, an attorney, an insurance person.  You saw them all because the community was small enough that if you didn't come together, you, you know there was, there was nobody for you to be with, so we always had access.  We had good access to the professional people in this community, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 578246
Speaker 1: Now, in I guess 1975 and you were seventeen you participated in the Utah Student Cultural Exchange Program is that right?
Speaker 2: Yes, but I would have been fifteen.
Speaker 1: Fifteen.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right they've got the wrong age here--
Speaker 2: That's okay.
Speaker 1: --I'll have to tell them when I get back to Chicago [Illinois], but at age fifteen you participated in the Utah Student Cultural Exchange Program and went travel, and travelled to New Zealand.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's thousands of miles away.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now had you ever been very far from Salt Lake City [Utah]?
Speaker 2: Yes I had.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, I had a very good friend, Dr. Albert Henry, and, and Dr. Henry started what was called the Rainbow Honor Society, so, and I was also part of the NAACP's [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Drill Team, the NAACP Sisters of Soul, so every year we went to convention, NAACP convention regionals.  I've been to NAACP national conventions.  One of the things that students receive if they had you know 3.0 or better we'd take a trip every year, so we had been, we had travelled some.  You know we hadn't travelled extensively, but we had certainly been to neighboring states of Colorado and California and Washington and Oregon, so had done some travelling.
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell us about how you were selected to travel to New Zealand?
Speaker 2: Well, again I was very close to Ms. Henry and there was another person Mr. Brian Hesslove (ph.), and Brian was a pianist or is a pianist.  I shouldn't say was because he, he is still a pianist and so Brian and I were selected because we could sing and her daughter Julia they were looking for a delegation.  Ms. Henry had met a native Maori of New Zealand and they had started to talk and she wanted to take a group that represented the United States to New Zealand, so there were blacks, there were whites, there were Native Americans and so we were all selected for various reasons.  You know the Native Americans did their traditional dance and those types of things, and it was a group of probably twenty of us I would say.
Speaker 1: Now was there, what, were there any specific cultural gifts that the black Americans offered Maori?
Speaker 2: We took some things.  Ms. Henry took, you know they had some things that they took, but what we found with the people of New Zealand we found very quickly and had to learn very quickly that it was customary in New Zealand if you said I really like that purse you have, that people would give things to you.  So, we had to learn early not to compliment, not to, you know that people would bring things to the local places that we stayed, so I have lots of gifts around me that I brought from New Zealand.
Speaker 1: Now, did that apply to the Maori or, or the white residents in New, New Zealand too?
Speaker 2: I didn't see too many white residents in New Zealand, but it, it was cultural in nature and we were there to, to learn about the Maori people.  We learned very mu, very little about the British people.  We did have some interaction with some whites, but very little, but we stayed in traditional Maori places, churches, and you know things like that and ate traditional food and you know all of those kinds of things, so it was a wonderful exchange.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 578247
Speaker 1: Well tell us a little bit now who are the Maori and are they, is there any affinity between Af, African Americans and the Maori or were there any comparisons that you could make between their experience and, and the experience of African Americans?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the Maoris [sic] are the natives of New Zealand and of course the biggest outside influence in New Zealand were the British.  You know so you had the, the British that came to that part of the world as well as Australia.  The Maoris unlike the Aborigines weren't quite as oppressed as you know--the Maoris weren't quite as oppressed as the Aborigines, but certainly I think that they had some cultural clashes with the white Brits, but they've been able to maintain their culture, their communities and at that time so many things were very, very unspoiled.  It's been a long time since I've been to New Zealand, but I think what fascinated us most was when we got to New Zealand and we started to see the native people, the Tahitians, the, the Maoris, the Aborigines, the native-born Hawaiians, the Samoans, the Tongans, the Fijians.  I think what struck us the most was the fact that the Fijians were so dark, and then of course we learned that we had conquered some of those parts of the world also, so there was some, you know, some, some African relationship with some of those parts of the world, but some native born, particularly in, in, in that part of the country you will some native born people that are very dark, but all of olive, so of course there's, there's that African tint, if you will.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah I've seen some of the Maoris look like brothers in Detroit, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes with the hair.
Speaker 1: And the afros yeah--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --and--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: But if you really, but there are some others, you know that are extremely dark.
Speaker 1: In your opinion and after observing them, are they going, were they going through a similar identity crisis as other people like American Indians or African Americans in terms of--
Speaker 2: No, no, they have done very well at holding on to their culture.  I think now you're seeing more assimilation and less of it which is, you know, too bad, you know, but at that time it was, it was very important for them to hold on to what they were.  I was surprised even in, you know, in the '70s [1970s] how, how few people that were native-born people had things like indoor toilets, you know, things of that nature, so still they very closely held culture.  There were parts of New Zealand up in Rotorua and Whangarei and places like that where we did communal bathing in the hot springs and you know that was, that was very interesting for a fifteen-year-old kid.
Speaker 1: So nobody worried about--
Speaker 2: We did, but they didn't worry about us and so after a while we figured out that they didn't care, you know, but wonderful time we had in New Zealand.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wonderful.
Speaker 1: Now the landscape of New Zealand had, was just featured a couple of years ago in the 'Lord of the Rings'--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --shot entirely in New Zealand--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --mountains, tropical--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --settings, plains, everything right--
Speaker 2: Everything.
Speaker 1: --there in one island.
Speaker 2: Well they're two islands.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's a North Island and a South Island, so you get a different feel. It's almost like the North Island I believe it is and I can't remember now, but I think it's the North Island that, one experience experiences things like snow and you know so you got more mountainous and the other island is, is, is more warm, more tropical in nature.  You know so between the two islands they had everything.  They had everything, but New Zealand is a fabulous, fabulous place.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Is there any one thing that surprised you as a, as a fifteen-year-old the most about New Zealand about the people or the culture or?
Speaker 2: How warm the people were.  The types of food that they ate I think that was the thing that shocked me most.  I remember thinking oh I'm gonna, I'm gonna starve to death by the time I get home 'cause there's things that I don't eat.  You know New Zealand is surrounded by water.  I don't eat shellfish.  You know, so I, I just assumed, you know, that they would eat a lot, and they did they ate a lot of abalone, a lot of fish, a lot of things from the sea.  They ate a lot of that, but was really shocking were the other things that they ate.  You know they would dig pits and it was lots of pork and beef, well-seasoned, cooked all day, yellow-meat watermelon, fabulous sweet potatoes.  I think I gained twenty pounds by the time I got back home, plus there was that British influence, so you would have tea, you know, you, you'd have tea several times a day and tea wasn't a cup of tea.  It was sandwiches and desserts and you know all of those kinds of things and so they eat a lot of pork and, and beef and you know things that I was really, I was really shocked at, a lot of good food, very good food.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so were you changed by the experience when you came back home?
Speaker 2: Oh certainly, oh certainly.  You couldn't help but be, but be changed, but the, with the warmth, the tradition, the dances, the language, the sights, the sounds, all of that was fabulous and certainly fueled my love for travel.
Story_ID: 578248
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you got back you had two more years of high school [West High School, Salt Lake City, Utah]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and you were on a newspaper staff and you sung like we said before, did you in your last couple of years had you kind of resolved what your vocation was gonna, you know did you really think about what you were gonna do?
Speaker 2: No, all I knew was that I wanted to leave the state of Utah, so whatever could get me out of here that was what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Now, what was, what was repelling you from Utah or, or what was fueling this desire to leave--
Speaker 2: Well I was convinced, you know, that I wasn't black enough, that I was missing the black experience if you will that I had been surrounded and influenced by the Mormon culture, I was missing being black, so I wanted to have an opportunity to be more black, so, so I had a desire to leave.  Of course, it's, it's funny now, but at the time I was, I was ready to go.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, did you have a choice of a lot of the colleges to, did you have a lot of colleges to choose from?
Speaker 2: I, I didn't, I didn't apply at a lot of colleges.  I mean, I had to, I had to be real about where I was gonna be and by that time my godfather [Frank Crosby] had passed away and my godmother [Janie Mae Crosby] had remarried, and she had married Mr. Perry Humphries, who was an airman and he had some problems with his lungs and so they bought a home in Tucson [Arizona], so I knew a little bit about Arizona because I knew that Arizona State [University, Tempe, Arizona] was a big sports school and I thought well that, okay I'd be a little ways from them, but I could still have some support, you know, if I needed some support, and Tempe is about 102 miles from, was 102 miles from where they lived, so that was where I applied and that's where I was accepted and that's where I went.
Speaker 1: Okay, Arizona State University.  So you graduated from high school in '76 [1976] and attended Arizona State for the next four years.
Speaker 2: For part of the next four years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A little interruption, went to American University and spent some time in [Washington] D.C.--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and did some things there, but--
Story_ID: 578249
Speaker 1: All right so you went to [Washington] D.C. to be, to work as an intern with Orrin Hatch right the senator from--
Speaker 2: I did, well it was called the Washington American Program and as part of that program, Washington Studies Program [Washington Semester Program], and as part of that program you had to have a job, so you had classes at the American University campus, and it was really an experience of the nation's capital, so the governmental aspect or, or the criminal justice system or whatever part of the, of the government that you chose, and I had a friend here who was a member of the Mormon church and at that time Orrin Hatch was the junior senator and they hooked me up with Senator Hatch and he hired me on his staff and again we have remained very good friends up until now.
Speaker 1: The senior senator was that Morris Udall or, or no he was--
Speaker 2: No, at that time the senior senative, senator from the state of Utah was Jake Garn.
Speaker 1: Jake, okay all right.
Speaker 2: He was senior and Hatch was junior.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so, so you worked in the Virginia Parole and Probation Department.
Speaker 2: As part of that also.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Because by that time I had chosen a major.  My major was criminal justice and so I wanted to look at the parole aspect as well as what was happening on the [Capitol] Hill.  Of course what was happening on the hill was a lot more exciting, but the Virginia Parole and Probation Department had a lot more to do with what my major was.
Speaker 1: Now what was your first impression of looking at the criminal justice system up close?
Speaker 2: Well my first impression was that we were part of it in a big way.  Most of the people on my case load or a large number were African Americans.  I remember doing the home visits and you know things of that nature, but I left feeling that there was definitely work to do, that I would never have a hard time trying to find a job, that they were always going to people that were gonna break the law and just took it from that philosophical point of view and moved forward.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in that program for how long for?
Speaker 2: Washington Semester Program it was a semester.
Speaker 1: Okay one semester.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so it was a semester and then came back and then the other half of the year did the study tour to Great Britain.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that was an exciting year in college, I guess.
Speaker 2: Very exciting.
Story_ID: 578250
Speaker 1: Now before we get you to Great Britain, tell us about joining Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority [AKA].  You did that in 1977?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did, I did.  Well, again you, you use what you have and being from the state of Utah which people thought was comical in and of itself and people couldn't believe that there were black people, particularly black people that were born in the state of Utah, so that was always a wonderful door opener, but I again I sang, so the first thing that I did leaving here, my pastor said the first thing you got to do is find a church to get in, but I found the campus gospel choir and joined the gospel choir.  All the AKAs sang, so I met the AKAs in choir and when the rush came that year I was invited and, and I accepted and I've been a member of the sorority gladly ever since.
Speaker 1: Has the AKA sorority, I guess, has it in any way or has it influenced your concept of leadership?
Speaker 2: Well one of the things that the sorority teaches is leadership.  That's what the sorority is all about, leadership and service, you know, so, so you start that as a college student.  You're encouraged to take on roles.  I held office.  I worked.  We did community service and so you, you, you learn how to be a leader.  You know we learned how to run a meeting.  We learned parliamentary procedures.  We learned how to control a budget.  You know, we learned all those things.  Certainly there were the fun things that people know about sororities and fraternities and we did some of those things too, but if you have a dance somebody has to take care of the money.  You have to account for where the money goes, you know, you have to be accountable for those things and so the sorority really started shaping my idea of what it took to be a leader, to lead, to lead a group of people.
Story_ID: 578251
Speaker 1: Now we were talking about football off cam, camera here, but did you get a chance to do any sports casting or sports writing when you were at Ar, Arizona State [University, Tempe, Arizona]?
Speaker 2: I didn't.  By that time, I had figured out, actually I figured out about three months after I went to ASU what I was going to do.  I went thinking that I was going to major in psychology and, and wanting that whole psych background, but I ran into a professor who was a Hispanic male and he asked me one day after class what was I going to do with my life.  I said I'm gonna be a psychologist.  He said so you're gonna get a PhD. I said well, no I'm here to get a B.S.  He said you can't do anything with a B.S. in psychology.  He said did your parents pay for you to come to this school.  I said no, I'm here on loans and grants just like everybody else.  He said have you ever thought about majoring in criminal justice.  I had a criminal justice class.  I said I hadn't, I hadn't really thought about that.  He said I tell you what, you poor, you black, there's money out there for people who major in this field and you might want to think about it.  I did, I got some of that money from, it's called LEEP money.
Speaker 1: Oh, LEEP, yeah.
Speaker 2: I got some of that LEEP money and the rest as they say is history, so.
Story_ID: 578252
Speaker 1: Okay, now, well tell us about the trip to Great Britain.  Now you went to Great Britain [United Kingdom] on a criminal justice--
Speaker 2: Study tour.
Speaker 1: --system study tour--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --and now what part of Britain did you go to?
Speaker 2: We went to London [England], Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire.  We went to Edinburgh, Scotland.  I'm sure I'm probably forgetting a few of the Shires that we went to that--
Speaker 1: Nottinghamshire that's where the good of sheriff of Nottingham was years ago--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --of legend anyway.
Speaker 2: Yeah of legend, yes of legend, Yorkshire, Skegness by the sea.  I did a little traveling in that part of the country.  I looked at the--
Speaker 1: So you didn't just stay in one place--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: -- but just moved around looking at--
Speaker 2: --no, no our role was to look at the system so to look at the court system, to look at the police system, the prison and jail system, and to compare them to what we knew of here--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and so ultimately what you found, what I found when I went to Great Britain was when I really learned where the United States had come from.  We make this proclamation in this country that we are a melting pot, you know that people have come and they've helped to develop the culture and the reality is what we are is a British core culture and it was very evident in traveling throughout Great Britain, you know, to just to see the likenesses.  Yes, the judges are red or purple and they do things with a little more pomp and circumstance--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and they wear wigs and you have barristers that appear in court.  You have solicitors, but still you could see it, you know you could definitely see exactly what this country was formulated on and based on and so it was a, a real eye-opener.
Speaker 1: Now Britain is the, you know, at one time had a, you know if you look at the things, the old movies like, well something like even 'Braveheart' and the, what criminal justice was like, you know, in those days the crowds standing around and scaffolding, you know real bloodthirsty, but, but, you know then you look at the development of modern police force in Britain by Sir Robert Peel back in 1830s--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and its transference over to here and Australia--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and other parts of the British Empire--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that, the, so policing, I mean as a civilian--
Speaker 2: As we know today.
Speaker 1: --yeah we know it--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know starts there--
Speaker 2: --it's a subset.
Speaker 1: --and it's a, well how, how did you, did you think that after going there looking at what they were doing how did it compare to what we were doing here?
Speaker 2: It was the same.  So, so, you know ultimately what I came out thinking was it's the same.  We're looking at ourselves in the mirror.  Again, you know, some, the, the differences were so minor.  I, I, I loved the, the pomp that you see or that you saw at that time.  You know the arrival of the judge and the, you know so there's a little more formality, you know all those kinds of things, but you could still see it.  Even in the Houses of Parliament, yeah there's some differences between the House of Lords and the House of Commons, but you could still see it.  You can see the similarities between the Senate and the Congress, so everything about it.  Only thing is of course we don't have a king, which is one of the things that they were moving away from.  You know we don't have a king, but other than that we do everything they do.  They don't celebrate the Fourth of July, but other than that it is just, we are just a subset of the, of the British people--
Story_ID: 578253
Speaker 1: Now is the position of black people or people of color the same in Britain [the United Kingdom] as it is here?
Speaker 2: At that time, there had begun to be a big cry from blacks, and there was a lot of talk about were people, for example, that were born in the [Caribbean] islands, were they truly British citizens, because you were getting large influx of blacks from other places who were British citizens for all intents and purposes.  But of course you know when you get too many that come in, there gets to, to be this outcry, so you were really beginning, and they were very interested in the Civil Rights Movement and, and, and some of the people that I met wanted to question me about you know what was happening here and how did this take place.  Of course, that wasn't my role and I hadn't been a major part of any movement, but the fact that I was from the U.S. they had those questions and you know they wanted to know those things and so there were, there were some real issues about race and citizenship that were cropping up in Great Britain at that time.  I have not followed it. That was in the late '70s [1970s] and early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think 60 Minutes--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --detailed a rise in the national party or something like that in, in Britain.
Speaker 2: In, in Great Britain, yes.
Speaker 1: And then I know either in the late '70s [1970s] or early '80s [1980s] they had the riots in Tottenham and the--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, so all, all was really beginning at that time and so it was, it was a hot political bed for black people and what was interesting about Great Britain that I didn't see here was Great Britain was more of, had more of a cultural mix.  At that time, I remember that I had my hair in braids and I had a braid that came down that stopped, you know, here and had a couple of beads on it and you know I was just doing it for the look of things, but the bead on the end was red and so it looked like I had the red stationary dot in the middle of my forehead.  So, there were often times people would think that I was Hindu or, or something, you know so because you had that cultural mix.  So, I would have people that would approach me, and it took me awhile to figure out, you know, why I was at attracting, you know, the people that I was attracting, but they weren't sure and they didn't know until I opened my mouth.  So, I met some fabulous people in Great Britain, very, very political underground things that were occurring.  As a student, I needed to be careful and I needed to certainly honor and respect my professor, so I didn't go too far afield, but definitely had some interesting discussions.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 578254
Speaker 1: All right, so you came back and then you graduated from Arizona State [University, Tempe, Arizona] in--
Speaker 2: 1980.
Speaker 1: --1980 okay, now had you decided then to go on to graduate school for criminal justice or what?
Speaker 2: I had, I had looked at either a PhD in criminology or at law school and in fact my relationship with Senator [Orren] Hatch had developed and he had certainly made some inroads whereby I could have attended law school in the District of Columbia, but as much as I loved the chocolate city, I felt that I probably needed to come home because my mother was here and I needed to, to be close.  I needed to be close to home, so I chose to come home.
Speaker 1: That must have been really a change being in Washington D.C.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean that really was chocolate city.  That was the height of the chocolate city days and--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes D.C was fabulous and really I have to admit I was afraid to stay in Washington D.C. because I knew that school would be the farthest thing from my mind if I lived in Washington D.C.  It was such an exciting city.  D.C. was electric.  Of course, [HM] Marion Barry was the mayor.  You had just so much happening in D.C., and I just knew that school just would not be first and foremost in my mind.
Speaker 1: Now was that the, that was, was that the, had they started the go-go music then in D.C.?
Speaker 2: Some--,
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --some, just the, again the beginning.  You know that was the begin, the '80s [1980s] was the beginning of rap and you know lots of things, the whole Rick James, Parliament Funkadelic, all of that kind of thing was very popular in D.C. at the time, so music was, you know was definitely king.  There was a lot of things happening with music and you know everybody came to D.C., so it was, it was a fabulous place to be in the late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Okay, now when you came back, now tell me I'm skipping something, but right here the next item we, we have is that you became a Moroni L. Jensen Utah State House Fellow in Salt Lake City.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: You were selected from over 150 applicants.
Speaker 2: Yes, now what that was about was an entree for young people into state government, how to bring African Americans into various positions in state government.  So, I believe that I had just started my master's program or was at the end of my master's program when I got that opportunity and led me into my first job in state government, which was with the Department of Youth Corrections, and I stayed with the Department of Youth Corrections for a number of years and then went into the governor's office and stayed there until I did law school and went on forward.
Story_ID: 578255
Speaker 1: What about the Division, [Utah] Division of Youth Corrections and the Office of Standards and Evaluations--
Speaker 2: Yes with youth corrections--
Speaker 1: Now youth--
Speaker 2: --and that came as a result of the [Moroni L. Jensen Utah State House] Fellowship.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, the fellowship placed you with an office, if you will, or, or with a department and I had a couple of things that were going at that time.  I also needed some hours in my master's program.  I needed some, some, some work hours, and so they, they went hand in hand and that's how I got into the Department of Youth Corrections.
Speaker 1: Now, anybody who's ever been to juvenile court, you know, for the first time is just probably shocked, I know I was, finding a number of youth that are--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --in that system--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and other variety of things that are being done by youth.
Speaker 2: And so young, so, you, you wonder where are the parents?  Who's been training you?  Where is the development?  What's, what's going on here, talk about a sad system.  It has to be the youth.  Of, of every part of corrections I think the saddest part of corrections is the youth correction system.
Speaker 1: And, and yet today many people are trying to try more and more youth as adults.
Speaker 2: As adults.
Speaker 1: How do you feel about that?
Speaker 2: I'm very much against that.  I think that there are things that you do when you are young that hopefully you grow out of.  Even in the court that I'm in, I look at the young people that come through for things like thefts and minors possessing alcohol, and I think to myself you're gonna have a record.  You know there was a time when if you stole something the person at the local store took you home, you know, or got it back and sent you on your way, but now kids are charged with those offenses, so they don't, they don't have an opportunity to grow out of them, they're, they're charged, they have those records and they become a part of the system and the door just goes around and around and around, very sad.
Speaker 1: Well, so you were actually a treatment counselor--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --at the Division of Youth and Corrections--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Diagnostic Evaluation Center.  Do you have any stories from those days that you can tell us or a story?
Speaker 2: Yes, well I knew when it time for me to leave.  That was a facility that was a lockup facility.  It was a 24-hour treatment facility, but a kid couldn't walk out the door if they chose to walk out the door, so we had school there, there were classes, there were, you know, so it was in between.  It wasn't a detention center, but they were there for treatment purposes and I can remember being up one night probably about two or three o'clock in the morning, it was snowing outside and a young lady bolted from one of the rooms and came past me and ran out of the facility.  I got up and ran after her and you know tackled her in the snow, and I remember thinking this is just, this is just not what I want to do.  This is just, and she had to be all of fourteen.  I thought this is just not what I wanna do for a living, so.
Speaker 1: Chasing down youth.
Speaker 2: Yeah, chasing down young people that you're trying to help, that, that certainly needs some guidance and you know all you got from them was push back and name calling and you know I thought this is just, this is just not for me.
Story_ID: 578256
Speaker 1: Now in '84 [1984], from '84 [1984] to '87 [1987], well in '84 [1984] you were appointed by [Utah] Governor Scott M. Matheson to head the State Office of Black Affairs--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --now how did you--now this is a pretty fast rise from, you'd just been out of college for four years, but your, you know the State Office of Black Affairs seems like a real big deal to most people, but is it--
Speaker 2: Well, again this is a tight-knit community.  This is at, at least for me the nurturing was ever present.  If there was something that they thought that I could do or that I wanted to do there was gonna be somebody that would make a call.  It would either be Reverend Davis or Ms. Henry or Dr. Coleman or Dr. Refisha (ph.) Adams, you know they were, they were gonna make those inroads.  And so when that position became available, Ms. Linda Dupont Johnson had, had preceded me, when that position became available I had been with Youth Corrections and again I knew I wanted to do something a little different, I, and I had sat, I believe I had sat for a year on the Black Advisory Council, so I knew a little bit about the position, not a lot, but I simply talked to the people that I knew and they got the application up there and I had an opportunity, they got me to the governor, they could get me that far.  They got me to the governor, and Governor Matheson and I just clicked and that was that.
Speaker 1: Now, now what is the Black Advisory Council?
Speaker 2: What it is, it is the link between the governor and the African-American community.  It started out with Governor Calvin Rampton and at time was actually a position in the governor's office as part of the governor's staff.  As years went on, it, you know moved to the Department of Community and Economic Developments and some other kinds of things, but Governor Rampton was very close to the African-American community and always wanted to keep an ear to the ground.  And so he started the position, and Governor Matheson maintained the position and all governors since have you know have at least made, have at, have at least had someone in the position as that link, as that go-between if you will.  But, what we have found particularly with the current governor, is that he's his own link.  He, he feels very comfortable about conversing and being with the community in his own right.  We've had some governors that did that better than others.  Governor Matheson, Governor Rampton, the two Democratic governors, of course, were closer to the community, then the next two governors were Republican governors.  The governor we have now [Jon Huntsman, Jr.] is a Republican governor, but seems to again be very comfortable.  He's maintained the position, but if he needs something from the community he, he makes those inroads himself.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you were as a head of the State Office of Black Affairs, then did you preside over the council, the Black Advisory Council?
Speaker 2: The Black Advisory Council--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --they were my advisory council, so I was actually, to say preside over, I mean I worked with them.  I actually staffed that council.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you know a level of super, you know of at least ma, maintain the structure so they can--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --meet and yeah okay.  Now I've heard there is now a Samoan Advisory Council--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --a Tongan Advise, Advisory--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Council, Mexican--
Speaker 2: Yes,
Speaker 1: --and, and Paiute I mean, you know, I can go on and on, right.
Speaker 2: At that time, there was Indian Affairs, Black Affairs, I believe Hispanic Affairs, and Asian Affairs, but some of those have broken out into different sub groups, because we have a very large Pacific Islander population that felt that they needed a voice.  There, there's of course more than one tribe represented in this area, so you've had that type of a subdivision that have come from the original four councils.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 578257
Speaker 1: Now what were some of those concerns in the black community in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, there was a big concern with the Utah state prison, the fact that we were less than 1 percent of the population and were roughly I think at that time about, yeah about 9, 10 percent of the prison population.  There was--
Speaker 1: So, roughly being incarcerated ten times the rate of other people.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  There were several young African-American men that were on death row at that time, so there was a watchful eye on some of that.  There's, there's always an education component.  There's always an educational concern.  Are our children graduating at the same rate?  Are our children going on to college at the same rate?  So, interestingly enough, some of the same concerns that you have now, the economics of things.  Although I have to say that in the state of Utah, blacks tend to do as well as African Americans in any other state of the union.  They, they, they tend to because this is a, a state that focuses so high on education.  You tend to have a lot of black professionals come into this state and so economically the blacks tend to stay, for the most part, in, in that, in that middle class range.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now you got your master's degree in '87 [1987].  Where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: University of Utah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then JD in '90 [1990].
Speaker 1: Now did you stop in between these degrees or did you go straight through?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't stop.  I, I came home on '80 [1980] and actually started law school in '80 [1980]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and went the first year, that didn't work out, and I didn't like it and started doing musical theater and productions of 'Porgy and Bess,' you know that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Now you didn't tell us all this, now--
Speaker 2: Well see you, I just tell you what you ask.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you started law school in 1980.
Speaker 2: Started in '80 [1980]--
Speaker 1: At, at the University of Utah [Salt Lake City, Utah].
Speaker 2: Went that first year, went that first year at the University of Utah and absolutely hated it.
Story_ID: 578258
Speaker 1: Okay, and you dropped out to become an actress, an actor.
Speaker 2: Of sorts (laughter), of sorts.  I just got involved in musical theater.
Speaker 1: Now what did your parents think about that, usually parents don't like that.
Speaker 2: You know my mother [Augustine Coleman Morgan], you know, looking back my mother pretty much let me make those decisions.  You know she didn't, she felt that I had obviously gone and, and had a degree and I had some sense.  She wasn't sure that I always used the sense I had, but my mother believed that you should, that you should be taught, that you should be taught well, that you should have a particular value system, and then you should move on and, and make your way.  So, she was very anxious for me to, to have some bumps and bruises of my own.  I think she felt that I probably wasn't gonna listen to what she had to say, so she was very supportive in whatever it was that I was, that I was doing.  She didn't, she didn't say a lot about it.
Speaker 1: Now did you work with a particular theater company?
Speaker 2: No, they were just, they were just local theater.  I enjoyed it more than sitting in contracts and things like that at the University [S.J. Quinney College of Law, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah].  I thought--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the University of Utah Law School was an extremely oppressive place and just decided that it just was not the place for me.
Speaker 1: Well you know we have a black theater movement in the country and I just wondered the name of the theater that you, you actually worked out of?
Speaker 2: Can't, can't remember it.
Speaker 1: You can't remember it?
Speaker 2: Can't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's not around now--(unclear)--?
Speaker 2: I don't think so, I don't think that it's around--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --now, but I've not, you know I've not kept that type of contact.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm asking, there, there are probably people interested in--
Speaker 2: I woke up.  It took me a little while, but I, I, I realized that probably wasn't gonna make it big in the theater.
Speaker 1: So, you were in 'Porgy and Bess' and--
Speaker 2: I was in 'Porgy and Bess' and a couple of other local theater things and enjoyed it, I mean it was a wonderful time.  It was a wonderful time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and so when, so after you did the youth activities you went on back to law school, I guess huh?
Speaker 2: Went on back, got my master's degree and went back to the university begging and pleading and saying I'll do better this time and they were willing to give me another chance, and got through it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was, what degree did you earn from law school?
Speaker 2: A JD, Juris Doctor Degree.
Speaker 1: Okay 'cause I know some, some are JLL and Bs and all kind of things.
Speaker 2: JD.
Speaker 1: J, yeah okay Juris Doctor, right, and what's the difference in those degrees?  I, you know I get them mixed up.
Speaker 2: It has to do with how long you go to school and you know there's some things that you can get after a JD that, that prepare you more for teaching and some other types of things, but a basic law degree is a JD.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you got your law degree in 1990, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now did, were, were you working all the while as I know--
Speaker 2: I worked various places.
Speaker 1: I know you were a law clerk for awhile.
Speaker 2: Was a clerk for several places, did all of the things that you do to try to make your inroads into the legal field.
Speaker 1: There's a note here about Reed Stringham, III.
Speaker 2: At the [Utah] Attorney General's office--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that's where I worked for the Attorney General's office.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Again I clerked.
Story_ID: 578259
Speaker 1: Did some things, but after law school [University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah] I met a very interesting man who had been head of the chemistry department at the University of Utah--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --Dr. William Guillory who decided to leave the science world and started a human resource management firm called Innovations International, and Dr. Guillory asked me how I was gonna pay for all those law school loans that I had.  I didn't have an answer for that, and he asked if I wanted to do some traveling and do some corporate training and said that I could do a few in-house legal things for him, write a few policies, do some of those kinds of things and so that marriage occurred and I did some corporate training for a while and what a wonderful, wonderful experience that was.
Speaker 2: Okay, so was it like motivational speaking or what, what did you specialize in?
Speaker 1: Diversity training, empowerment, you know all of those, those kinds of human resource areas.  We had contracts with some pretty big companies, EDS, Texas Instruments, Kodak, Avon, you know so it was certainly very lucrative, coming out of law school the money was very, very good.
Speaker 2: Well it seemed like you'd be a good candidate for that having been in theater.  You wouldn't have been shy so, and then you would know, you were well spoken coming out of law school--
Speaker 1: Out of law school.
Speaker 2: --be able to you know--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, and I still do some of that--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --on occasion, yes.  If he calls, I still go.  It's just wonderful, wonderful to do that, that upfront training, teaching type of thing.
Speaker 2: What's the most rewarding part of that, of the motivational speaking?
Speaker 1: I think when you see the people that really do transform and begin to say okay maybe I do have some baggage, maybe I, I need to look at things different and you know Dr. Guillory would set if from a focus of you are responsible, you are accountable, so it doesn't matter whatever else happens in life you still have some responsibility and some accountability.  And it's interesting because that can be a hard pill for people to swallow.  We learn that very early in life.  You know you look at your children.  Something breaks in your house and you say who did it.  What's the first thing the child said?   I don't know, you know.  There's nobody in the room but that child with a broken item.
Speaker 2: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, my brother, my sister, the dog, the wind, you know.  So, we're teaching them at that very young age how to abdicate their responsibility and their accountability, so you know I run into people forty or fifty years old who say well no it's not my fault and if it hadn't been for so and so I'd gotten that job or if it hadn't been, you know, so you stop and you really talk about you know it's, it's not about that.  It's not about what's fair, what's good, what's bad, what's right or wrong, was I hear, was I in the situation, did I have some involvement.  I have to be accountable for what I produced.
Story_ID: 671376
Speaker 1: So, okay, so you worked for Innovations International Incorporated for--
Speaker 2: Still do.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: I still have that relationship.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now in 1993 you got married right?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: And, well tell us how you met your husband [John Robertson] then.
Speaker 2: I've always known my husband, so I didn't, I didn't meet my husband, I grew up with my husband, but I was not friends with my husband.  My husband was a, was a jock, and he had an older brother, Terrence, who sang, so I sang with Terry and he has an older sister, Janet, who was very close to and when my husband married his first wife, in fact I even remember what I bought them as a wedding gift.  And he and his wife were in the midst of a divorce and his sister Janet said you know I have a nice brother, you know my brother Jackie don't you.  He worked in the church.  I mean he was a wonderful guy.  He just wasn't on my radar screen.  I knew his mother, I knew his father, but I said to his sister, Janet, I said you know your brother is a nice guy and in fact he would be good for my cousin, Paula.  And my sister-in-law said fool you need somebody for yourself, and I said oh I hadn't, I, I hadn't thought about that.  Again, it wasn't that I, you know, that I didn't think he was a worthy candidate.  He just hadn't appeared on my radar screen, so I'm sure she was doing the same kind of talk to him.  So, a couple of Sundays later he approached me and asked me out and we've been together ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so and so you actually grew up together in the same neighborhood and everything?
Speaker 2: Same, everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were, we didn't--in, interesting that although we were in the same neighborhoods and we traveled in the same circles, we weren't together.  We didn't do things together because he had his little set and I had my little set, but I knew who he was.  I was very aware of him, although we didn't, you know, our paths didn't cross a whole lot other than at church.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did it take you long to get married after you started going out?
Speaker 2: A couple of years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We dated a couple of years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We're very good friends and I felt it was very important that he have time.  I had no interest in being a rebound for anyone, so we were just very, very good friends and in fact he was a great, he was a great guy.
Story_ID: 671377
Speaker 1: Okay, we were, okay now in 1994--well--well, all the while now you finally opened up private practice as an attorney right in around '94 [1994]?
Speaker 2: Actually I went to work, I went to work for the Salt Lake Legal Defenders [Salt Lake City, Utah] office--
Speaker 1: Okay, and what, what year is that?
Speaker 2: --after I had my second child in '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay 1995.
Speaker 2: And stayed with LDA until I took the bench.
Speaker 1: Okay, the Legal Defenders Association?
Speaker 2: So, that's a criminal practice, criminal defendant practice.
Speaker 1: Now how was that, that's, now you're assigned to people that really can't defend themselves right?
Speaker 2: Well, you're--
Speaker 1: I mean or can't, can't afford or can't pay for a lawyer.
Speaker 2: --you are assigned people who are impecunious.
Speaker 1: Okay, impecunious means you don't have any money right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter), that's what it means you don't have any money.
Speaker 1: Well, there have to be some stories, I guess, associated with this job.
Speaker 2: That was an interesting job.  I, I think the real interesting thing about LDA was the fact that people, I mean racism abounds everywhere, and I can remember my first client was accused of sexual solicitation.  He was a john, he was the john, not the, not the hooker, the john, and I don't know whether he could have afforded an attorney or not, but anyway he was appointed counsel and he went to my supervisor and told my supervisor he did not want me to represent him, and my supervisor came to me, he was a young man, he said I don't know if it's because you're a woman or I don't know if it is because you're black this person does not want you to represent him and if you don't want to represent him because of that you don't have to.  We'll let you make the call.  Well, of course, I chose to represent him.  I thought, now you will, you will not doubt my skills and my ability because of my gender nor my color.  I will represent you and represent you well.  So, of course when he won at trial I got, I think it was twenty-four red roses, and I still have the card and I thought, you know, this is what you face; very interesting situation.
Speaker 1: Okay, I would guess that often minorities are in a situation where they need free legal help?
Speaker 2: I had, I had a fair amount of my caseload that was represented by minorities, but I also had a pretty good percentage of white defendants, and again my first, my first client was a, was a white male.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 671378
Speaker 1: I guess what's the crime rate here in Salt Lake City [Utah]?  Is it high or low by comparison to other places or?
Speaker 2: It's a little lower than the national average.  We do a, a good job of keeping the lid on certain types of crimes, but just like everywhere in the country there are some things that we're seeing an increase in.  We saw a big increase with several years in gang violence.  There was a large crackdown on that and we've seen some decline.  We saw a, or we are still seeing a big increase in crimes that are drug related that has to do with the meth trade.  You know drugs are, are, have always brought about crime, but different types of crime depending on which type of drug was popular at any given period in our history and so you know now we're seeing the big meth explosion, and the thing that's interesting about meth is that you're seeing lots of women involved in the meth trade and you know so, so you're seeing a different kind of person come through the system that we've, that, that we've seen in the past.
Speaker 1: You know I've heard, I guess, what you see in the news is a lot of home laboratories--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --making meth--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, so you got a lot of people affected by meth, you know one of those labs explodes or you know you have an officer that, you know that, bust a home meth lab, all the cleaning that has to be done and you know just--
Speaker 1: It's unlike some of the other drugs it doesn't have to be grown or imported right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It's just--
Speaker 2: It's cheap to make.
Speaker 1: --there's some chemicals--
Speaker 2: It's cheap to make, it's easy to make.  Any backyard chemist or less than even that can figure out the ingredients and, and make meth.  It's very cheap to make, but of course very deadly, very dirty.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay and this seems to be drug of choice.  It seems to be more popular amongst lower-class white people than--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --than--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Lots of mothers, homemakers, we're seeing getting involved with meth 'cause it's highly addictive and so that first hit or so you can easily be addicted, so we're seeing a lot of people come--you know that, that brings about an increase in thefts and you know not just drug charges directly, but all of the charges that come along with that, domestic violence, truancy in students, and so all of that, all of that increases with, with the drugs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 671379
Speaker 1: Now at some point you, now tell me if I'm going to fast here, but at some point you worked for the U.S. Department of Interior, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, but that was way back--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Oh, that was back, okay.  Oh okay, so I have this on here, but that, that occurred what, when?
Speaker 2: During law school.
Speaker 1: During law school, okay, this would have been in the mid '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So 19, it would be 1980 what?
Speaker 2: Oh probably about '88 [1988] or so I'm thinking.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay now, let's see.  Since we moved, as you move along you're involved in a number of different organizations and associations.  One is the Minority Bar Association of Utah, and, and the Utah, well the Minority State Bar, the Minority Bar Association, the Utah State Bar--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the Alberta Henry Education Foundation.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Utah Legal Defenders Association.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so far the answer is yes (laughter).  You, Women Lawyers of Utah.
Speaker 2: Women Lawyers of Utah.
Speaker 1: American Bar Association.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Salt Lake County Bar Association.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) yes.
Speaker 1: National Association of Women Lawyers.
Speaker 2: Yes, Women Judges.
Speaker 1: Women Judges, okay.
Speaker 2: The National Association of Women Judges.
Speaker 1: Somehow we got this one, okay, I'm sorry we had this wrong, Women Judges, okay.  Well you wanna tell us about some of them and how you got involved with them--
Speaker 2: Well---
Speaker 1: --and is, is it, is it, is it necessary to be involved in so many law associations?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't, you know I think they all have some, some good things, some connections that you want to make and, and so at any given point in time I'm more involved in some than I am in others.  As of late, I have really become interested in the National Association of Women Judges, and I think for me that's, that's probably a very important organization and the National Bar Association.  I mean I think it is paramount to always have a connection with other African-American lawyers and judges.  That's just something that, that one, not only wants to do, but needs to do and should do, so, I think that those are probably the most important two.  Because I am here in the state of Utah, I make it my business to attend the Utah State Bar on occasion and to have some contact with the local women's law association, so I think those are probably the four.  You know I do ABA classes, American Bar Association classes, here and there and things of that nature, and I haven't been as involved in the National Bar Association as I would like to be, but I think that's probably sometime you know where my primary focus had to be in that direction with those organizations and, and yes I think it's necessary.  I mean I think it's important for networking.  I think it's important for all of the educational purposes.  I think it is extremely important.  You don't want to ever be in a vacuum or live in a vacuum.  I mean I wanna know about what's going on locally, but I certainly wanna have my pulse on what's happening nationally.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 671380
Speaker 1: Now, well tell us a little about, a little bit about the Alberta Henry Education Foundation.  Who, who was she?
Speaker 2: She was a mentor of mine.  She worked for the Salt Lake City School District [Salt Lake City, Utah], and when I was growing up she was one of the people that kept the school district on their toes in terms of the education of first black students and then, you know other minority students.  She made sure that things were as they needed to be, so when we had issues in this community, we told Ms. Henry and that's how things got resolved.  She was also the president of the Salt Lake branch of the NAACP for a number of years and so was an extreme power broker in my community, a church woman, woman of God, and just a tremendous resource.  Ms. Henry knew everybody, you know, so between Ms. Henry and Reverend Davis, and Dr. Coleman you were covered, you know, so we developed a foundation in her name.  Actually, the foundation was developed prior to her death.  She thought that education was something that she wanted to be involved in and so she along with the Sandacks and one other group of people, pers, one other group started the foundation and it has maintained.  She passed away in '86 [1986], excuse me in 2006 I believe it was.  She passed away, but we have maintained the scholarship foundation and currently functions and runs and it gives scholarship monies to students, not just minority students, but students who are going on in higher education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In the state of Utah though it is only in the state of Utah.  We don't give monies to students who are attending college outside of the state.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you mentioned Sandack.  What, what, what is Sandack?
Speaker 2: The Sandacks were friends of Ms. Henry and their sons are both attorneys, so they drew up all of the articles of incorporation, all of the legal paperwork for the foundation.  They were very good friends of hers and have maintained friends.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they were like sponsors of some of her ideas?
Speaker 2: No, I wouldn't say sponsors, I'd say that they worked together.
Speaker 1: As friends, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were friends.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: She had started out at one time by working for the Sandacks.  Then, they became friends.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 671381
Speaker 1: From what I have here you'd better tell us what, what the next position.  Now how--were you elected judge?
Speaker 2: I was appointed.
Speaker 1: Appointed, when, when, when?
Speaker 2: At that time Salt Lake County [Utah] had a county council and I was appointed by the council and then after that stood for retention election on a four year basis.
Speaker 1: Now when were you appointed first?
Speaker 2: In '98 [1998]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the appointment came and I took the bench in January of '99 [1999].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so appointed judge in 1998.  Now who appointed you?
Speaker 2: The county council.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's a little different now, but at that time it was the council who appointed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then the voters make their choice every four years we stand for election, but it's just a retention election.
Speaker 1: Okay, so every judge is basically appointed and then the vote is to reta, retain them.
Speaker 2: Not every judge.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Municipal judges are--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --appointed by their mayor and then their mayor has a choice of whether or not they retain them.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is a county, you're a county judge?
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and so we are elected.
Speaker 1: All right, did you, when did you decide that you wanted to be a judge?  Was there a certain point in time that you--
Speaker 2: Oh, I decided that when I went to law school.  It was just about when and how I could hook that up and you know how I could put myself in a position to do that.  I've, I've always, always once I decided that I wanted to pursue the law and be a part of the, the whole legal field I knew that ultimately that that's where I wanted to be.  I was blessed that it came up a little sooner than I thought it would, but the opportunity presented itself and I was able to do that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're basically like forty-one years old I think?
Speaker 2: No, I'm forty-nine!
Speaker 1: Oh well, I mean when you, when you were appointed judge.
Speaker 2: Oh, when I was appointed I was forty.
Speaker 1: Forty--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --okay yeah, all right, so you were pretty young by comparison--
Speaker 2: Fairly, fairly young.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Fairly young.
Speaker 1: Okay, now were you the youngest judge then on the bench?
Speaker 2: No, no, I don't know.  I can't answer that.  I, I, there might have been others, but we were all--if there were others they weren't a whole lot younger I think probably--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --there might have been one or two in their late thirties I knew that were municipal judges.
Speaker 1: Now you weren't the first black county judge right appointed?
Speaker 2: I was the first black woman--
Speaker 1: Black woman okay.
Speaker 2: --and there's still only one other.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's one black male, Judge Tyrone Medley whose a district court judge and myself.  We are the first and we are still sit sadly, but there's just the two of us in the state.
Speaker 1: So Tyrone Medley was the first black judge?
Speaker 2: He was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and at the time that Tyrone was appointed if memory serves me right he may have been the youngest appointee to the bench because I believe that Tyrone was in his thirties.
Speaker 1: Okay, were you the first woman judge?
Speaker 2: First black woman.
Speaker 1: Black woman okay.
Speaker 2: There were other women--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --but, there were no African American women.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, well you're, you're still a judge right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you enjoy it?
Speaker 2: I love it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I absolutely love it.  I had one of my boys ask me that the other day if I like my job.  I said I thought that at some point it might become boring, but after nine and a half years I haven't gotten to boring yet, so I love it.
Story_ID: 671382
Speaker 1: Okay, so it must be some good stories that you might be able to tell in sort of an anonymous way.
Speaker 2: I don't know if we can do that.  I don't know if I have any real good stories to share from the bench, but you know I can remember probably for the first six months to a year I would take the bench and it would always be people in the audience who would gasp.
Speaker 1: Would actually gasp out loud.
Speaker 2: Just (gasp) you know just from just pure shock, you know, now it's old hat, but it was very interesting about those first, about those first six to nine months you know and I, I can remember that I had one gentlemen who came--I've only been asked to recuse myself from a case once and that's something that a judge takes very seriously if someone asks me to step down from a case I'm really gonna consider that, and a gentlemen came in and he said that he wanted me to recuse myself and I brought him back and I said okay I'm willing to look at that, but can you tell me why and he said yes.  He said because I saw you, I saw you in the hall and I saw you looking at my hat and I said hmm what kind of hat was it, I don't quite remember that.  He said you remember my hat.  I said can you show me your hat, and he showed me his hat and it had a Confederate flag on it and he assumed that because he was wearing a hat with a Confederate flag that he was in trouble.  Yes, I, you know, I said sir I'm more than willing to step down from this case, but I have to tell you I don't remember seeing you or your hat.  You know I see hundreds of people in a day, I don't remember riding an elevator with you, I don't remember anything about it.  He said are you sure?  And I said absolutely.  He said well then I change my mind I might have been wrong.  But, I, I thought he, you know he made that leap automatically that he was, that he was in trouble.
Speaker 1: That kind of tells you what people who wear the hats are thinking in some ways.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: No, no accident.
Speaker 2: No accident, no accident at all, but very interesting job.
Speaker 1: And it's interesting every day.  It seems to always change.  It's, it's never boring and I just, I enjoy the job.  I, I enjoy the level of court that I have, because as a county judge I always see misdemeanors.  So, I don't have to send anybody to the gas chamber or put anybody away for a long period of time and it seems to just bode well for me and my philosophy.  It's amazing how many people come up to me in public and say do you remember me?  No.  They say you're my, you were my judge.  You know and I always say well you know are you doing okay?  Do you think we treated you fairly?  Do you think we treated you with respect?  And I have yet to have a person come up to me and say something in anger, and they're a lot of people that I fine very high, that I send to jail, that I send to programs, that I do all kinds of things to, but my philosophy that you treat people with respect.  I don't care what they're coming in there for.  I get people that come from the prison.  You know I get all kinds of people, but they're still Mr. or Ms., or Mrs. in my court.  I call them by their name.  I try to get their name right if it's a name that I had, you know, a hard time trying to pronounce.  I ask how are you today, you know all of those kinds of things, and I find that, that it works well.  People respect you when you respect them.
Speaker 2: So, you think people really respond to being treated fairly whether they're guilty or innocent?
Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely, yes.  It's all about fairness.  They wanna know that I listened to them, that I heard them, that I gave them an opportunity, and you know whatever the sentence is their fine.  You know I'll, I'll sentence somebody to thirty days jail and they'll say thank you and that's always amazing to, and say thank you.
Story_ID: 671383
Speaker 1: Okay, what--can you describe for us your most difficult case?
Speaker 2: My most difficult case.  I'm sure that the most difficult cases or group of cases, not a case in particular, but my most difficult group of cases is you know the cases that you have when someone's standing there saying I'm the only caretaker for my children and you know if I go to jail somebody's gonna take them away, can't you give me another chance.  Those are the most difficult kinds of cases that one runs into.  And for me, it goes back to something I talked about earlier those issues of responsibility and accountability.  And I quite simply say to people those are things that you needed to take into consideration before you got to this point.  I realize that life happens, you know people get sick, people lose jobs, people die, issues come up, but you still have a responsibility and people are, I'm very clear with people when they come to court I say if something happens, if something occurs and you can't meet your obligation to me whether it's, you know, to get class done or to pay your fine on time you need to let us know ahead of time.  If we can work with you further, we will.  But, if you come in here to me six months later and tell me that your mother was terminally ill and you had to care for your mother I'm not gonna here that because at that point that's an excuse, so it comes back to that whole responsibility, which you'll get people that are crying and you know that you know they're desperate, you know that, but you have to do what, what is necessary.  You have to hold people accountable.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have what you would call a judicial philosophy?
Speaker 2: Again, my philosophy would be to treat everybody with respect.  That is my judicial philosophy, be they attorney, be that defendant, the people that I work with.  You treat people with respect.
Speaker 1: Okay, now are you--do you aspire to any other public office or do you have any--what, what, what are future plans?
Speaker 2: You know at this time my future plans are to raise my children and make sure that my children are productive citizens and once that's done I may look at some other things, but this has been a wonderful job to be a professional person and to be a mother and wife.  It is equally as important to me to be there for my children, and this job has allowed me to do that and so those, those little people are, are really number one, so they are my vocation, my avocation.  They're what matters and, and certainly whatever I would do career-wise has to be second.  So, for right now this is just fine.
Story_ID: 578260
Speaker 1: I think my biggest hope and my biggest concern is I want us to really value education.  We seem to be losing that respect for education.  I think people of my age and older--(unclear)--how important it was to get a good education, but I am saddened at how few African-American men and women are going on the higher education.  I understand that higher education doesn't make you rich.  Higher education prepares you to be middle class, but knowledge is power, more than just the money involved, it's power.  I'm saddened that we are not going into the sciences.  I'm saddened that we don't have more architects, that we don't have more engineers and my concern is really to drive the necessity for a good education home.  The other thing that I'm concerned about is I think that we are growing further and further apart as a people.  I think we're giving away some of the wonderful culture values that made us who we are, and I think it is important to have a sense of history and to know where we've come from, you know what we've accomplished and I think that will help us to, to know we are capable and able of greatness, so that sense of history, that sense of family and I'm just saddened that we seem to not have the same kind of respect for our elders.  I know in that the years that my mother was sick she lived with us here in this home for thirteen years, and I stopped and I thought why was it important for me to have my mother live with me.  Well, when my grandmother got sick, my grandmother lived with us, you know, so I knew that.  I didn't have the belief that you put your elders in nursing homes and, and things like that, but you do what you need to do to care for family and those are probably the three areas that I, that I really am most focused on, caring for the elderly and more a sense of history, and more of a respect for education.
Speaker 2: --(Unclear)--when you look back on everything that--(unclear)--what would you do different?
Speaker 1: I would do differently?  You know I can't think of anything that I would have done differently.  I really think.  I, I, I think, well let me take that back.  I think that one thing I have done differently I would have stayed in Washington, D.C. and worked on [Utah] Senator [Orren] Hatch's staff and gone to Georgetown (?) Law School [Washington, D.C.] and started that and then school.  I think that's probably the one thing that I, that I--the opportunity that I had that was golden that I didn't take advantage of, but other than that I can't think of any, anything that I'd do over.
Speaker 2: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 1: Would I do what?
Speaker 2: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 1: No I didn't, I think I wasn't politically savvy.  I think that I had a belief that in order to be black it meant that you were a Democrat, and I think that I thought that to associate myself with a conservative Republican and somehow put me out of the realm of what I was supposed to do culturally, but you don't all have to be the same and it took me awhile to, to learn that.  You know as a result of that I'd become a very non-politically party political person, you know I don't affiliate with the party, I affiliate with individuals and I think that that's how that came about.  But, I think at that time it scared me to be affiliated with someone that was definitely a conservative Republican, and there's nothing about Hatch that speaks of anything other than conservative party politics.  But, there was a fabulous opportunity there that I, that I missed.
Story_ID: 578261
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--and you look back at everything you've done to this point, what--(unclear)--would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I married a good man [John Robertson].  That is the best thing that I've ever done was I picked a good man.  I think that a good mate makes all the difference in the world and tremendously thankful to have someone there to support, somebody that doesn't, that doesn't compete with you, somebody that supports your efforts, somebody that is concerned, that is concerned with raising your children with you.  Those are very important things and that was very good, very good on my part, absolutely.
Story_ID: 578262
Speaker 1: Okay that's gonna lead right into the next questions--(unclear)--?
Speaker 2: Well I have of course my husband, John Robertson who works for the local power company, and he has been with the power company now for almost thirty years and I have three fabulous daughters, Joey, Jordan, and Jacquenita, and Jacquenita came to me as a gift from my husband's first marriage and I have enjoyed--(unclear)--like I have the girls that I was blessed to conceive and bring into the world.  Each of them very, very different.  Jacquenita is now nineteen and in Florida at FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], loving, going to a historically black college or university.  Jordan is my middle child.  She's the, I believe her daddy's sport child since he got all girls, and very active in high school softball, is a freshmen, made the varsity team, so she's loving life and then my baby girl who I think has the most common sense of all of my children, very grounded, very even tempered, nothing seems to bother her one way or another and the variety between the three definitely keeps me going.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there anything I have not asked you that--(unclear)--?
Speaker 2: No, I, no I think you have asked a wide range of things and you've covered my life pretty good, pretty good.  I can't think of anything that I'm dying to say.
Story_ID: 578263
Speaker 1: Okay, well the last question is similar to legacy and ma'am how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a woman of God first and foremost because God is the head of my life.  That's, that's where I am on a day to day basis.  Secondly, I want to be remembered as a woman who loved her family, not just my nuclear family, but also my extended family, my friends are very important to me, and then I want to be remembered as a woman that loves the law.  I chose a profession that I think fit me, a profession that I love, and hope that my legacy, legal legacy will be, will be a lasting legacy.  I think, I hope that the people of Utah will feel that I have served them well--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 578264
Speaker 1: This is an early picture of my mother [Augustine Coleman Morgan] when she was in--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Those are my middle and my youngest daughter, my husband [John Robertson] and I--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: MALE VOICE:  --(Unclear)--
Speaker 2: That's my oldest sister--(unclear)--and that would have been taken in 1963 or 1964-(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Great grandparent, grandma--(unclear)--and the year that this was taken it must have been--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: MALE VOICE: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 2: That's my brother, Theodore Morgan, Jr.  That would have been taken--(unclear)--so that would have been taken in the early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: MALE VOICE:  --(Unclear)--
Speaker 2: And that's a college of me and that was taken in 1977 just after I'd joined the sorority--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: That's my sister -- and that picture was taken a couple of years after her accident, so that would have been '64 [1964], so that would have been taken probably about '67 [1967], around 1967--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: And that was my grandfather Wallace Coleman, my mother's father--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: That's my grandmother, Mrs. Martha Scott and that would have been taken in, in the '50s [1950s]--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: That's my oldest daughter, Jacquenita Robertson and it was taken last year at her high school graduation, would have been, which would have been in 2007.
Speaker 1: That's my baby daughter, Joey--(unclear)--Robertson.  That was just a few years ago in 2006.
Speaker 2: And my middle daughter, Jordan Marie Robertson and that was also taken two years ago in 2006.
