Story_ID: 45014
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My full name is Gayle, G-A-Y-L-E, Laverne, L-A-V-E-R-N-E, Greer, G-R-E-E-R.
Speaker 1: And, ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is 3/11/1941, and place of birth is Tulsa, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Currently? I am currently retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I would say I would probably be considered a very active volunteer.
Story_ID: 45015
Speaker 1: Okay, and during your career you were?
Speaker 2: In my career, I started out as a social worker.  I have an MSW [Master of Social Work] from University of Houston School of Social Work [Houston, Texas].  And my life ambition and aspiration was always to be a social worker and eventually, hopefully, to be a psychiatric social worker.  But I did that for some thir--close to 15 years, both in terms of community organizations like the Urban League, which I started with in Houston, Texas, back in about 1971, and I then moved on to the Fort Wayne [Indiana] Urban League. Interestingly, I was there--I left the Urban League the year before Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker] came for the then-new Urban League executive director and was shocked, just like he had come to my very first dinner that I held at Fort Wayne, Indiana.  So that was an interesting time through those years.  And then I, I met a company called American Television and Communications Corporation while in Fort Wayne, Indiana, and was offered a job, which I took primarily to get out of Fort Wayne, Indiana, I might say, because it was beginning to get a bit uncomfortable, and I was another of a single--I was a single mother of a son and, and I was very much of an activist, and the community was getting less friendly.  So, it was good to get out of Fort Wayne, Indiana.  And my plan was to--when I joined the company, American Television and Communications Corporation, I was--I relocated to Denver, Colorado.  My plan was to do social work again, but the cable television industry just kind of took over my life (laughter) more or less, I would say.  And 20 years later I'm back to doing social work, but I'm not being paid for it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: So, you, you, you were--you became a vice president with American--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I became a senior vice present with Time Warner Cable.  I was with Time Warner Cable about 20 years.  And my last position was senior vice president, which was--I did it under that title.  I was involved in a pretty well-known project during the time, that was being done by Time Warner and US West.  They were attempting to provide telephone via cable--a cable plant in cities at that time.  And I was involved in a project that was a collaboration I should--it was more of--between Time Warner and US West.  That went on for a couple of years.  It was a very interesting diversion from cable operations, but it was at a time when I was really getting antsy and really ready to move on because the part that I liked the best about the cable industry was running cable systems and being--being responsible for cable television systems.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I did that for a number of years.
Speaker 1: All right, so just to editorialize, you're called the mother of black cable or something--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, that--oh, really? Let's hope not (laughter)--
Speaker 1: That's--yeah, somebody told me that.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Speaker 1: That's so--by someone.  So let me--okay, so--I'm sorry, where were--Okay, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is February 2, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  And you don't have to give your address.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you--you're in Round Rock at my--in my home in Round Rock, Texas.
Story_ID: 45016
Speaker 1: All right, okay, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm-up, though we've already had a warm-up, so (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Those questions are, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I, I just love food.  I would have to say that there are two or three favorites, fried chicken being one of them (laughter).  Most of my favorites I don't get to enjoy as much anymore.  And I also like good cakes and pies, and I like experimenting with a lot of stuff.  But I grew up on the basics, and I still care a lot about the basics.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably brown would be my favorite color.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: It's interesting--I enjoy the Dominican Republic, and I also like Mexico.  They're easy to get in and out of and me feel very--I felt--always felt very comfortable in those locations.
Speaker 1: Okay, the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Keep moving.
Story_ID: 45017
Speaker 1: Okay.  The next question then in that spirit is your--about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, and then we'll put them together.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Her name is--her name was Gloria, G-L-O-R-I-A, Lucille, L-U-C-I-L-L-E, Morgan, M-O-R-G-A-N.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 30th, 1911.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And her place of birth was Salina, Kansas.
Speaker 1: Okay, S-A--
Speaker 2: L-I-N-A.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, well, what can you tell us about your mother's ancestors?  How--how far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: I cannot trace my mother's ancestors back.  I knew very little about my mother's ancestors because both her--I did not know either her mother or father.  They were not bor--alive during my lifetime.  And my mother was an only child, so was my dad [Archie Morgan], so there weren't aunts and uncles and a lot of cousins and stuff.  So, we were very much a nuclear family of my mother, my dad, my sisters, and my grandmother [Mary Ingram] on my father's side.
Speaker 1: Now did your--your mother's--did you know what your mother's parents did for a living?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 45018
Speaker 1: Okay, and did your mother [Gloria Morgan] talk about growing up and what it was like at all?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother was kinda traumatized by her upbringing.  She--her mother died.  Her name was Bertha [Peyton].  Her mother died shortly after she was born.  And her father [James Peyton] had sisters in Chicago [Illinois], and when my mother was about five or six years old, he took her to Chicago for what she thought was going to be just a short vacation, which turned out to be for the next 15 plus years.
Speaker 1: So, did he ever come back?
Speaker 2: No, she was--she was pretty much abandoned by her father, and she was raised by his sisters.  And she had a first cousin because one of the aunts had a daughter who lived there.  It was like two sisters living together, with one of the sisters having a daughter.  And my mother felt she was more there to kind of be kind of live-in help more so than actually a member of the family.  So, she had a very unhappy childhood.
Speaker 1: That was aw--
Speaker 2: She just couldn't talk about it very much.
Speaker 1: So she may not even been interested in what, you know, the--her grandparents did for a living or that--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --type of thing.
Speaker 2: She--well she didn't--she didn't know her parents, so I don't think--
Speaker 1: Well that's what I meant acutally--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --she knew her grandparents.  Yeah, she knew very little about her family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your mother--did she have a chance to finish school in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother, she finished high school and she very much wanted to, to go to college and do all those kinds of things which she didn't get a chance to do.
Speaker 1: Now did she grow up on the South Side or the--?
Speaker 2: She grew up on the South Side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Did she go to Phillips?
Speaker 2: I don't know what high school she went to.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it's like one choice.  I think in those days it was--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --either--well Phillips or--yeah, it was Phillips pretty much.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it's probably--
Story_ID: 45019
Speaker 1: And as I said, she didn't--the only time my mother [Gloria Morgan] ever mentioned anything about her growing up was when we would receive the Chicago Defender, which was quite an event.  I, I can't remember--I think it eventually became a weekly.  I think, in fact, when we first started gettin' it, it may have been a monthly or a bi-monthly.  And we always liked receiving that because that was the first time we had seen a newspaper with black people's pictures in it that weren't going to prison or something.  And, so it had predated the local black paper in my community which became pretty fun to see Oklahoma Eagle.  And there were pictures that always kind of provoked her in the Chicago Defender.  And we never re--really could quite figure out why.
Speaker 2: Provoked her in what sense?
Speaker 1: Her aunt ran an interesting establishment, which appeared to me to be more what one would call today a brothel.  But she had--it was kind of a rooming house, let's say.  But there were other people who used to come there.  And some of those people appeared in the newspaper that we re--the magazine that we would receive, who were always kind of seen as kind of important, which she always said they really weren't that very, you know, that they were doing these things and--she, she lived--she saw things that, you know, she remembered but that she did not like to talk about.  And the only thing that would bring those things up would be that, that newspaper.
Speaker 2: That's interesting--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So she saw some of these people on an old basic level.
Speaker 1: Little--little different than what most of us saw.
Speaker 2: Okay and these would be some of the black leadership.  I suppose--
Speaker 1: It was.
Speaker 2: --it would appear in the paper.
Story_ID: 45020
Speaker 1: Okay, so now did your mother [Gloria Morgan] come to Tulsa [Oklahoma] before she met your father [Archie Morgan] or afterwards?
Speaker 2: No, my father brought my mother to Tulsa.  They met back in Salina [Kansas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because my father was also born there, and he was back there teaching.  And my mother went back I think to see her dad [James Peyton]--to see some family member, and she met my father.  And she was in Salina for about a week or two.  My father proposed to her.  She came back a month later and they got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 45021
Speaker 1: All right, now, give me your father's full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: His name is Archie, H-A--I mean A-R-C-H-I-E, Lee, L-E-E, Morgan, M-O-R-G-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was born October 4, 2000--I'm sorry, 1904.
Speaker 1: That's all right.  And where was he born?
Speaker 2: Salina [Kansas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm sorry.  I have to take all that back.  Both of them were born in Okmulgee, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okmulgee, oh okay.
Speaker 2: Okmulgee.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, I'm gettin'--
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: --ahead of myself.
Speaker 1: O-K--
Speaker 2: Oaka--O-K-M-U-L-G-E-E
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okmulgee.
Speaker 1: I've heard of Okmulgee.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So they were both born in Okmulgee?
Speaker 2: Yes, but her father [James Peyton] had been gone to Salina, and she went to Salina to visit her father.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, I got it.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm, and that's where she met my dad.
Speaker 1: Okay, Okmulgee, Oklahoma.  So--so what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: The most prominent one is my father's mother, whose name was Mary Ingram, Mary Gertrude Ingram.  And my father, as I said, was also an only child, and he and his mother--I think my father's father died when he was very young, and my grandmother left Okmulgee [Oklahoma] and came to Tulsa [Oklahoma] to work.  And she was--worked as a maid and was on the property, and she and my dad lived in maid's quarters most of his teenage years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: And he went to high school in Tulsa.
Speaker 1: So they lived on the property of some white people--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that his mother was working for?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so yeah, probably I would guess he had a different kind--kind of experience--
Speaker 2: He did.
Speaker 1: --living there than--
Speaker 2: He did.
Speaker 1: --than he would be living in, in the (unclear).
Speaker 2: --A neighborhood, yes, it was--it was after he was almost ready--when he was about ready to graduate from high school, when he started living out in a community--in the black community there in Tulsa.
Story_ID: 45022
Speaker 1: Now your dad [Archie Morgan] was there when the riot took place?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.
Speaker 1: And so he--did he have any stories about the riot?
Speaker 2: You know it was very interesting.  The only people who really had stories about the riot were my grandmother [Mary Ingram].  My grandmother talked about the riot quite a bit.  And I think we often thought it was kind of a folk story that may or may not have been true because it was not talked about.  I'm just--I remember about 19--it may have been after I graduated from high school or just before graduating high-'bout mid-late '50's [1950s] when I really understood what the race riot was all about and how disruptive it was of our community.  And it went right down the street where my grandmother lived.  And she used to tell us stories as we sat on her front porch.  And she would wave--she would point toward the railroad track and said, they were coming and they had fire and black people were--Negroes were running.  They were running, and the white people were running behind them with fire.  And she--she talked about that all the time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is the 1921 Tulsa [Oklahoma] disaster, popularly known as the Tulsa riot.
Speaker 2: Yep, which was really, I think, the only urban riot that's ever taken place that involved federal agents, because the National Guard--well federal agencies came into Tulsa and really ended up siding, quite frankly, with the white community, which created a lot more havoc at that time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, unfortunate--
Speaker 2: It burned down the--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the business community.
Speaker 1: And unfortunately not the only one, there's Springfield, Illinois [1908], and there's Rosewood, Florida [1923].  I mean, there's a--there's a lot of them--Wilmington, North Carolina [1898].  There are more than we think.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: Well, that one was really very well known and had--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and the feds got involved and really kind of promoted it.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: The riot.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think the--actually, the governor of Oklahoma tried to ameliorate it on some levels from what I've read, but he was out-maneuvered by--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, all the rest of the people.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Story_ID: 45023
Speaker 1: And the writer--the historian, John Hope Franklin [HistoryMaker], was about your father's age--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --I think.  Maybe he was younger--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He was a little younger than my father [Archie Morgan].
Speaker 1: --your father.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a little younger than my father.
Speaker 1: His, his father was the attorney for the black community.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So--but I--your grandmother would talk about it, but you all didn't really--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --think-'cause it (unclear), that's what's wrong with the school system, black history is not confirmed in your text anywhere.
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't talked about.
Speaker 1: And nobody else talks about it, so.
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't in the text.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you--you hear something and you can't even.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It just wasn't talked about.  And that's why I just remember when I really fully understood it.  I just could not understand.  I, I think it's radical (laughter) (unclear) too.  I think that's how I ended up, you know, going into social work--social work and community organizing.  And I did that for a number of years.
Speaker 1: You--your dad would have been 17, I think, at the time, from my calculations, and he would have--if he was actually living on the other side of town--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, he was on the--they were on the North Side then.
Speaker 1: Oh, by the--oh, by the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: They were on the North Side, living on Lansing Street.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And--because he was going to high school, Washington, which I think it's still called--I think it was called Booker T. Washington [High School, Tulsa, Oklahoma] at that time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there--ironically, a young fellow your father's age was the nominal cause of it, supposedly--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, the guy who flirted with--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Supposedly flirted with the lady on the elevator.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Dick Rowland his name was--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and I don't--R-O-W-L-A-N-D--but I don't know.  He, he was put in jail.  They thought they were gonna lynch him and that's the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --uproar was about, but--
Story_ID: 45024
Speaker 1: Yeah and, you know, and really not until people like--I don't know if you--you know Don Ross, who was a Congressman, a state Legislator?
Speaker 2: I heard of him yeah, yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: Don really, you know, became very active in his, you know, later years.  Well, 'cause he was in the state legislature for a long time, I would say 10--15 years, and really was very instrumental in starting the dialogue about the race riot.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think he even secured reparations--
Speaker 1: He did.
Speaker 2: --for the survivors.  Do you know how much the survivors got?
Speaker 1: I don't remember that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were, like, an uncounted numbers of casualties.  I think they discovered mass burial sites when Don Ross did the investigation.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: Where people were killed and buried and they had never--
Speaker 1: Never sought 'em.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, Don and I--I've known Don all my life.  We were born on the same day, and we were in--we went to school together and were in high school together and graduated from high school together and still very dear friends.
Speaker 2: On the same day you all were born--
Speaker 1: Born on the same day and the same hospital (laughter) (unclear)--talk about that.
Story_ID: 45025
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so anyway, this is--but your father [Archie Morgan] never mentioned it, huh?  He never talked about it?
Speaker 2: You know, my father talked about it--I think back--my sister [Gloria Shumate] and I were mentioning this many--some years ago.  And it was more like the--he never gave us the impression that it was the scope that it really was.  I, I think that his generation was in denial.  I think it was such a shocking--because as I talk to my other friends who were friends of our family, and who were good friends of my father--I remember my father being a member of an organization called the Brobamale (ph.)--Bobamale (ph.), and they used to get together once a month at each other's homes and, you know--and that's where they played poker and would drink and would, you know, really let down, really feel comfortable talking about whatever it is.  And most of them were professional men.  And there was just a talk around the early days--the rough early days, the racism.  And one of the things that I grew up with was almost suffocating racism.  It was--we, we were taught to be very aware of where we were.  And, and that was kind of the--of the offshoot I'm thinking from the riot because our parents were very protective of us, as it related to issues of race, you know, being--not being noticed, not being out there.  Black men--young boys were always kind of protected; you always felt that sense.  And, and I think that, you know, they downplayed it so that it would not, I guess, be so big in their minds.  I don't know.  Because my father played a role in Tulsa, or was put in a role I should say, of being kind of a, a peacemaker.  He was one of the few people of his generation who would--could operate on both the north and south side of town, and who became, like, one of the first blacks to join the, the white Chamber of Commerce and the white YMCA, and stuff like that.  But he paid a, a price by--and so many of his generation, of living law abiding lives, quiet lives, lives that did not seem to be too large because you would be--it would be dangerous.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 45026
Speaker 1: And I think they--that was kind of what I remember feeling growing up in Tulsa, Oklahoma.  And we--it was a very close--everybody knew everybody in North Tulsa, everybody.  And one of our--one of our favorite pastimes were on Sunday afternoon during the summertime, was going down on Greenwood, where Greenwood intercepted with Archer, and that's where we used to see all our friends.  And there was a drugstore, Williams Drugstore, that was very prominent.  And, and, and the black community had built back up a lot of its businesses by then.  It was a--you know our grocery stores were owned by black people when I grew up--banks, black people; department stores, black people; movies, it was--I grew up in a very rich business community.
Speaker 2: That's what I've read.  There's a book called--that I'm--that I've kinda found accidentally in a book in a box of books that were being thrown out of a bookstore, called "Events of the Tulsa Disaster," by Mary E. Jones Parish, who is the town stenographer.  She wrote the history of the black people during the riot, and there were only a few surviving copies of that book.  I read about one in the "Tribune" back in the early '90's [1990s], but--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But it's clearly--the book was published in '23' [1923], two years after the riot ended.  They had already started rebuilding the community.  And another fellow named Scott Ellsworth had a book called "Death and a Promised Land" [1992] that he wrote that also--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember that one.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And he des--he says, you know, categorically, they rebuilt.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You know, so--I mean, sometimes we hear this story and we think it's been des--it was totally destroyed, and that's not the case.
Speaker 1: No, it--
Speaker 2: If it was destroyed--
Speaker 1: Well it was destroyed--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: --but it was--when I grew up, it was rebuilt.  It--there--it was a very prominent--Greenwood was a very active business community.
Speaker 2: The testimony to the resilience of--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --people that lived there.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  And really what changed Tulsa was integration.
Story_ID: 45027
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so at any rate--so did your father [Archie Morgan], you know, being a teacher, I guess he went--did he go to college?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, where did your dad go?
Speaker 2: He went to Salina Teacher's College [Salina, Kansas], and then later on he, you know--he went to Oklahoma State [Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma] and OU [University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma] for graduate work later, but his initial training was at Salina Teacher's College.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so he eventually went on to do graduate studies in--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: University of Oklahoma.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And--okay, did he get a master's or anything?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Master's of Education.  And he started out as a teacher, but he is--most of the years he spent it as a principal.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he was your high school principal--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He was my junior high--my elementary and my junior high school principal.
Story_ID: 45028
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, we'll get to that point.  But--so he was raised in this unique position of being in the community but also outside of it, and--
Speaker 2: Well, he was in the community, but he was also--my father [Archie Morgan] also saw his role, as I said, a peacemaker, as making things work.  And when it got to, you know--whenever there was some kind of discussion or controversy going on of any racial nature, my father was kind of brought into the debate.  And, he--he played that role really until he died.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A role a lot of black people weren't playing in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, yeah, we--I think a lot of us in the next generation saw that role, but we didn't see what came before it, you know.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: We didn't (unclear).
Speaker 2: You know, and a lot people saw--you know, it was not always seen at the time as looked upon in the way--you know some people saw it as Uncle Tom, saw it as, you know, being subservient to whites if you didn't balk at 'em or-- or whatever the case may be.  And as I said, we, we, we live this life--I felt that my family lived this life that was not to be too big, not to live too large.  They were always--my grandmother [Mary Ingram] talked about it all the time.  I never will forget I used to go to work with my grandmother, and she used to clean homes on the South Side in a community called Brookside.  And we would get on the bus-- and I liked the seat right behind the driver, and she would snatch me off that seat.  And it was just--and I would get in big trouble whenever I did something that was kind of out of place.  And I'm--I--I'm sure that's--that probably is a, a--another instance of the radicalization of Gayle (laughter) Morgan because I--those are many things that I, I--I don't--I have never forgotten.
Story_ID: 45029
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now your parents met in Salina [Kansas], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And your mother [Gloria Morgan] was there visiting and your father [Archie Morgan] was--what was he doing?
Speaker 2: Teaching.
Speaker 1: Teaching, okay.  Is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: They met through mutual friends, family friends.  It definitely was my mother's way out of a situation that she hated, and so when my father asked her to get married, she said yes and really didn't know him.  They didn't know each other, quite frankly.  It's amazing they--they literally lived to death do us part, my father--when my father died.  And--But my mother always felt like, you know, after she got married my father became very prominent and, and that she--she always had ambitions to be prominent, where my father didn't.  He was--he just kind of found his way.  He was kind of plunged into being--one thing he was, a great orator; he could speak, and he could speak extemporaneously.
Story_ID: 45030
Speaker 1: One of his [Archie Morgan, father] roles at church was to get up every Sunday before tithing and make some appeal to people.  And he always had a story, always had a story as to why you should tithe.
Speaker 2: And do you remember any of the stories he told?
Speaker 1: Well one--they were always around, which I just never--I always said, I don't--what--I just didn't believe it; I do now, but I didn't then.  But, it was always around.  The more you give, the more you receive.  And he would tell stories about how he would write a check for church, and he--and he did every first Saturday of the month.  My father would put up a coffee table--I mean a card table, his little chair--and he had this little metal chest where he kept all of his bills, and he would sit down and write every check out.  But the very first check was the check to the church.  And somehow, he would start out writing those checks, wondering how he was gonna pay all those bills.  But because he wrote the first check to the church (laughter), he always found a way to pay all of his bills.  He told that story one way or another every Sunday.  And, and, and it was always an interesting story because he would, you know, he would always talk about how he would tell that story to someone else.  But he really believed that, and he was a very faithful tither.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What was the name of your church?
Speaker 1: First Baptist Church North Tulsa.
Speaker 2: Okay.  First Baptist Church North Tulsa, okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause there is a First Baptist Church, which was downtown.
Speaker 2: Okay, another one.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm, and ours was called North Tulsa, which was the black one.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 45031
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now do you have any--you don't have any--do you have any siblings?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have three--I had three siblings.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My oldest sister is Gloria, G-L-O-R-I-A, Lee Schumate (ph.) when she died.  She was an educator.  She went to Wa--Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Tulsa, Oklahoma] and then she went on to Lincoln University in Jeff City [Jefferson City, Missouri] and graduated and came back to Tulsa [Oklahoma]--really to Sand Springs [Oklahoma] was her first job--and became a teacher.  And she taught until she became very ill about 1978.
Speaker 1: Okay, any other siblings?
Speaker 2: Another sister, Mary.
Speaker 1: Is she younger or older?
Speaker 2: She's older.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Gloria was the oldest and the next one is Mary Louise and--her name was Mary Louise Nells (ph.) when she died.  And Mary did not graduate from high school.  And she had four boys.  And Mary was a nurse--worked as a nurse in doctor's offices for a number of years.  But her last twenty-plus years, she put together a catering business and became pretty successful at being a really excellent caterer.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were talking about your sister Mary.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mary.
Speaker 1: She was a caterer?
Speaker 2: She was a caterer.  And Mary died about three years ago.  She and her youngest son died on the same day, and--which was really sudden.  And then my younger sister, which is the only remaining sister--living sister, her name is Myrna, M-Y-R-N-A, Robinson, Myrna Lois Robinson.  And Myrna is the youngest, and she lives in Memphis, Tennessee.  And she also is a retired educator and graduated from Oklahoma State University [Stillwater, Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so everybody went to school or some kind or another and did well.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Story_ID: 45032
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they walk, how they talk, how they conducted themselves, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Probably my father [Archie Morgan].  But I do believe that I've--I, I think I now understand that a lot of my, probably energy level and maybe ambition, probably came from my mother [Gloria Morgan], but I'm often compared a lot to my father.  And I find myself often having similar kind of--he and I thought a lot alike about issues especially those around things--social issues like race.  And he and I talked a lot about those kinds of issues.
Story_ID: 45033
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so now did you grow up in the same place?
Speaker 2: I grew up in Tulsa, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: In the same neigh--neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so can you describe the--the house you grew up in and the street?
Speaker 2: Yes, I grew up at 643 East Marshall Place in Tulsa, Oklahoma.  It was the second house from the corner, and I--the house on the corner was owned by a lady by the name of Ms. Marshall that we were all scared to death of.  And on the other side of the--of me was the Jack's Memorial Funeral Home, which our neighbors used to be--they were the Jacksons and he became a mortician, and they turned their house into a funeral home.  And then next door to them was the Catholic church.  When I--when I used to go back here not too many years ago, I used to walk.  There was a walking trail that they built that lit right near the house that I grew up in which is--no longer exists.
Speaker 1: It's like a walking tour of the Gap--
Speaker 2: It is a--no, it was a trail--walking trail that they created around the dam and right in the middle of inner city Tulsa.  And it was right in--down on--near my house, which no longer existed.  The only thing existed in that neighborhood at that time was the Catholic church.  And I was just always so shocked by how small that little area was, how--how close we actually--we lived to Lansing and how close we actually lived to Greenwood.  And it was a very compact community.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the Catholic church?
Speaker 2: St. Monica Catholic Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And nurses--nurses--nuns lived on the grounds.  There was a nun dormitory right there on the grounds and they were always lots of stories that we used to like to tell about they always seemed to have had a mysterious life because there were huge pine trees that separated their property from the funeral home property, and you couldn't see over there about what was actually going on back in the quarters.  We always made up stories about the quarters.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was an interesting place.
Story_ID: 45034
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, all right now, we always ask this question, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: That's interest--the smells of food.  Cooking and barbecuing was a big deal, so there was a lot of always smells of charcoal and wood and food; cars, a lot of cars--sound 'cause I lived right off the main drag of Greenwood.  A lot of things that I re--I remember the funerals.  Funerals were a big part of my life growing up because they had the funerals--many of the funerals right there at the funeral home.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's right next door.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it was--the house was just like my house.  The houses were built just alike, and then they converted their house and added on to it and made a funeral home.
Speaker 1: That must have added to the mystery of the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: It did.
Speaker 1: With the funeral home and the--
Speaker 2: Catholic church.
Speaker 1: --Catholic nuns and all that.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was--it was an interesting neighborhood.  I'm so sorry it's not there anymore.  I always feel like it's, you know, should have been preserved because there's a lot of history in that neighborhood.  Across the street was a family that had roosters and they would fight them, and I so remember Michael Vick when he got in trouble with the dogs; that was common in my neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Dog fighting?
Speaker 2: Dog fighting to the death.  And interestingly enough, I don't remember anyone being really alarmed by it, annoyed maybe, but alarmed by it--I just--I so was reminded of that when Michael Vick was going through his--his situation.  And I remember him talking about it. Growing up as a kid himself in his neigh--in his community, it was common.  It was never seen as something that would--you'd end up in prison.  And I grew up right across the street from that, and it was an interesting--very interesting community.
Story_ID: 45035
Speaker 1: And during those times, you know, we as black people, we kind of segregated ourselves too. Because there were the educated ones, very middle class what they used to--bourgeois is what--I was a member of the bourgeois community.  My family, as Don Ross and a lot of my classmates tell me, that I--as adults, that we were seen as a much different family from the outside than it felt like from the inside.  And, and then there were people who we were not suppose to play with because of who they were or who they were perceived as being.  And being the principal's daughter was suppose to be--it was some very prestigious position at that point in time (laughter) and one which I did not like because the teachers expected me to act different than the other kids.  And that was just not in my DNA (laughter) to act different than the other kids.
Story_ID: 45036
Speaker 1: And I always liked being with the kids who were in the most action, so I got in trouble a lot.  Teachers always were very disappointed.  I was always told you're--you're gonna be very disappointing to your father [Archie Morgan]; you're just not gonna make very much of yourself.  I was told that often.
Speaker 2: What kinds of trouble would you get in?
Speaker 1: Oh, I would play hooky, we--especially on Senior Day when we were in junior high school [George Washington Carver Junior High School, Tulsa, Oklahoma] when my father was the principal.  The ninth graders could get the day off after their commencement, and they would be able to leave the campus and often they would end up at the Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Tulsa, Oklahoma]--at the high school campus.  And there would always be a lot of stuff going on, on the parking lot and all that.  So, me and my girlfriends--my girlfriends, we thought we, we could go when we were 8th graders, and we did.  And when we came back the entire side of that school--there were people in the window looking at us coming back to the school.  There were about six of us.  And when we got to school, it was the one and only time that I got a spanking from my dad, and--along with everybody else.  We all got paddled for leaving the school grounds.  But I--I was much more interested in being popular than being (laughter) some little goody two shoe principal's daughter.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 45037
Speaker 1: Now, where did you start--what was the name of your elementary school?
Speaker 2: Charles S. Johnson was the name of the elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay, named for the great and black sociologist.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Charles Spurgeon Johnson--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: President of Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so now did you like going to school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I didn't particularly like studying, and I didn't like the structure of school.  Structure's always been something I've had some issues with throughout my life, quite frankly.  But, but I liked being with my friends and so school was really where, you know, I had fun.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was not--I was not a studious student; I was a popular student, and that was kinda more important to me.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a favorite subject at all?
Speaker 2: Probably, back then, social studies and sociology.  Social studies, I think, is what it was called when I was in high school.
Speaker 1: Well what about teachers?  Were any special teachers that, you know, kinda like--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was one special--one very special teacher.  Her name is Myrtle Elliot, and the last I heard, which was not too long ago, she still lives.  And our birthdays were on the same day.  And she came into my life when I was in junior high school and took a liking to me and really started me to start looking at school differently and looking at--outside of those con--confines of Greenwood, Archer and Pine.  She was a very glamorous woman who had married into a very prominent family, and she was kind of much younger than her husband.  And she was--I always thought she was just beautiful.  She was always so made up and so fashionable and she talked about things that I had never heard of.  And I always enjoyed going to dinner with her on our birthdays because she would tell me about things that were going on in New York and California.  And she traveled, and I always admired her.
Speaker 1: Okay, now she was at what--
Speaker 2: Carver.
Speaker 1: Carver, okay.  So Carver was a--
Speaker 2: A junior high school.
Speaker 1: --junior high school.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So that's George Washington Carver, I imagine, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Carver Junior High School, okay.
Story_ID: 45038
Speaker 1: Okay, so, let's see, now were you influenced a lot by popular culture growin'--I mean did you go to movies--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and watch TV and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well we had the first TV on the block.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Had got on my--I think it was my 11th or 12th birthday.  And I've always been interested in television, and I've always been interested in popular culture.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that was about 1954 or so, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And--now when you were in junior high school, I guess that's when music started to change on the radio.  The rhythm and blues was--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then--
Speaker 2: Beginning to come.
Speaker 1: And white people's version was rock and roll--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah, started to change though.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Black music--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --it was really beginning to come in--into its own.
Story_ID: 45039
Speaker 1: And there was a very famous venue in Tulsa [Oklahoma] called the Big Ten Ballroom, and Tulsa was, and especially North Tulsa, was a very social town.  And all the--the big stars used to come to the Big Ten Ballroom, you know, Ray Charles and Bobby "Blue" Bland.  And then there were little clubs called--I'm trying to remember one that was so famous where people--we would--you would see people like Dakota Staton and other well-known people.  And I don't know if you've heard of Ernie Fields.  Are you familiar with Ernie Fields' Band?  Ernie Fields was one of the first big bands--black big bands--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --that started in Tulsa, so a lot of the people who were coming there he did a lot of background music for.  And then while they were there, they would sing in these clubs that, you know, we all--you know, when you went to a club you dressed up and it was a real big night out.  So, I saw a lot of people in Tulsa and a lot of music was in Tulsa.
Speaker 2: Okay, and in the Gap area there--
Speaker 1: The Gap started many years later.  The Gap Band--
Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't mean the Gap Band--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, but in that area, yes.
Speaker 2: Greenwood, Archer and Pine.
Speaker 1: Greenwood, Archer and Pine, yes.
Speaker 2: How many theaters were, were there (unclear).
Speaker 1: The Rex, I think, was the only thea--no, no, no, no, take that back, there were two theaters: one was called the Rex Theater, and that was on Greenwood; and then there was a theater that was called the Anderson Hall--Anderson Theater, which was--which was founded by a man by the name of Anderson that was out on Peoria Street in the '50's [1950s].
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so this was--Tulsa, I guess, would be a popular stop for what they used to call the old "chitlin' circuit" (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: So all the top entertainers in the black(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: All the top entertainers.  We used to see them all.  And, and the Big Ten Ballroom was very close to my house, and we were--before we could go in, as kids, we used to be outside listening to them.  And then after that, we used to go in.  I'll never forget when we used to come home from the first (unclear) in our early years of college.  Some of that was still there.  And it was always nice to get back to Tulsa in the summertime because it was always very active, you know, a lot of music, concerts in the park, those kind of things.
Speaker 2: Now did you ever get a chance to meet any of the stars since--
Speaker 1: I met Bobby "Blue" Bland.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Which I will never, ever get--forget.  And then, you know, to see him about five years ago was just absolutely a remarkable experience.  But I used to see Bobby "Blue" Bland, and there was another--Taylor.  I can't think of his first name.  He was a well-known musician.  But Bobby "Blue" Bland was when I was in high school (unclear).  I really often would see--well he was there a lot; we got a chance to see him.  And my father [Archie Morgan] owned--ran a little kind of a concession store that was near the park where the musicians used to hang out.
Story_ID: 45040
Speaker 1: All right, so in high school, well--your father [Archie Morgan] was the principal of Carver, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's Carver Junior High [Carver Junior High School, Tulsa, Oklahoma].  And so where did you go to high school?  This is--
Speaker 2: Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Tulsa, Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, Booker T. Washington, okay.  Okay, now is this the only black high school in Tulsa?
Speaker 2: Yes, at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, just shortly--I think it was before I graduated.  You said black high school?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that was the only black high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were--black kids started going to other high schools, but Washington was the only black high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so by the time you got in school, there was some integration of the other schools?
Speaker 2: Right toward the end of my high school career, like 11th, 12th grade, there were kids who would go to church with me but were in other high schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 45041
Speaker 1: What was the primary industry of Tulsa [Oklahoma] that black folks were--you know, the rank and file were involved in?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it felt like teaching to me (laughter) because a lot of my family were friends with other teachers, a lot of teachers.  But there was not oil.  It was--
Speaker 1: Oil, okay.
Speaker 2: Oil was going on and there were kind of related service jobs that people had--would be something.  And, mostly service, you know, hotels.  I remember several prominent church members who were concierge types at hotels downtown and so it was a lot of service workers.
Speaker 1: Okay, service workers and--oh, I forgot about the oil.  There's even a move called "Tulsa" about oil (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That old, old movie from the '40's [1940s]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, yeah, oil is supposed to be the money that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, oil--oil was the money behind practically everything in Oklahoma.  But--and--and there was talk of a few black people who found--people found oil on their land and, you know, most of them were kinda swindled out of it.  And I remember this lawyer who came along who was kinda helping--in fact I think he was--somehow he was hooked up with John Hope Franklin [HistoryMaker].  But there was some lawyers who came along when I was in high school.  And there was a lot of discussion about these families that had oil wells and how they were trying to protect their--their mineral rights and their oil rights and those kinda things.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Herman Roberts [HistoryMaker] in Chicago [Illinois], that we interviewed, ran Roberts Motels and entertainment venues, a real entrepreneur.  He was--he was in Oklahoma and actually discovered oil on his land, I mean, you know, later.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When they, you know, went back to Oklahoma and discovered oil.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 45042
Speaker 1: So, yeah, that's--so in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Tulsa, Oklahoma]-now--now were you involved in--you were a very social person, so were you involved in a lot of the high--
Speaker 2: I was.
Speaker 1: --school activities?
Speaker 2: I was, I was, very active.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Singing groups and majorette--I mean cheerleader and band and--I was a very active student.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you run for student council or anything?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or student body president?
Speaker 2: No, I was always--I was a behind-the-scenes operator (laughter).  I never liked running for anything. No.  But I was an actor.  I was in student council and--and things like--you know, I always had the pressure of being a Morgan [clearing throat] growing up, and as much as I can de-emphasize that, I did.  I never liked being seen as something different or special.
Story_ID: 45043
Speaker 1: How did your sisters--did they feel the same way or did they have a different approach to it?
Speaker 2: I think they--I think they had a different--my older sister felt it, and my--I would say both of my older sisters [Gloria Shumate and Mary Nells] probably felt it too, but they--my sister right over me [Mary Nells] who did not graduate from high school, most definitely felt it.  The stigma of not graduating from high school and early--early pregnancy and--she really was affected by that most of her life, quite frankly.  And--but there was a lot of pressure on being a Morgan and growing up.  And I think it was (unclear) this image that my father had in the community.  And, you know, as people talk to me about it now, or when I used to go back for the high school class reunions--I used to go back to my high school class reunions, and we were just seen as a much more prosperous for sure family than we really were.  Very few people knew that my father [Archie Morgan] would come home and take off his suit and tie and put on overalls and go downtown and clean a building that was--had--that was named The Morgan Building as a janitor for many, many years.  And most people didn't know that.
Story_ID: 45044
Speaker 1: So, he [Archie Morgan] had a lot of different streams of things he had to do to keep income--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --going, you know.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  He had--
Speaker 1: Teaching and--
Speaker 2: --four girls.
Speaker 1: --concession store--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and then go downtown and clean buildings up at night.  Like a lot of people in that area, a lot of--took a lot of jobs to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it did.  And, you know, and they were all--they were all somewhat entrepreneurial too.  You know, my father was often trying out, he and his friends, various ventures.  That, that store was a business venture that my mother [Gloria Morgan], I thought, was gonna divorce my father over (laughter) because she was very risk averse.  And--but my father persevered on that and was able to--and they had that for awhile.  And it was more of a seasonal place 'cause it was when the parks--in the summertime that, that business was open and when he was not teaching because he would have the summers off.
Speaker 1: Now did you mother ever work outside the home?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm, she worked from outside the home.  She worked for a company called Glencliff [Glencliff Dairy] and--for many, many years.
Story_ID: 45045
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how were grades in school?
Speaker 2: Average.  I was an average student [clearing throat] that--until--you know, after I got in college.  I, I was a--I really kind of start straightening up around my second, third year of college.
Speaker 1: Now did you have good counseling in high school about college.  I mean, I know your father [Archie Morgan] already--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --knew--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I, I--my--going to college was a given.  No one has to counsel, you know, that was just what my parents had planned for us whether we wanted to go or not, and so college was never a question.
Speaker 1: Now where did you start--
Speaker 2: I started at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--oh, before we get you there, I mean, was there anything special about graduation from high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Tulsa, Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: No, nothing, nothing particularly special.  I was just glad to get out of high school.  I was--I was ready to leave Tulsa [Oklahoma].
Story_ID: 45046
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you get a chance to travel much as a kid with--
Speaker 2: Yes, we went with my father [Archie Morgan].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The one--one of the trips that I remember very, very much is when we went to Boulder, Colorado.  My father went to a secondary principal's convention there, and we were the only black people at the convention.  And my sister and I--younger sister [Myrna Robinson] and I went with my mother [Gloria Morgan] and dad to this--to the secondary principal's convention.  And we stayed on the University of Colorado [University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado] campus is where we stayed.  And the first--we only saw one person, which was the postman downtown Boulder.  So, we just always--we just thought that Colorado was a white place and there were no black people there.  So after the convention, we went to Denver [Colorado] where my father met up with the people who really introduced he and my mother in Salina, Kansas, that were then--that were living in--in Denver near Five Points.  I don't know if Five Points ring--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: So Five Points is the heart of--it's similar to the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: To the Gap area.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And we were--oh, we--we loved it.  We had such a great time in Denver.  And that was my memory of Denver, was that whole community around Five Points.  So when I went back to Denver to work for the cable industry, I was just in shock because it was nothing like what I remembered.  It took me years to find that community (laughter) a--again.  And it was just so--it was just so totally different.  I, I always saw Denver as a community of a lot of black people and--'cause that's all was around when we were there visiting.
Speaker 1: And that's Five Points--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That Five Points neighborhood.  That was the only thing we--we were exposed to.
Story_ID: 45047
Speaker 1: Now what you alluded to, I think at the head of the first half hour, was that integration and, and destroying the Gap in a way.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well integration really was the beginning of the decline of the black businesses in Tulsa, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: We--the people, we talked to link it to the Urban Renewal projects and the highway--the superhighway construction--does that--does that make any sense to you?
Speaker 2: That was later.  The Urban Renewal was really after you could go downtown.  Black people were allowed to go in department stores and movies and places downtown.
Speaker 1: So we're talking about the late '50's [1950s], early '60's [1960s]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --period.
Speaker 2: We're talking around 1955, '56' [1956] through '65' [1965], for the most part.  And then the Urban Renewal came shortly thereafter 'cause I think the early--the most of the Urban Renewal took place after I moved to Houston, and I moved to Houston [Texas] in 1962.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But the community had started to de--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, the community had--
Speaker 1: --started to decline.
Speaker 2: --started decline.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, the bank was still there--the black bank was still there.  A few things were there but a lot of the town--a lot of the businesses had closed.
Speaker 1: So was it the disbursement of people from that concentrated area out into the--
Speaker 2: Part of that; it was part of that.
Speaker 1: It diluted the--
Speaker 2: The, the cash flow in that community.  That's where you had to--that's where you bought, you know--and--but then as through a supermarket, so to speak, not like there are today, but bigger stores, and prices were better, is when the black businesses started declining.  And then Urban Renewal came and that made a big difference as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Kind of continued to decline.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, high school graduation--this is 1960?
Speaker 2: Fifty-nine [1959].
Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959], okay.  Graduated from high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Tulsa, Oklahoma] in '59' [1959]?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And you--I--you went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennesse]?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Fisk was quite an experience.
Story_ID: 45048
Speaker 1: But, you know, one other trip I, I wanted to tell you about, the one with my father [Archie Morgan].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: On another secondary convention to Atlantic City, New Jersey.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: To visit a family that owned beach property.  And then when we left there, we went into the city of New York [New York City, New York], and that was my first time in New York.  And I was with a girlfriend.  And I had never seen so many people in my life, and this was in Harlem [New York City, New York].  And we walked and walked and walked until we could not see anymore; it's dark.  And then we decide--and were people--all kinds of people, talking different languages and all that.  And my girlfriend--we turned around and came back.  And when we got back to the house; the lady who we were staying with, in one of these multi-floor buildings, was downstairs, and had never been downstairs--had been many, many years because she was in a wheelchair, and she didn't come downstairs.  And they were all downstairs, police were there and everything because two girls had been there from Texas a few weeks before that and had been killed, and they were so afraid that something had happened to us.  We had been gone two or three hours, but we were just so fascinated by the scene, by the city life, that we just walked and walked and walked until it got dark, and we said, oh, we gotta go back and turned around and went back.  So that was always kind of an interesting experience 'cause the whole community was looking for us (laughter).  And then I went on to--to Fisk after high school.  And one year I was at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee].  My father did not like Fisk.
Story_ID: 45049
Speaker 1: What was it about Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] that your father [Archie Morgan] didn't like?
Speaker 2: Probably the fact his daughter was not actually going to class (laughter).  I was (laughter) there having a good time.  And it was my first time being around wealthy black people, I mean real wealth.  And it was--Fisk was a totally different experience than what I had grown up with.  And there were a lot of us who got in trouble at Fisk during those days.  And--
Speaker 1: Now the rules--just for those who are watching this, college has changed so much since that era.  And it started changing in the mid '60's [1960s].  But what were the rules like at Fisk for a woman on campus?
Speaker 2: Well, you had to wear gloves and heels to dinner.  You, you were not allowed off the grounds after about six o'clock in the evening.  You know, you actually took classes that were titled "The Fisk Woman."  It was something unlike anything I (laughter) experienced.  But, you know--And then when we got in trouble--me and a group of us got in trouble at Fisk for going--staying out too late--because you had to sign in and sign out.  And so finally, after we had stayed out too late a couple of--three times, they took off the sign-off/sign-in list.  So, that made it even better or worse for us because we no longer had to sign in and sign out, so we just left and would stay gone and come back, and no one would even know we were gone.  So it was--Fisk was a--during the time that I was there, the thing that comes most to my mind is a lot of--a lot of stories about the struggle of black people.
Story_ID: 45050
Speaker 1: I was right in the middle of the Civil Rights Movement, Nash Silvia--her--was that her name?
Speaker 2: Diane Nash.
Speaker 1: Diane Nash, she was there.
Speaker 2: Oh, this is a time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Barry--Barry the mayor of Washington--who was the mayor of Washington--was a big action--
Speaker 2: Was it Marion Barry?
Speaker 1: Marion Barry [HistoryMaker], he was in grad school; he was there.
Speaker 2: You have James Bevel [HistoryMaker] there?
Speaker 1: He was there.
Speaker 2: James Lawson?
Speaker 1: (Unclear) There were a number of civil rights activists that were in Nashville either at Fisk [University, Nashville Tennessee] or Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee].
Story_ID: 45051
Speaker 1: And I had a friend, her name was Mary Treadwell.  In fact, she, Mary Treadwell, once upon a time was married to Marion Barry [HistoryMaker] and has a very interesting history of her own.  But Mary was very active in that sit-ins; they did these sit-ins.  And having growing up--grown up in that environment I described to you where you stay in your place, you don't go--go to danger.  So going and sittin' on--you know, sittin' in at a counter downtown was not something that came to my mind to do.  But my girlfriend Mary, who was from Columbus, Ohio, very much of an activist, she talked me one day into going with her on one of those sit-ins at Kress'--I think it was Kress' counter; coke--you know, a fountain counter where you would sit there and get a hamburger, those fountain counters that they used to have in Kress' and Woolworth's and places like that.  And--but before we went, we all met in Jubilee Hall, and you were told the dos and the don'ts and how you had to--and, you know, this was a very non-violent thing.  You were to be non-violent.  And it was, like, no matter what, you were not to retaliate or say anything.  You were just to sit there.  And, I remember walking in that store, and the thing that most struck me was that most of the people out there screaming at us--was just screaming, were women not a lot of men.  It was a lot of women, and they were calling us everything, and I was so afraid.  And we went in, and we sat at this counter.  And this was my one and only sit-in (laughter).  There were these women who they let come in, and they were going down the aisle pulling people's hair and spittin' on 'em and pulling on 'em.  And I'm sitting there just saying to Mary, I'm not gonna be able--I'm--I just knew that I was about to bring the Civil Rights Movement to an end (laughter),  because I just couldn't see how I could just sit there and watch--you know, just be spit upon and pulled.  And some policemen came in before they got down to Mary and I and pulled these women out.  And shortly thereafter we were able to leave, and I never went back.  I, I, I was so glad.  I, I literally felt that I was going to be the person to end the Civil (laughter) Rights Movement 'cause they really made it feel like, if you did anything that--you know, you were really creating a real bad problem for the movement.  So, I never--I never did that again, but it's--it was very much--
Story_ID: 45052
Speaker 1: I remember the Klu Klux Klan's coming on the Oval.
Speaker 2: So they came to the campus?
Speaker 1: They came to the campus, and in fact I wrote a little story about it.  I always thought the Klu Klux Klans was like the boogieman.  Not something that was real but was something to scare you, until I saw them my freshman year at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee].  And everybody thought that was so funny that I didn't realize--'cause I called my mom [Gloria Morgan] and told her that the Klu Klux Klansmen were on the grounds, and they had fire, and they were gonna lynch us, because all what I used to hear that they did to you.  My father [Archie Morgan] used to talk about traveling in--by car.  And, you know, we traveled by car. You know, by dark you--you were at somebody's house or you had some place to go.  You wouldn't be traveling on the highways at night.  And it was always about the Klu Klux Klans.  And for some reason, we always kind of associated that with the boogieman until that--that incident.
Speaker 2: So they weren't really visible in Tulsa [Oklahoma] like that?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Wearing the robes and marching--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --down the--
Speaker 1: I've never--
Speaker 2: I've heard of those kinds of stories, the marching down street--
Speaker 1: I never--I never saw anything like that until on the Oval of Jubilee Hall in Nashville, and that was in 1959, '60' [1960].
Speaker 2: So how did that--they actually showed up on the Oval--
Speaker 1: They showed up on the ground.
Speaker 2: --in the middle of the Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] campus.  And what happened?
Speaker 1: Oh, the police came.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They were taken away or run away or something.  But you would see them; after that I would see them quite a bit, you know, or read about them.  A lot of the people would come back from the city and sayin' they had seen them or stuff like that.  But, you know, that was, you know, 1959. And 1960 was a very active--there was a guy that--I don't think (unclear), but he was very prominent.  In fact, he and John, the guy who's in the Senate--the Congress--
Speaker 2: John Lewis [HistoryMaker].
Speaker 1: Lewis, right--very close.  And he went to Fisk.  I can't think of his name now.
Speaker 2: Not James Lawson--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No, it was James Lawson.  He was a kind of philosopher, minister; he was very studious.  He and Nash were very close.
Speaker 2: James Bevel married--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Marri--maybe that's who it was.
Speaker 2: Reverend James Bevel[HistoryMaker].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --He was a--
Speaker 1: That's who it was, James Bevel.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's who it was.
Story_ID: 45053
Speaker 1: And, you know, so it was a lot going on during that time.  And, you know, that was another reason my father [Archie Morgan] wanted me away.  He, he just felt that I was in danger.
Speaker 2: Okay, so--so you went back; you were there a year so that takes us further--we're in 1962, so--
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1959 through 1960 (unclear), and then I went--in September--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --of '60' [1960], I went to Oklahoma State University [Stillwater, Oklahoma].  And that's where I met my husband [Fritz Greer], my son's father.
Speaker 2: Okay, now what was the atmosphere like in Oklahoma State?  Now this is an integrated situation, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was, but it was kind of self-imposed segregation because all the black people stayed together.  You didn't see any integration of students.  You know, and in the student hall there was always--in the student union, or whatever they called it, the black people always stayed together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 45054
Speaker 1: And it was--and then there was this guy called Fritz Greer who was a big basketball star, he and another guy by the name of L. C. Garden and--
Speaker 2: Now is Fritz Greer--is Greer related at all to Hal Greer who became a big NBA star?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I wondered that when you said--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: They were around the same time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But Fritz Greer played for Oklahoma State [University, Stillwater, Oklahoma], and he--he was an outstanding basketball player.  He was also an outstanding golfer, which was kind of unusual at that time, and still is a big golfer.  And I--Fritz and I got married that--he then graduated, and we moved to Houston [Texas].
Story_ID: 45055
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now did you continue to go to school in Houston [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas] and went there for a year.  I went a year at Fisk, a year at Oklahoma State, a year at Texas Southern, and then I transferred to the University of Houston.
Speaker 1: Okay, then the University of Houston--
Speaker 2: And then I graduated from the University of Houston.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Both bachelors and masters.
Story_ID: 45056
Speaker 1: Okay now, at--how did you like Houston?  I mean, was the atmosphere at Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas]--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, it was like, for instance, Texas Southern, to some extent, reminded me of Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], you know, and that kind of culture in a lot of ways, but Texas Southern--because they both were urban schools, you know-- Texas Southern was right in the middle of Third Ward and Fisk was on Jefferson, so they were both similar in that way, but I always kinda felt like an outsider.  'Cause at that point I was married with a baby, so I really didn't get a chance to get involved in student activities.  I was just a student.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's a whole different attitude here than--
Speaker 2: A totally different--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --as a married student off campus.  And, so I just never really could get adjusted to Texas Southern be--I, I think because of that.  And so--for some reason, I don't know how--someone told me about--about this time I had decided to go--I was gonna go to school in social work, but I had to get my bachelor's first, so.  And there was talk of a graduate school of social work starting at the University of Houston, so I transferred to the University of Houston.  I got a Bachelor's Degree majoring in political science and sociology and then graduated; worked for about four years in Ben Taub Hospital [Ben Taub General Hospital, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Ben Taub?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 45057
Speaker 1: Now, through these school years, were there any important people as mentors or administrators or anyone you met along the way that really influenced you?
Speaker 2: That's an interesting question.  Well, I--as I said, Fisk-Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] was a kind of a life-changing experience for me because one of the things that I said, it's the first time I was exposed to black wealth, so to speak.  And there were a lot of very well-known people who would come to the campus, you know, people who we read about that were educators and that would come to the school.  And Fisk was a very prominent place, and the Jubilee singers were very prominent at that time.  You know, they were going to sing for the queen, you know, doing those kinda things.  So, I was there at a time when I was exposed to just really life altering, life changing kind of experiences, and it really kind of reinforced my thing about social change and was the beginning of a very activist life for me.
Story_ID: 45058
Speaker 1: Now did you meet--I don't know when Charles Spurgeon Johnson passed, but we're there people around Fisk at the time that knew him, and did you relate it to going to a school named after him?
Speaker 2: You know, I'm trying to remember.  I think he was the president.  I think he was dead when--I don't think he was--
Speaker 1: I don't think--yeah.
Speaker 2: --the president--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: He became president one time.  That was in the '40's [1940s], but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--.
Speaker 2: No, but I, I met him when he--the school was named 'cause the school was called Booker T. Washington Elementary School because the elementary school and the high school were in the same building on the same campus, so to speak.  And when the high school moved out and left the school for just the elementary, they renamed it Charles S. Johnson School [Tulsa, Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: So he actually came to--
Speaker 2: And he came for the naming of the school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was probably, oh, '48' [1948] maybe, something like that, you know.
Story_ID: 45059
Speaker 1: All right, so now let's talk about Charles Spurgeon Johnson, of course, Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and also a school that W.E.B. DuBois went to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so you got this social--sociology.
Speaker 2: Yeah, got the--and the whole activist climate.  You know, I started kind of becoming a part of, of that because when I--when I left Fisk and went to Oklahoma State [University, Stillwater, Oklahoma] that was an interesting experience too because it was the first time I'd ever gone to school with white people, and it was just a totally different experience.  And the self-segregating was something that I'd always found fascinating.
Speaker 1: Was it something that you thought should have--
Speaker 2: Not be.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I--It seemed that we limited ourselves to certain sections of the university grounds, and we didn't take part in the larger life of the university.  Now, as I look back on it, we weren't invited a whole lot (laughter) to do that either, you know, and everybody else was kinda okay with that, you know.  But, I always felt like we were limiting ourselves, and so part of that--and then when I went to Houston [Texas], I felt out of place at Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas], which is--I think it was more of the fact that most of the students there--you know, I was kind of part of that age group, but at the same time I wasn't part of that life, because of being married and a mother and some of the experiences that I had had.
Story_ID: 45060
Speaker 1: So, you may have said this already but I forgot, but was your husband [Fritz Greer] from Houston [Texas]?
Speaker 2: No, my husband's from Duncan, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And he just got a job.  He was recruited.  His--he got his job at the YMCA.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Houston, which was in Third Ward at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he wasn't drafted by the--the pros didn't try to draft him?  Did he try out?
Speaker 2: No--yeah, he--well he tried out for--and went--and participated a little bit in some kind of spring camp or summer camp playing basketball, but he never--he didn't play pro.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so he worked for the "Y" and--
Speaker 2: He worked for the "Y" for many, many, many, many years, but his passion is golf.  He has played golf practically all of his life.  He, he, he played golf when he was a kid because they started out caddying at the country club.  And the caddies were able to play golf on Monday or Tuesday or something, whenever the country club was closed.
Speaker 1: I think that's the story of a lot of the early black golfers--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Some of them learned how to play better than the people they were caddying for.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, he, he, he--Fritz for many, many years was a scratch golfer.  And really that was what he really should have done professionally, but he just never felt comfortable letting go of that monthly--that check that came (laughter) every week, you know.  But, he--he still today in 70s is a very active golfer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 45061
Speaker 1: Okay, now Houston--what about University of Houston [Houston, Texas]?  You said that at Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas] you really didn't feel any--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't--it was, you know, you--there was a party atmosphere about black colleges that we often talk about and nothin'--but there was a lot of studying going on too, but there was, you know, kind of a social life to me, I always felt.  It was at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], which I was a part of it, and it was also at Texas Southern.  U--University of Houston--about this time is when I met a guy by the name of Jesse [Gray].  He, he organized the tenants in New York.  What was his name--very--was a big-time organizer in--in New York is where I met him when I was at Oklahoma State [University, Stillwater, Oklahoma], became a part of a very active group, and you know.  And I remember when HUD [Department of Housing and Urban Development] met--came to Houston and we boycotted.  We, we--not boycotted but picketed the convention, you know, because there were certain discussions around housing pra--pa--policy.  And at that time they were building these huge tenements, you know, what--what they call the--public housing, and a lot of controversy around the public housing, especially the ones in Chicago [Illinois].  We often studied what was going on there and so I, I became very activist when I went to Fi--when I went to University of Houston and remained an activist until I joined the cable industry.
Speaker 1: Okay. University of Houston, okay.
Story_ID: 45062
Speaker 1: Now, all right, you say you worked at Ben Taub Hospital [Houston, Texas] after you--
Speaker 2: Yep, worked at Ben Taub Hospital after I graduated from--no, I worked at Ben Taub Hospital, yeah, after I graduated from college [University of Houston, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Oh, well tell me this, now what was your master's thesis about?
Speaker 2: We didn't--
Speaker 1: You didn't have one?
Speaker 2: No, school of--
Speaker 1: Oh, you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --social work you don't have 'em, you do practice.
Speaker 1: Practice, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And one of my practice was in the Cuney Home Projects, which was monumental experiences of trying to get the mothers primarily to involve themselves in the PTA [Parent-Teacher Association].
Speaker 1: Okay and now this--is this a high rise project, or?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, this is three stories.
Speaker 1: Thirty stories?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, three.
Speaker 1: Three, three stories, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, just about three--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, that's not bad.
Speaker 2: It's called Cuney Homes not--they weren't--they weren't as big as they were in Chicago [Illinois], the ones in Houston [Texas].  There was one in Houston that, which I can't think of the name of right now, that was probably six to ten stories.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But Cuney Home, where we did our placement, was only about three stories.
Speaker 1: And how do you spell that?  Is that?
Speaker 2: C-U-N-Y [sic].
Speaker 1: Okay, that's what I thought, okay.  That was in a--
Speaker 2: Third Ward.
Speaker 1: Fifth Ward, okay.
Speaker 2: Third Ward.
Speaker 1: Third Ward, Third Ward.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was in Third Ward.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not too far from Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there was a lot of poverty and violence and stuff going on at that point in time.  Housing was--it was just a lot of discussion around how poor people were kind of piled up on top of each other.  And when I start working for--when--when I got out of grad school, our project--as I said, when I was in grad school, was tryin' to integrate the community with the school system and tryin' to get mothers and fam--parents to be active in the PTA [Parent-Teacher Association].
Story_ID: 45063
Speaker 1: Now the social work courses and the ones that you had, did they emphasize organizing?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In the Saul Alinsky mode, that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That sort of thing, okay.
Speaker 2: I, I was a Saul Alinsky advocate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, went to Saul Alinsky Institute in Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --during that time.
Speaker 1: All right.  That's interesting 'cause a lot of people don't talk about it, but that's something that's really--really affects--affecting the way Chicago--
Speaker 2: That's where I met Jane--Jesse Gray was his name.
Speaker 1: Jesse Gray, okay.
Speaker 2: That's where I met Jesse Gray, was at a Saul Alinsky meeting, 'cause he was trained by Saul Alinsky.  And he made--he did one of the most effective rent strikes in the history of New York, which was back in, oh, probably early '60's [1960s]--mid '60's [1960s], 'cause I met him right around graduation--not too long after I graduated, and around the time that I graduated--somewhere mid '60's [1960s]--
Speaker 1: And did you ever meet a fellow named Charles Ross by any chance?
Speaker 2: Charles.
Speaker 1: Charles Ross, same last name as Don Ross.
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He was an organizer, and several people we've interviewed remember Charles Ross--
Speaker 2: Oh, really.
Speaker 1: I was surprised (unclear).  I knew him from Ohio, but I didn't know he had done as many things as he had.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --(unclear)--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the--the--really the major organizer which had such an impact on me was this guy Jesse Gray.
Speaker 1: Jesse Gray, okay.
Speaker 2: Who the National Tenant Association which he was--he was one of the major organizers.
Story_ID: 45064
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so what kind of activities, since you were organizing in the projects--?
Speaker 2: I organized in projects, organized senior citizens.  We organized some 500 senior citizens in Texas to go to--to the state house around the time that Medicare was being debated and discussed and dealing with senior citizen benefits--social security and senior citizen benefits--did that.  I organized welfare mothers--did kind of what--organize almost anybody we could organize (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now what did you learn about social change from being involved in organizing?
Speaker 2: It took people, that's one thing, and that organizing demonstrated to me that, while it sounds very glib, the power is in the people.  When--whenever we were disciplined and persistent and--and had our facts right and our strategy, we were always effective.  Same thing happened with Tate.
Speaker 1: Charles Tate.
Speaker 2: Charles Tate.  Because that was toward--that was when I was in the Houston Urban League, when we came back from that conference.
Speaker 1: Well talk about the conference.  Maybe we--fir--you know, so we--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the conference--
Speaker 1: This is a conference--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 45065
Speaker 1: Now you were work--working for the Urban League?
Speaker 2: I was working for the Houston Urban League.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was the beginning of cable franchising in the urban markets.  I had not even heard of cable franchising.  And my boss, a guy by the name of Larry Cager, who was executive director of the Urban League there in Houston [Texas] suggested that I go to this conference.  And I went to the conference, and we came back and organized what was called at that time Media Action Teams all over the country.  As a result of this training that we got from Charles Tate the group there to educate the black community about the franchising process.  And when we got back--we knew nothing about cable franchising, but when we got back--'cause we were taught how to find out where your city is as it relates to franchising, whether the ordinance has been developed, where the procedure is on the city council calendar.  We learned all that in this conference.  And when we got back, we found out that the ordinance had been put together.  There were a group of people headed by John Connelly (ph.) that were about to be given the franchise.  It was a very powerful group of business people that were behind this and big law firms and etcetera.  And we just got extremely active.  We went on television; we started going into churches; we--we just educated the community and finally put enough pressure on the city council to open up the process.  And that was the beginning of a very long process.  But at least a handful of very rich and powerful people didn't walk off with a hundred year franchise, which was in the making practically.
Story_ID: 45066
Speaker 1: Okay, so the cable franchising, from what I understand then (unclear) explain it in more detail.  The average--I mean, people had more say-so in it than they thought, and your job was to--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --educate them and--
Speaker 2: To let them know what it was.
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, because, you know, so--a number of readings was required in public meetings and public hearings and, you know.  And most ordinances and things like that and franchises had been, you know, let very quietly.  No one knew anything about that whole process.  We sure didn't.  I learned a lot about city government and how it operated from Charles Tate.  And so we came back and organized our group, and we were able to open up the franchising process which turned into a big deal with--that was very open.
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of our group that you were in?
Speaker 2: It was called the Media Action Team.
Speaker 1: The Media--
Speaker 2: They were all called Media Action Teams.  I'm trying to remember the name of Charles' group because it was kind of a tag off of a group that he had put together in [Washington] D.C., which was doing this training all over the country.  And--but there were Media Action Teams.  We were the Houston Urban League's Media Action Team, and we got--we were very instrumental.  And I tell you, that was a somewhat violent time.  I--My Lincoln--that old blue and white Lincoln Continental, and every tire got slashed the night of the vote.
Speaker 1: Now who vote--this was the city council--
Speaker 2: This is at the city council.  This is at the city council.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When they voted to table discussions on that current franchise ordinance and to open it up, you know.  In other words, you know, my--my Media Action Team, our group, exposed not only to the black community but to Houston [Texas] what was about to happen at, you know--this franchise was an extremely valuable document that was about to be given to a handful of people for a long period of time.  So that was probably one of my most successful organizing efforts.
Speaker 1: So this was in-what--what year is this we're seeing now?
Speaker 2: This is 1972.
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-two [1972].
Speaker 2: You know, '71' [1971], '72' [1972].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Let me see when that little--let me see, I came out of grad school in--
Speaker 1: Seventy [1970].
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965], '69' [1969], yeah, came out (unclear) grad school, it was 1972, '73' [1973], something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Because I moved to Indiana--I mean I moved to-yeah, Indiana in '75' [1975], late '75' [1975], so this was about 1972, '73' [1973], something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you were in graduate school.  You--
Speaker 2: I graduated--I was in grad school from '69' [1969] to '71' [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was in the second University of Houston Graduate School of Social Work class.
Story_ID: 45067
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, 1971 to '73' [1973], okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969] to '71' [1971]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --was when I got the grad degree.  And and then I went to work for the [Houston] Urban League from 1971 to 19--about '74' [1974], and then I left the Urban League in Houston [Texas] and went to work in a program called One America where--you may know her, this woman.  Her name was--I had her name a minute ago.  She was a postal--she was part of the U.S. Postal--her husband was.  He was a postal commissioner many, many years ago.  This is early '70's [1970s] when they were in [Washington] D.C.--Jenkins.
Speaker 1: Jenkins, okay.
Speaker 2: Jenkins were their last names.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she started a program called One America, which was a program to train--work with first offenders and--first female--first female offenders.  And I worked on that program for about a year or two before moving to Fort Wayne [Indiana].
Speaker 1: Okay, now what took you to Fort Wayne?
Speaker 2: The Urban League.
Speaker 1: The Urban League, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm, I went to become the executive director of the Fort Wayne Urban League.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were you still married at this time?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I didn't think so, okay.
Speaker 2: No, I divorced--I got married in 1961, and I was divorced in 1975, the year I left Houston.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you were the executive director of the Fort Wayne Urban League in 1974.
Speaker 2: I said 1975--
Speaker 1: Seventy-five [1975], okay.
Speaker 2: --to 1979.
Speaker 1: Okay, to 1979.
Story_ID: 45068
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well--okay, well how was--how was--I know Fort Wayne [Indiana] was a lot different from Houston [Texas].
Speaker 2: Oh, Fort Wayne was a lot different, and it was the height of my organizing.  School desegregation was the big issue then, and Fort Wayne was one of the few communities that I was aware of where separate--it was separate but equal in terms of the quality of the schools and the facilities and the equipment.  I mean Fort Wayne had beautiful inner city schools, many of which were relatively new schools.  And the year that I became the executive director of the Fort Wayne Urban League, the courts put a court order on the school district to desegregate.  And they were in discussions of the desegregation--a school desegregation plan, which--which was primarily closing all of the inner city schools (laughter), which--
Speaker 1: That's progress for you (laughter).
Speaker 2: Which was--you know, I was outraged by that.  It--I was just absolutely outraged.  These were beautiful schools and that--and I never will forget the superintendent's name was Lester Grile and--almost single-handedly, quite frankly.  But I started dealing with some ministers and very prominent African Americans in Fort Wayne, talking to them about his plan, that this--this-- this just could not be; we gotta stop it.  I was driven by that for years, a couple of years for sure, until I was able to organize that community.  And we organized that community; in fact, I have a poster that's probably in storage, which tells the whole story.  But, we met, like, two or three nights a week in black churches around town.  And every night that we met we took up collection, and we were able to hire a law firm out of Chicago [Illinois].  And I flew to Chicago to retain the lawyer.  And the word got out that I was in Chicago and when I was coming back.  And when I got back to Fort Wayne to the airport, all the media was at the airport waiting for me to talk about why I was in Chicago and what our plans were, and the whole thing.  But we fought that desegregation plan tooth and nail, and in--
Story_ID: 45069
Speaker 1: Who did you hire in Chicago [Illinois]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You know, I knew you were gonna ask me that.  It was a black law firm for sure.  And I see the guy so (unclear) right now.  I, I need to find that out.  I just can't remember at this point.  I just need to figure out who I can get to talk to who can help me figure out who that guy was, but he was very effective, and he used to come in to our meetings every week from Chicago.  And the churches would be packed on a Wednesday night or a Tuesday night or a Thursday night.  And we raised thousands of dollars, took out a full-page ad, which is the--which is the poster that I was telling you about.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We took out a full-page ad where black people signed the petition against the school board desegregation plan.  And it was very prominent people: Levan Scott, who was a very prominent educator in Fort Wayne, Indiana; Jeff Toole, who was the physician, who--not Toole--Jeff Towles, who was the physician, who saved Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker] when he got shot in 1979--
Speaker 1: Yeah that's the incident where Vernon Jordan was shot in the back--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --from a bluff or something (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was coming out of--
Speaker 1: Of a car.
Speaker 2: --a place and got shot.  And, interesting enough, he was with the same Urban League worker that he had--was--that I put in charge of his going around town some four years later--earlier.  He was with that same person the night he got shot.  And--but I can't--I, I, I just need to find out who that law firm is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It wasn't Thomas Tyler, was it?
Speaker 2: Umm, that name--yeah, I don't even know if I can remem--if I would--If I heard the name, I would remember it.
Speaker 1: Or Judge Pinchen--I mean Pincham was an attorney (unclear)?
Speaker 2: This was a young guy who had just been hired by this law firm.  The law firm was a very prominent black law firm.  He was relatively newcomer to the law firm from New York and was very, very effective and was in Chicago doing this kind of work for a number of years.  And I lost touch with him after a couple of years, after I had moved on to Denver [Colorado].  But we were very successful in delaying the school board plan and then getting--getting a new plan in place and which included putting black people in the administration and a lot of things like that, that were--we were able to get, you know, at least on paper before I left, when I moved on to--to Denver.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 45070
Speaker 1: And, now you met a fellow involved in the American (unclear).
Speaker 2: The ATC [American Television and Communications Corporation].
Speaker 1: Yeah, ATC.
Speaker 2: American Television--
Speaker 1: Yeah, David and them.
Speaker 2: --and Communications--David Kinley.
Speaker 1: Kinley, right.
Speaker 2: I met David in Fort Wayne [Indiana].  David was in Fort Wayne franchising.  And this was after my Houston [Texas] experience.  And I had nothing to do with fo--franchi--I didn't want anything to do with cable franchising.  I felt that it was--I didn't like the people who were involved in it.  You know, I had my four tires slashed, and I thought they were a bunch of gangsters, so I didn't want anything to do with it.  So, when he came to see me to talk about their package, I referred him to somebody else, one of my staff people, which he later knew one of my board members and called my board member and said, "I wanna sit down with Gayle Greer, and she won't see me, and I'd like for you to make that happen."  So, we did make it hap--he did make it happen.  And we went to dinner one night, and I told David Kinley that the best thing he could do for his company was to pack up his bags and leave town because he did not have a snowball's chance in hell of gettin' that franchise.  And this was at least a year ahead of time.  This was a year before the (unclear) was ever taken.  But, you know, franchising was based on who's--who are the influential people in town.  And Storer, which was a company--cable company at the time, had come into town and swooped up all the power, all the people who had very influential connections to the cit--city council.  Well, just as I predicted, that's exactly what happened after ATC had spent a lot of money franchising.  And I guess maybe two three months later, maybe--maybe a year later, he called me one day and said he wanted me to send him some resumes because he was going to start building out his--his department of--what (unclear) call new market development, which was really franchising.  And he wanted some res--me to send him some resumes.  And I said okay, I'll do that.  So I had the person who was in charge of--of employment, you know, go through some of the resumes and we put together some resumes and sent them to 'em.  But when he got 'em, he called and said, "Yours wasn't a part of it."  And I said, "I'm not looking for a job in cable television," and he says, "But I sure would like to talk to you about cable television."  And he was so impressed with me telling him a year earlier that, "You don't have a snowball's chance in hell..." and--and this is who's gonna win this franchise.  So, I later laughed with him after I started working for him--said you know anybody could have given you that (laughter) information.
Story_ID: 45071
Speaker 1: Okay, so, I think you said earlier they [American Television and Communications Corporation] flew you out to dinner?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well he [David Kinley] finally called one day and said--cause he was in charge of Indianapolis [Indiana].  They were franchising in Indianapolis at that time, and he said, you know--and he flew his own plane, and he said, "I have to go to Indianapolis and why don't I come down to Fort Wayne after I leave my meeting in Indianapolis and let's have dinner?"  So, I said, "Okay, we can do that."  And so he flew to Fort Wayne [Indiana] and we had dinner, and he suggested that I come to Denver [Colorado].
Speaker 1: Now, what year is this?  This is 19--
Speaker 2: This is 1978.
Speaker 1: Seventy-eight [1978], okay.  That's what I thought, all right.
Speaker 2: And I went to Denver on the Monday after Labor Day in 1978 and really just fell in love with Monaco, going from Stapleton Airport down Monaco out to Englewood out South.  And it wasn't--after you got past Hammond it was nothin', and you wanna know why are these people way out. Well, now it's like, you know.  But, so I was interviewed by the entire senior management staff and offered a job by the end of the day, and my response was, "To do what?"  I was a social worker, you know, and I couldn't figure out why in the world would, you know, they wanna hire a social worker.  And it turned out that the reason they--what they saw in me was my network of Urban Leagues.  And many of the Urban Leagues were in communities where ATC [American Television and Communications Corporation] had targeted (unclear) franchise markets.  And there were Urban Leagues like Indianapolis [Indiana] being one of them.  So that's the reason they brought me on.  Oh, and the reason I agreed to the job was because I wanted out of Fort Wayne, Indiana--but really had no intentions of staying private enterprise-business-- had no intentions.  And it just went so fast.  It just-- just kinda sw--I was sweeped up in the action of a startup really, more or less, is what that was.  I mean, it was the beginning; it was the ground floor of today's cable television industry.
Story_ID: 45072
Speaker 1: Okay, so what happens is, is that in some ways here is someone who was on the outside of the franchises making sure that the community got what they wanted.  Now you're on the inside of the franchises.  Did you see the possibility of doing the same thing from the inside?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I saw a lot of business development opportunities.  I felt like it was in a real good position to help minority and small businesses.
Speaker 1: And par--part of the mandate, the federal mandate for these cable companies, was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Was the involvement of minorities.
Speaker 1: Yeah, which they--
Speaker 2: And all--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --tried to escape at first, but--
Speaker 2: Oh, they--they tried.  They--and many of them did escape.  It was a hard fought battle.  And the cultures is really what was--was such a clash of the people who ran the cable television industry, going into these markets that were urban, like Cincinnati [Ohio], like Houston [Texas], like Indianapolis [Indiana], St. Louis [Missouri], you know, inner-city markets, most of which had at least one or two minorities on the city council.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, therefore, their agenda was make sure that the minority community and minority businesses are involved.  And these--the industry was resistant to that, severely (laughter) resistant to it.
Story_ID: 45073
Speaker 1: Now was there a reason why I was told a lot of the early cable power centered in Denver [Colorado]?
Speaker 2: Oh, it did.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: Most of the major cable operators were there.  ATC [American Television and Communications Corporation] was there, Teleprom--not TelePrompTer, but United Cable was there.  You know, most of the cable--you know, Bill Daniels was there, who is really the father of cable television,  Monty Rifkin, all these guys who were really pioneers were in--were in Denver.  And I remember asking Monty Rifkin, "Why?"  And he says, "Well, I can only answer for me.  I'm a skier."  (Laughter) So, it turns out that's why a lot of them were there (laughter), was because, you know--and they were from that part of the world, the West, you know, Wyoming--a lot of, you know, where there was not broadcast signals.  People couldn't get good broadcast signals, so.
Speaker 1: That's, that's a key that--you know, when I read the materials I was reading that, but I didn't link 'em together.  But that's, you know, cable--the first cable systems were (unclear) community antenna television when you'd run--
Speaker 2: That's what it was.
Speaker 1: --a cable because you can't get a signal in the mountains.
Speaker 2: There you go.  And they did the cable over the mountains to bring 'em in.  And that's what Bill Daniels--that's what he--that was what he did.  You know, and in places like Wyoming and Utah, you know, places like that, they didn't have television.  And he tells the story.  He's--he's one of my mentors by the way, and he was really very inspirational to me.  He was a very special person unlike, to me, anybody else in the cable industry, 'cause I found the cable industry to be very hardnosed, very uncharitable, just hard nose entrepreneurs who were very successful.  You can't (laughter) deny that.  I mean, they were super con-successful, and to be able to run an industry without any interference from government for so many years was amazing.  These guys pulled it off up until about 19--when was that--'70's [1970's] when the first telecommunications kinda came.  We could charge whatever we wanted.  That was in the '80's [1980s] really, 'cause when I joined the industry there were no rules.  You could do what you wanna do.
Speaker 1: So this is like the Wild West--
Speaker 2: It was the wild--
Speaker 1: --in the Wild West.
Speaker 2: It was the Wild West (laughter) in the Wild West; it was.
Story_ID: 45074
Speaker 1: And all these people who I had educated (laughter) after Tate, you know, were now coming to me as an operator, you know, with my same verbiage about community access and minority involvement and schools wired, you know, all this kind of stuff, you know.  And I, I was in another seat at that time.  And now as franchising, it was fun to explore all of those possibilities, but when you put pencil to paper with the business people, the accounting people of the industry, you know, those--those things couldn't pay for themselves, even though we promised a lot of stuff that didn't pay for itself.  And--but it was an interesting time because a lot of the community choch--training that I did and--and alerting people to the intricacies of a cable franchise and how it is a public document that benefits us all--how that turned around as I became working from the inside.  And--
Speaker 2: So, so--
Speaker 1: Still, still very much believe that it was good for business to continue to do that.
Story_ID: 45075
Speaker 1: Okay, so what were the first cable franchises that you worked on, I guess?
Speaker 2: My first cable franchise was probably Cincinnati [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you said it was an interesting situation.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was.  It was--it was a very interesting situation, very competitive.  And our biggest competitor at the time was Warner.  And, and, you know, we ended up merging, became Time Warner.  But, when I was in franchising, Warner was a separate company, and they were a very competitive franchiser.  They prom--they did promise stuff that had not yet--was not yet possible, quite frankly.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I heard the cable franchisers who would just promise everything like (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, they did.  Well you know, at the time there were these things called institutional networks that you just don't even hear anything about anymore.  I find it interesting that (unclear) guy that came in here to give me--on my cable company here is ATT, AT and T (laughter), which was a bitter enemy (laughter) when I was in business--bitter enemy.  And there (unclear) my operator here.  But it was--it was a--it was a serious business that, at the time, plant was being built, you see, in the urban markets  and so, you know, you needed certain density in order to get that.  And cable operators were often accused of wiring around some of the densest part of the community, which was the black community.  And in some cases there was some evidence of that, but for the most part it really wasn't-- not a deliberate design to exclude the black community.  Often the head-ins were in communities quite a bit further from the inner city community and, therefore, that's where you start building.
Story_ID: 45076
Speaker 1: Now, big picture--we mentioned him before we started doing anything, but how did Benjamin Hooks [HistoryMaker] play--well, what role did he play?
Speaker 2: Well he was an FCC [Federal Communications Commission] commissioner at the time and was really pushing for these franchising provisions that would include--he was probably the only commissioner, quite frankly, that I can remember that really was kind of pushing some of these provisions for institutional network and minority businesses--minority cable owners.  You know, that, that was a big deal that he really worked on.  That's when tapers (sp.) finally moved into, getting more minorities involved in, in the ownership of cable television.  And, and, and during my time, you know, which is pre-Bob Johnson and BET [Black Entertainment Television], Bob was a part of the Trade Association when I joined the cable television industry.  He was a staff person at the Trade Association, but he was in a very group--you know, he was in the best seat for a young, black entrepreneur in that all the business people, you know, were a part of the NCTA [National Cable and Telecommunications Association].  He was a staff person there, and he pitched his black entertainment television concept to John Malone who, at the time, was running TCI [Tele-Communications Inc.].  And after a lot of negotiating, etcetera, Bob was successful in getting the funding to start BET.  And then shortly thereafter, the Newark cable television franchise was given to a black person, Marshall, Barry Marshall, was his name.  And he was very active in the--what became the, the National Association of Minorities in Cable.  He was one of the co-founders of it.  And there were, you know, Don Barton, who was very instrumental--owned the cable system in Canton, Ohio.  And then later he owned it in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Detroit, right, right.  He also owns a lot of casinos now.
Speaker 2: Yes, he did (unclear).  He died here not too long ago, by the way.  And, so there was a lot of stuff going on and, and there were some people who benefited very well, Bob being one; Don Barton did very well in the business. And then there were a number of us who did fairly well, as it related to moving up into positions of influence in--within the cable industry.  It was slow, um-hmm, but, you know, a little of it happened.
Story_ID: 45077
Speaker 1: Well tell us about this, since Cincinnati [Ohio] was the first one, just--just kind of walk--walk us through what your role was in that.
Speaker 2: Well, my role was to go into a city that we were interested in franchising and set up a local office.  And the purpose of that local office was to do all of our franchising, which really was public relations.  We also--my job was--I was charged with finding local individuals that we could partner with who had influence.  Now you didn't say that publicly, but the people you wanted to partner with--that the cable operator wanted to partner with, and this partnership was often an 80/20 partnership, was people who could help you influence votes on the city council.  So, that was my job, to meet people, to find out who, who were the movers and shakers, to find out--to get ideas about how to structure the package to the city council.  You know, I had a meeting--every day I was in Cincinnati.  And I spent a many a day in Cincinnati for about two or three years--was meeting with community groups, you know, them telling me what they wanted to see in a franchise, meeting with political figures, you know, talking about the franchise.  And that was being done-- shortly after I started Cincinnati, I started New Orleans [Louisiana],  so I was working almost simultaneously in New Orleans and Cincinnati.  And my two biggest defeats in life (laughter) was losing the franchise in Cincinnati and New Orleans.  Interestingly enough, ATC [American Television and Communications Corporation] then, now Time Warner Cable, ended up owning the cable franchise (laughter) in Cincinnati for many, many years.  And we--we never did run the cable system in New Orleans, but I was very active in that down there too.  And that--now that was a totally different kind of franchising experience whereas practically everybody you dealt with was--was black in the New Orleans franchise experience.  And Morial--and there was another guy who was--used to be the city coun--used to be the mayor here not too long ago who--who was a city council member when I was involved in franchising there.  He was the mayor, oh, 10 years ago in New Orleans after Morial, the-- the NAD.
Speaker 1: After the--after the NAD.
Speaker 2: After the old NAD.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: It was right after him.
Speaker 1: Between the--the old Morial and Ray Nagin.
Speaker 2: Oh, way before Ray Nagin.
Speaker 1: Way before Ray, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, way before Ray Nagin.
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He was on the city council.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He became the mayor-I think he was first black mayor.  A lot of people didn't know he was black because he was very fair skinned, and a lot of people didn't know he was, he was black.  And so I was working both of those at the same time.  And the experiences were--were so very, very different.  But we--they were both very competitive fighters, but, you know, sometimes, you know, Time Warner just decided that we were just not going to offer packages that we couldn't deliver on.  And that kind of an attitude really meant you didn't want the franchise because your competitors were offering whatever the people said they wanted.
Story_ID: 45078
Speaker 1: Now what kinds of things would be offered?  I know--
Speaker 2: They would offer these institutional networks that would do everything.  You know, everything would be on the in--the institution network was gonna be different from the residential network where the homes were.  This was gonna be a separate cable system that allowed for institutions, schools, community organizations, small businesses; they were gonna all be on that cable network to just do all kinds of interactive kinda stuff.  You know, interaction was--was the big buzz word.  Like you were talking about how that happened in Columbus, Ohio, for instance, how they would get together and--
Speaker 1: Interact.
Speaker 2: --interact.  Well that was a big deal, and Warner innovated that.  And that's what the institutional network was to do, was to allow the Urban League and the NAACP and the--the churches to be in their own respective offices and buildings and have a meeting on the institutional network (laughter).
Speaker 1: We know this didn't happen, so.  So this is one of--this is the, the most attractive lie that the--
Speaker 2: Oh, it was.  The institutional network was--
Speaker 1: Now didn't the cable franchisers know full well that this couldn't--wasn't gonna happen, or did they hope they could do it, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, we--I can only speak for my company.  My company saw the possibility of an institutional network but not to the extent that people had read and envisioned that this network would do.  A lot of the technology that was required to be able to have all this interaction wasn't even in existence (laughter), you know, so--at any large measure.  And the cost of that kind of stuff would have been totally prohibited.  So, you know, it got to the place where that's how you won, though.  You won by giving--having the prettiest package and giving away the most stuff.
Speaker 1: Now that would have been, yeah, it would have--to think about it, the hundreds of churches, you know--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  And this--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and they weren't gonna pay for it.
Speaker 1: In the black community, yeah--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --they wouldn't.
Speaker 2: They weren't gonna pay for it.  It was the cable that was gonna pay for it.  And, you know, and the schools--Now, Time Warner, at the time ATC, you know, we saw some viability in wiring and connecting schools.  We saw some-- some viability in that, and that--that--that was a possibility to a limited extent.  But I don't think--I don't know of any real institutional network really ever got off the ground.  It was--every package that I offered, Cincinnati [Ohio], New--New Orleans [Louisiana], Indianapolis [Indiana], Houston [Texas], every place we offered international--institutional networks.  That was just a given.
Story_ID: 45079
Speaker 1: One of the things that I heard back in the day that, that was part of the package was jobs for inner city--young men in the inner city especially.
Speaker 2: Installers.
Speaker 1: To--
Speaker 2: Cable oper--yeah, yeah.  We--that was another thing that was also an indication that we were trying to do.  And a lot of that happened in some of these (unclear).  In New Orleans [Louisiana] it definitely happened.  In Indianapolis [Indiana], it happened.  I remember a group that was--I'm trying to remember.  They were somethin' that I got involved in the cable com--it was a printing company, you know, and they became a pretty big printing company in Indianapolis, as a result of gettin' business with ATC [American Television and Communications Corporation] earlier on.
Speaker 1: I, I think I remember when, when Charles Tate came in Dayton [ohio] he was talking about a training program, that it was funded by--I don't know the cable operators--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --I know they were training--
Speaker 2: Yes, there was--there was a training program--
Speaker 1: --young men in the urban community to install--
Speaker 2: Yes.  And there was a woman whose name escapes me, who ran that program for years and years and years.  Somewhere in Ohio and--was where that program was, was headquartered, and she was the head of that program for a lot of years, of that--that training program.
Story_ID: 45080
Speaker 1: And, you know, there was an organization after that, which is still in existence, I think, called the [Walter] Kaitz Foundation which the cable industry more or less kinda put together to bring in more managerial level minorities.
Speaker 2: Kaitz, C-A-T--
Speaker 1: K-A-I--
Speaker 2: K-A--
Speaker 1: --T-Z.
Speaker 2: --I-T-Z.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Kaitz Foundation.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.  It was named after a family, their last name Kaitz, that lived in the Bay Area--very wealthy, who wanted to do this, and so they founded the Kaitz fellowship where they would take college students--African Americans in lar--in large part fo--initially, and mate them with jobs in the industry.  The problem with the Kaitz Foundation for as long as I was involved in it quite frankly, was that the cable industry never really saw that as real talent for them.  They saw it as something they needed to do in order to get past all of the questions from FCC [Federal Communications Commission].
Speaker 2: So the people trained, were they--they weren't utilizing--
Speaker 1: These were college graduates.
Speaker 2: --Were they utilized on the--yeah.
Speaker 1: These were marketing--they were--I must admit that when the Kaitz Foundation started, I had some real apprehensions about it.  Because my question was--because you see, I had started working on the operating side of the house, and most of the people that I worked with on the operating side of the house, which was white, didn't even have college degrees.  Many, many of your pioneers and folks who started the industry, they didn't have college degrees.  And most of the guys that I worked with in operations and in the field, they didn't have college degrees.  But the Kaitz Foundation, you had to have a college degree to be a fellow.  And many of them had MBA's.  And my question was always why do you need to be a fellow and have a fellowship program for big bachelor degrees and MBA students, and you don't need one just for white people to walk in off the street; it just never--it never made any sense to me.
Speaker 2: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 1: And it never did.  I think that there were very few people, and there were a lot of Kaitz fellows, but I would bet you that maybe 15 percent, and that is probably being optimistic, actually was able to move from those fellowship positions into credible, well-paying, managerial positions in the industry.  Most of them did their fellowship for a year and left.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 45081
Speaker 1: One of the features that seems to work in most cities is ca--is cable access channels.  I mean the cable access station (unclear) facility provided by the cable provider.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was--that was a big deal.  You know, you had public access and you had government accident, so that the city councils and the school board should--could have their meetings on TV.  And then--but you know public access got a real bad word--name because the real public access started in New York, and I mean it was (laughter) serious.  People would get on TV and public access and do about everything--anything.  And, you know, people down South and the Midwest, they didn't want that.  I mean, they had heard about public access (laughter), so public access had kinda bad word--was a bad word in many ways.
Speaker 1: I done read an article about pub--public access in New York.
Speaker 2: It was--public access in New York was a scream.  I never will forget this man who had a dog show.  And it was his dogs, and the dogs--for about 30 minutes they had this show where he would talk to the dogs and he would walk the dogs, and the dogs would walk back.  And they'd ring bo--the tails up against the camera, and the dogs would make (unclear) off the camera (laughter)--I mean it was--it was--I mean it was--it was crazy, crazy shows on public access in New York.  It never really got that wild hardly any place else 'cause af--shortly thereafter, you know, when--in the '80's [1980s]--early '80's [1980s] is when they start puttin' together seizures for who could run a public access channel, and most of them became owned by the city.  So, they never were really owned and operated by community groups, with very few exceptions.
Speaker 1: Okay, they formed non-for-profit--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were a few--there were a couple of--that did that fairly successful, but not very many.
Speaker 1: Okay, I think that Chicago's is a not-for--you know if Chicago cable access--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Chicago was pretty active.  In fact, Julieanna [Richardson] was--around the time that she was the administrator, she was involved in--I think she was the first cable administrator for the city of Chicago, I think or very near.  I mean that was--that was in the--
Speaker 1: Eighties [1980s].
Speaker 2: A--early '80's [1980s], yeah, um-hmm.  So, they had a fairly sophisticated program in Chicago, and it was one other place that a--can't remember--Cincinnati ended up doing some new interesting things with--in community access, um-hmm.
Story_ID: 45082
Speaker 1: Okay, 1980 you were co-founder and then later the chairwoman of the National Association for Minorities in Cable and Telecommunications.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.  We--the organization was founded by three or four individuals: I was one of them; another one was Barry Washington--Gail Williams.  Barry Washington was--you know, owned his own cable system in Newark [New Jersey].  Gail Williams worked for HBO [Home Box Office], and the other person involved was a guy by the name of Jabari Simama, who was in Atlanta [Georgia], and was involved with the City of Atlanta's telecommunications project.  And another one, [L.] Patrick Mellon, who was really our attorney, who, at the time, was at the National Cable Television Association.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the thing that--you know, there was already a, a--Minorities in Cable when I joined the industry.  There was a woman who-Julieanna [Richardson] will be able to tell you her name.  She's--Nettie, Nettie--Oh, I almost thought of it.  She was--she was a mem--she was a staff member with the Universal Church of--the Uni--Uni-United Church of Christ out of New York.  And the United Church of Christ was very huge in this telecommunication stuff.  In fact, they were involved in doing some of the sponsorship of things with tape.  And Grace Nottingham was her name.  Grace Nottingham was the founder of Minorities in Cable.  And it was primarily an organization out of New York.  And Grace, when I joined the industry, approached us--'cause she wasn't a member of the cable industry.  She--you know, she worked for the United Church of Christ.  And she approached us once at an NCTA [National Cable Television Association] minority--NCTA started doing these conferences with minority business men and would bring them in to Washington every year to expose them to kind of a--what do you call 'em when you bring people in--they have 'em for--in job interviews, you know, when you bring a whole lot of companies and sit them around and--fair, it was a fair.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Business fair. And they would bring these cable operators into the NCTA [National Cable Television Association] and then they would invite minority--existing minority or potential minority business people to this conference and--hopefully for them to find business.  Well that's where I met Nettie-Grace [Nottingham].  And Grace approached me and Barry Washington and said that she would like for someone within the industry to take over the association.  So after a lot of discussion, we decided to take it over, primarily because it, it was just--You know, the few black people that were in the industry were such non-entities.  There was so few of us, you know.  When you would go to these conventions and you'd walk into these things and there would be these--they'd be sittin' on these stages and these huge casino, auditoriums, and--all the way across with lights flashing and all the technology and stuff--white men, just nothing but white men.  And that just, just didn't seem right; it just didn't make sense to me.  And I used to talk about it a lot.
Story_ID: 45083
Speaker 1: I--you know, I have to say, and I--in fact, I wrote the CEO (laughter) when he retired my seat--the CEO guy who was CEO when I was there, you know, when he retired really (unclear) him and thanking him for his support of my career.  Probably if I had been in his shoes I'd have fired me (laughter), 'cause I was very interested in things that--I did my job and I did it well.  I was very good at what I--what I was responsible for.  But that just wasn't where my passion was.  My passion was that I saw this big industry with all this opportunity, and somehow we needed to connect this with people who didn't know anything about it, how to do that.  So that was my mission for over 20 years I was in that industry.  And I was lucky to be working for Time Warner, as I look back on it, because they funded Minorities in Cable [National Association for Minorities in Cable]; that's where we got our money from.  And they allowed me to travel.  And at the time when we started the organization, everybody else, like women in cable, the technology people, and the programming people, all--everybody would have meetings, and they would have meetings, you know, during the week.  They would go to these meetings during the week, not Minorities in Cable.  We would take our weekends to meet.  And we would fly into Detroit [Michigan] often because the ca--cable operator was Don Barton, and we could use his facilities, and we would--we would meet there a lot.  We met with--there a lot.  And my company paid for a lot of that.
Story_ID: 45084
Speaker 1: And, you know--and it was--at that time there were a handful of senior, so to speak, African Americans in the industry, several of which were very supportive of me and who helped me keep the organization going but did not want to be themselves personally identified with the organization.  There was a lot of that.
Speaker 2: Who were some of them (laughter)?
Speaker 1: I, I hate to say who they were.  I mean many of them, you know--To give one example, is a guy by the name of Stan Thomas, who was a very senior African American in HBO [Home Box Office], and if he had lived, would have probably been--very likely could have been CEO of HBO--was very bright, very, very smart, very successful, who I could go to at any time,  and he would--he would do whatever I needed done.  But like Bill Daniels, he didn't necessarily particularly want to be given the recognition for it.  Stan did finally come around and became--many of those guys became members of the National Association of Minorities in Cable.  There were a number of them at that time--Don Anderson, who was a very senior person at HBO.  The programming side of the cable industry had a lot more senior-like minorities in positions.  The operations side of the business did not.  That--that was the one I was in.  But the thing that I always remind a lot of the younger people as we were coming along that Minorities in Cable [National Association for Minorities in Cable and Telecommunications] would not be, if it had not been for the industry.  And I remember people like Bill Daniels who I would go to, and Bill would just say, you know, Gayle, this is just creating more division, you know, (unclear) black this and female, women this, you know, it's just separate, all this separate.  And I said, it's separate anyway, before you even call it; I mean, it's already separate.  And he would hear me out and then give me money and say, "I want no recognition."  And he did that a number of times.  He was very, very supportive.  And there were others, Kevin O'Rourke, who, if he had lived, would have probably been CEO at Time Warner.  [L.] Patrick Mellon, who had become very senior in ESPN at that time, who was also very instrumental in the organization.  And both he and Stan, and O'Rourke, all three of them died as very young men.
Story_ID: 45085
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, did--I had asked you about the origins of Women in Cable, but was that going on before you got--
Speaker 2: Women in Cable started the year or two ahead of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and now--so you, you seem to have had, had worked out a pretty effective working relationship with, you know, all these white males in the cable industry.  Was this uniformly true with most people or they were just--
Speaker 2: Well number one, there weren't many African Americans in the cable operations side that--there just weren't many there.  Most of them were on programming.  There were a fair number in programming, not many in cable operations.  I lucked out I must admit.  As I said, number one, I lucked out by the company I joined who--and I was just persistent.  Coming out of the background that I came out of, you know, I was an activist, and I was--I had been very much affected by race and what it was doing.  So when cable franchising--when I noticed that cable franchising was probably gonna be coming to an end, 'cause my company was becoming more and more resistant to puttin' on the table a lot of the things that the communities were looking for, so franchising was kind of winding down, and acquisitions started coming about.  And I knew that I--only way you could survive this business I felt at the time was to be in operations, which most people I talked to thought I was crazy.  They said you're a social worker (laughter); you don't have any operation experience; you've never been in on a cable operation, you know.  What do you mean you wanna be in cable operation--said I wanna be in cable operation, and I wouldn't give up on that literally.  And one day I was called and said you got cable operations.  And I was given a group, a little raggedy cable systems that they had no intentions of ever growing again, and did very well.
Speaker 1: About what year is?
Speaker 2: This was 1984, maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.  That's when I think I went into operations, about 1984.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you're a vice president of this--
Speaker 2: Yes, I went in--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went in as a director.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or a manager really.  Went in as a manager and moved to a director and was a vice president within 15 months.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At that time, if you didn't become a vice president, and on the operating side of the house pretty fast, you should leave (laughter), because that's just how fast you--that's how fast the industry was growing.  I mean I, I literally went into the industry on the ground floor.  I'm pre-HBO [Home Box Office].  I'm pre-BET [Black Entertainment Television].  You know, I was there very early.  And there was just opportunities.  There were just jobs, and the industry was just coming right along.  And I just pushed; I was pushy to--because that seemed to me to be the place to be in that business.
Story_ID: 45086
Speaker 1: Okay, now in '84' [1984] there were--I've got notes here about the 1984 Cable Act.  How did that affect with (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Now the Cable Act was the thing that put some rules and parameters around the whole cable franchising process.  That's kind of when we start moving, you know, kinda the other da--the other way.  Because before that, you know, we could offer what we wanted to offer and then all we had to do was politic and get the best votes.  And then if you delivered fine, if you didn't, you didn't get fined (laughter), you know, or whatever the case was.  But then when the Cable Act started--talk about the Cable Act, that's when cable companies like Time Warner, ATC [American Television and Communications Corporation] decided we gonna get out of this business and start doing somethin' else.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, it was codified a lot of stuff around public access, but most important, around franchise fees and cable rates.  It was really what the city councils around the country were trying to get a handle on.  Before then, we could charge what we wanted to charge, and the Cable Act stopped that.  Put cable--basic cable--they started regulating--started regulating it like it did power companies, yeah.
Speaker 1: There were recruitment goals set, you know (unclear)--
Speaker 2: All that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Recruitment goals, how you could, you know--how you could wire your market if you were gonna move into a community, you know, the percentage of the market that had to have a plant going up in inner city communities, workforces with women and minorities.  So, it was--it was the beginning of really modernizing the cable industry in a lot of ways.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's the Cable Communications Act of 1984.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 45087
Speaker 1: Have we made any progress since that time in terms of the percentage of minorities involved in cable TV?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did we have more?
Speaker 2: Certainly since I went into the business.  You know, there are a number of very influential people of color and women in the industry today.  In--you know, and, and this is during a time where, you know--cable's got its challenges because it's got a lot of competition now.  And so those who have survived it are doing very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 45088
Speaker 1: Now in '86' [1986], you were awarded the National Cable Television Association's Vanguard Award for Leadership.  Now what is the significance of this.  This sounds like a big--
Speaker 2: Oh, it was a big deal.  It was a huge deal.  The Vanguard Award was given to a man and a woman.  That's--that was the Vanguard Award edition of "Cable Magazine" that I showed you.  The other guy who is on there with me is Bryan Lamb, who founded C-CAN--C-SPAN.  And he and I were Vanguard awardees the same year.  It was always a man and a woman.  And I suspect that my award was given for a number of reasons: I think minorities in cable [National Association for Minorities in Cable and Telecommunications] had a lot to do with it; my movement through the industry to, you know, posit--some position of influence.  Probably had, you know--that was what they were kinda recognizing.  I was like--I think Bob Johnson had gotten the award, maybe the year before or two years before I did.  There weren't many people that got--African Americans who had gotten that, that award.  I think Bob was the first one.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they had a big, big event for it, a gala?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was huge.  It was huge.  It was at, at the cable television--I think it was--was it during the convention?  I guess it was during the convention.  I, I--it's a memorable night.  My mother [Gloria Morgan] was living, and it was in Dallas [Texas]--is where the affair was, in a large hotel.  My mother and I walked into the hotel on our way to the ballroom, and sitting right there in a bar lobby--lobby bar was Ted Turner, and we passed by him.  My mother--he looked at my mother and he says, "Oh my, you are such a beautiful woman!"  And my mother remembered that until she died.  She--she was so smitten by the fact that Ted Turner made that comment to her.  And that was in '86' [1986]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1986, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right, so.
Speaker 2: That was a big deal.  That was huge.  It was--that's when the cable industry really went all out for honors and awards and that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Archie Morgan] get a chance to see you--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --involved in cable TV?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father did not.
Speaker 1: So he passed away when you were--
Speaker 2: My father died in 1971, just right after I graduated from grad school [University of Houston].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I guess you would never have guessed that you had been (laughter) working in cable television.
Speaker 2: I had no interest, quite frankly, of working in cable television; it just happened, you know.  And I--as I said, I was very lucky.  I--You know, the fact that I was working for Time Warner, the fact that I ended--I came in at a time where, you know, if you were working in the corporate office, you were visible, and you just--I took advantage of it to the extent that it made sense.
Story_ID: 45089
Speaker 1: Okay, now in '89' [1989] Time merged with Warner Cable, and that made them a giant of sorts.
Speaker 2: It did.
Speaker 1: And later on, I guess in '92' [1992], ATC [American Television and Communications Corporation] merged with Time Warner, right? Is that, that correct?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No, Time and Time--Time, Inc. and Warner Communications was the first merger.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was at the headquarters at the top level.  And then shortly thereafter is when the cable businesses, Warner Cable and ATC, were brought together, but they start operating as one about that time.  But the first merger, we were all in the same company, we were just operating as different companies.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And not until later, that last date is when we really merged the businesses.
Story_ID: 45090
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, in--let's see, you were on a number of different boards and--looking here, what--can, can you name some of them or what you were doing?
Speaker 2: Corporate boards are you referring to?
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--both--
Speaker 2: Yeah corporate--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah I was on--I was--that was a very interesting job.  I was chairman of United Way in Denver [Colorado] for a couple of years, probably one of the few people who was chairman for two years.  I became chairman, and shortly thereafter, a guy by the name of [William] Aramony who ran United Way of America, was found squandering money and all that.  He was sent to prison.  And the United Way was hurt very badly; the campaign suffered.  And at the end of my first term as chairman of the board, nobody wanted to be chair (laughter), so I ended up being chair two years in a row.  The (unclear) about (unclear) is where United Way began, that is the beginning of United Way was in Denver.  And so I was chair--and that was--you know, those positions--was talking to someone the other day--it's kinda like my father [Archie Morgan], that's why when you asked me a few minutes who would I say probably I'm most alike and--what--anything that appeared to me to be kind of racially driving something was just a red flag.  And I found that working with the source was the best way to do it, rather than joining some protest group like I did when I was in grad school in my early years in the community organizing.  I finally moved to join the source.  United Way was a major organization that held the life blood of organizations like United--like Urban League and Family Service Center and any kind of community service organization.  They, they couldn't break you or make you.  And I felt that where you had the influence was on the board of United Way, rather than trying to create some outside pressure of, let's say executive directors or something like that, to put pressure on United Way.  I, I always felt like the way you put pressure on United Way is you join United Way.
Story_ID: 45091
Speaker 1: But, isn't there a dynamic where you need somebody on the outside calling some change to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I think that--you see, I think that's always there.  That's been my experience.  My experience has been that there is always more people on the outside calling for change, where they didn't--when I was coming along, they weren't on the inside.  And that was one of the things we learned at the Tate Conference, you gotta be on the inside for this.  You have to be able to influence city councils.  You have to be able to influence banks and financial groups and people who are puttin' money in cable.  I mean it was--so, it was--my work with the Urban League and groups, like dealing with Charles Tate, was that you needed to be--you needed to be sittin' at the table and, and that's where you should be sayin' where I wanna be, rather than kinda trying to get in the door.  Once you're in the door, you need to be at the table.  And that was just somethin' that I have strived to do in almost everything that I've done.  And my experience took me to being, you know, very much a part of the old boy, quite frankly.  I was very much a part of it in a lot of ways, to the extent that I could be a part of it.  You know, they let you in so much.  But to the extent that I was allowed to be a part of it, I was a part of it.  I started playing golf to be a part of it.  And I would go--I was--I would go to our senior management meetings, and I would end up at the spa during the breaks, you know, and lounging and reading and enjoying myself, because I was the only person that looked like me at the conference.  And there were only a handful of women even there.  But I realized at dinner in the evenings lots of decisions looked like had been made, or they were talking about stuff that I had no clue about what they were talking about.  And I learned that a lot of that stuff was talked about on the golf course.  So I decided I'm gonna find somebody to teach me how to play golf.  My first husband [Fritz Greer], being the golfer he was, that was my--what do you call it--that was the extra woman in my life, was golf, in large part (laughter), so I didn't like it.  It was just too--it just took over his life, and I just had no use for golf.  And, but I decided that maybe that's what I ought to be doing, so I hired a coach and--took me awhile because I'm left-handed, and I tried to play right-handed for awhile and that didn't work, so started playing left-handed.  So I played golf all through mostly my, you know, my years in operations just to hear what's going on, hear, you know, be a part of the clique, so to speak.  I did a lot of things to be a part of the clique because that's where--that's where you could sit down with the people who made the decisions.  It was frustrating because you realize often when you got that close that there was really no interest in what you were talking about.  But it still, at the same time--it was the place to be in order to make any changes.
Story_ID: 45092
Speaker 1: Okay, you know--now you retired in 1998.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: But what were some of the events leading up to your final years--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I had been offered--well my husband at the time, who died shortly after we moved to Texas, had just joined Wellington Webb Administration.
Speaker 1: This is in--
Speaker 2: In Denver [Colorado]--
Speaker 1: --in Denver, yeah.
Speaker 2: Wellington was the Mayor, and my husband was a part of his cabinet.  And I got offered a job, you know.  I was asked to apply for the--running the cable system here in Austin, Texas.  And--thought about it.  And that would have been a huge job, but I didn't want to live someplace else other than my husband.  And I hated to ask him to give up his job, so I turned it down.  At that time, the corporate office was no longer where really the action was.  The action had moved out into the field in places like Austin [Texas], and, you know, other communities where the cable operations were--had become very decent (unclear).  So, it just was no longer the business that it was.  And instead of, you know, trying to find things to keep me busy, I finally went to Stanford and said, you know, I need to go, you know.  And working with them, they let me retire.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was extremely grateful, and it was a wonderful career, but it was time to go.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, this is 1998?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you had served like 20--
Speaker 2: Twenty years.
Speaker 1: --years--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --running cable.
Story_ID: 45093
Speaker 1: How would you advise a young woman of color get into the in--industry today.
Speaker 2: You know, I'm not sure I would know how to do that, but I would certainly assume that it probably is easier today than it was when I joined the industry or when I left the industry in 1998.  Because there are people and place throughout these companies now that are much more in tune with finding people regardless of sex or gender or race.  So, that--that's one thing I think I would--I don't--I don't think it would be as difficult.  And, you know, looking at young people, young women especially today that I run into, they don't need a whole lot of advice about how to go about getting what they want.  They are-- you know, I am so impressed with young women, you know, in business today; they're doing it.  You know, they're just--there's--there's--there's such a network and still growing.  I mean, I'm not suggesting that we done made it; that's not what I'm saying.  I'm just saying that I think that there is a network now out there that is much more in place to help young women, both minorities, as well as just women in general, in getting in position.  I mean, many of these companies now are run by women, which was unheard of when I was in the business.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm, and minorities.  You know, so it's just--it's just a very different place now.
Story_ID: 45094
Speaker 1: Okay, now in '98' [1998] you also co-founded with Steve Stokesberry--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: GS2.net?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, interestingly enough, you know, when I left business, cable industry, I felt exhausted.  And I thought that's what I would do, is just kinda go home and sit and sleep in and do nothing for about a year.  That was what I had figured I'd do.  But I would say probably within six months is when I got into GS2, or less.  It was something about getting out and spending a couple of weeks that revived me, and I had all this energy.  And I was approached by some young technology guys to be a part of their group--first as kind of an investor.  That's how I started, by being an investor.  And Steve Stokesberry was also approached, and he was an investor.  And these young guys--these technology guys put us kind of in roles of leadership.  We didn't know really what they were doing (laughter), but it seemed like a good business concept.  And that's how the name came about, GS2, two G's, two S's: Gayle Greer, Steve Stokesberry.  And that's how the--the name came.  And the first business we started in GS2 was an application that went online to assist primarily small cable operations and related companies to do customer service online, where customers could go online and pay their bills or go online and send in a report for--request for service and that kind of thing.  So that was the first application that we, we were doing.  And then thereafter, we formed another company called DonorNet, which was one of the first applications that went online that was a charity website where people--and it we designed it primarily for United Way campaigns--type campaigns, where instead of having to go in and call people together into the cafeteria and talk to them about giving to the United Way, people at that time were working in terminals so we were--we were able to put an application together that would allow the person to sit at their desk and see the options of where their money could be donated and that kind of thing.  GS2 did not really make it.  We ended up having to--really 'cause it was one of those job--one of those businesses that was very technology driven and required a lot of capital and--we did get our initial investment of a million dollars, which just absolutely blew mind (laughter).  After a couple of years, we realized that, that was just gonna require a lot more capital than we were gonna be able to come up with, so we gave up GS2 and stared concentrating on the DonorNet.  And ended up really giving DonorNet or selling DonorNet to a company out of Chicago [Illinois], who ran it after I left the company, which was in 2001.
Story_ID: 45095
Speaker 1: So, what did you do after 2001?
Speaker 2: I moved here [Round Rock, Texas] shortly thereafter.  I was very much involved in, you know, volunteer efforts and stuff, and then I moved here and got involved in domestic abuse.  I worked the hotline two months after--(unclear) three months after my husband died--I mean after I had moved here my husband died suddenly.  So, that really kind of, you know, had a huge impact for a number of years, quite frankly.  And so I did a lot of traveling.  Because I had just moved here and didn't know anybody, so I spent a lot of time in Denver [Colorado], and I still spend a lot of time in Colorado.  I have a house in the mountains.  I spent my summers there.
Speaker 1: So when did you move here in--
Speaker 2: Two thousand two [2002].
Speaker 1: Two thousand two [2002], okay.
Speaker 2: And we moved here because my son's [Van Greer] in Texas and grandchildren, so wanted to be close to them.  And so that's why I moved to Texas.  And now kind of, you know, involved back--now I'm back on the board of United Way [United Way of Greater Austin] and doing volunteer work with communities and schools--doing a  lot of the stuff that I did many, many years ago, but now more as a--as a volunteer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so all these years of experience probably make you more effective, I guess, in terms of--
Speaker 2: Oh, it does.
Speaker 1: --understanding what the power relationships (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I, you know--It's a totally different experien--you know, United Way has gone through a whole lot.  It's a totally different organization, but having that backdrop of United Way twenty somethin' years ago, is, is very effective in terms of United Way today.
Story_ID: 45096
Speaker 1: Okay.  I was told to ask you about eLEC--eLEC Communications.  Is that something--
Speaker 2: eLEC.
Speaker 1: eLEC.
Speaker 2: Yeah, eLEC was a company that I was on the board of that was headquartered out of New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it is a--it was a internet long-distance business, which I think is still in business.  I think they--they don't--their name is not eLEC anymore, but they set--they joined up with a number of the companies and I think are still in business.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know people that use that kind of service, I just don't know what the name of it is--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well one is Vonage
Speaker 1: Right, Vonage, right.
Speaker 2: Vonage is the big one.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: And eLEC--I remember when I joined eLEC, Vonage was just beginning and we were seeing it as the big dog that we were all trying to become.
Story_ID: 45097
Speaker 1: Okay, and I was asked to ask you about the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.  'Cauuse you would know how that affected the cable industry and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I saw it more affecting--I was sittin' on a number of boards at that time.  I was sitting on ING Financial Services' board.  Before that, I was on Equitable (unclear) board.  And all the time of that Sarbanes-Oxley, I was on bank boards.  And that's really where the Sar--Sarbanes-Oxley was more evident to me by being a director on a board, because it was really about, you know, the governance--how to go about governing.  And it made a lot of changes, especially on financial reporting and auditing and that kind of stuff.  You didn't feel that in the operations of the company really.  It was really at the more--at the director level.  So that's where I really became very well--and especially when I was with ING is when it was really coming about with being a financial institution, which Sarbanes-Oxley had a huge impact on most financial institutions.
Story_ID: 45098
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so we always ask this question: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today?
Speaker 2: I think my biggest concerns are education.  There is a movement going on which is a bit troubling to me.  I understand it and there are a lot of merits to it, but I'm afraid of what it's going to do to the black community and to communities of color.  And it's around education, and it's how the business communities around the country have become impatient and intolerant with public education and are now doing things like promoting vouchers and charter schools and things that are--requires a certain amount of sophistication and wherewithal to get--to take advantage of.  And my concern is that, what will happen is that inner city schools, if it keeps goin' the way it's goin', inner city schools are end up with no money and a lot of poor kids getting no education, because these charter schools are--they're moving, and the business community is behind 'em, in many cases.  And, that concerns me.  Because education has always been our best ticket to upward mobility, and I'm seeing that threatened, quite frankly, both at the education level.  And then, as you--and then when you look at what's happening in this economy and technology and all that, you know, high school degree--high school diploma don't get it.  Lots of college degrees don't get it anymore.  So, you know, the whole ability to be able to remain economically viable for large groups of people of color is a real concern to me.  Because I think the job market is moving away from them, and I think education is not doing its part that it did when I was in school.
Story_ID: 45099
Speaker 1: You know, the teachers were--I had teachers who expected me to go to college.  You just don't see that in public schools hardly anymore.  And it's just--it's really kind of sad what's happening in public schools.  I'm, I'm real concerned about it.  And that was one of the reasons why I got involved in United Way and Communities and Schools, which has a very effective dropout program.  But the charter school movement is something that worries me.  And, and some of them are very good schools, and many low income people of color have gotten a good education, but those kids are in families that--with very little aid or assistance are gonna do it anyway.  They're gonna make it.  I don't know if you're aware of how, you know--it's a very complicated way to get into a charter school.  Most of them have lotteries, and parents have to be able to get their kid to the school and fill out a lot of (unclear)--but one of the things that--the reason the--those charter schools that are successful in many ways has to do with the parent involvement.  I mean, you have to be involved, in the charter school, or your kid gets kicked out.  You can't kick a kid out of public schools, you know, just for the--if the parent doesn't--not involved, but you can in a charter.  And, so, you know, those kids who are in there are gonna do very well.  Many of the charter schools are very well positioned to do very well in preparing these kids, but I just think the vast majority are not gone get there.
Speaker 2: It kind of robs the public schools of--
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause the dollar goes with the kid.
Speaker 2: --more, more active parents and--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --students.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And--my hair?  Okay.  Do I need to see a mirror?  Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: All right, so, any other hopes and concerns, you know for the--
Speaker 1: Well, education is really a concern, I must admit.  And--You know, I could talk forever about what's going on, on a national level.
Story_ID: 45100
Speaker 1: Back to the charter school for a minute.  Are you involved in any efforts to try to bolster the public schools.  I mean, in terms of--
Speaker 2: Well, as I said, I'm involved in--with United Way [of Greater Austin] and Communities and Schools, both of are working in public schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not charter schools, but public schools.  And the United Way here has carved out a compet--a community here where it is putting all of its resources into the public schools in that community.  And it's channeling its, it's way of--pathway of--from the elementary school, you follow 'em to the junior high school, from the junior high school you follow 'em to the senior high school.  And, and now there is a whole emphasis moving toward preschool, you know, early education--early childhood education.  We're finding--
Speaker 1: Like the Head Start, yep.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Head Start Program type programs, 'cause we're finding out now that if the kid doesn't get it by the--eight years old (laughter) practically, you know.  There is some question about how successful they will be.  I mean, this whole first few years are so critical.  And so now--'cause I know I sit on a foundation board, Daniels, which is Bill Daniels, who is cable television.  And we spent a lot of time talking about urban childhood education.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think I heard Jonathan Kozol say that was the number one--
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: --issue.
Speaker 2: It's becoming--it is.  It's becoming.  And we now recognize that--You know, we used to think you had to get 'em in kindergarten, or you had--you know, you had to get 'em before they get into middle school.  You need to get 'em out of the womb practically and stay with them until they get out of college.
Story_ID: 45101
Speaker 1: Now what about programs like--that are kinda organizing base like James Culver's project and Bob Moses' Algebra Project, where they try to get in the schools, and they have another force organizing parents and students?
Speaker 2: I'm not familiar with those, but there are a number of those efforts going on.  You know, and there are--there are groups now.  'Cause Daniels has given money to various organizations whose job it is to organize parents and keep parents engaged with their schools.  So, there is some effort going on, but I'm just concerned about the image and the perception of public school teachers.  It's not good.  And I think a lot of it is not earned.  I think it's unfair.  And to--and, and then the unions have not been all that helpful to the profession in a lot of ways to me, because they've put so much emphasis on teachers, whether they're good or bad, rather than on the kid.  So, that is why a lot of businesses, you know, and the private sector started mobilizing against public education.  There is a, I feel like, an attack, quite frankly, on public education by the business community.  I mean that's serious.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: And, you know, I think that, you know, Obama [President Barack Obama] is now--and his Administration certainly recognize that and a lot of things he's doing is, you know, Race to the Top and a lot of those programs have gone into some of the schools, but a large amount of that is going into charter, you know. And so that--that's, that's really a concern as to what's gonna, gonna happen there.
Story_ID: 45102
Speaker 1: Okay, now when you look over everything you've done to this point in life, is there any major thing that you would go back and change if you could?
Speaker 2: No.  Because it probably would mean that my life would change, my outcome would change.  And there is nothing about where I am today that I would want different.  I have a wonderful life.  I have beautiful grandchildren (laughter).  And, you know, it's--and wonderful friends and--and I was lucky enough to be born when I was born, to get the opportunity I got that was able to afford retirement, you know.  Lots of people not gone be able, who are in their 50s today.  They gone be able to retire. You know, that--that's--I worry about my son [Van Greer], you know, being able to live the life that I have lived by the mere fact of when I was born.  That's really kind of why I have done as well as I've done.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 45103
Speaker 1: The follow up to that is, when you look back again at everything you've done to this point, what would you consider your major accomplishments, your legacy?
Speaker 2: I would say, influencing systems; having an impact on organizations; I'm very much of a people person; I've done a lot of mentoring.  Recently I just nominated a Kaitz fellow [William Kaitz Foundation Fellow] that I hired some 13 years ago to be a member of the Daniels Board [Daniels Fund Board of Directors], by the mere fact that he has earned it.  He's running Colorado with Comcast, and he's living an unbelievable life in Denver [Colorado].  You know, it's those kind of things that I feel very proud of--of people who I see today that I had just a little bit of connection with and who are doing so well and who are still very dear friends, and who I can still help from time to time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 45104
Speaker 1: You wanna tell us a bit--a little bit more about your family.  You got a son and grandchildren.
Speaker 2: I have a son, Van [Greer], who has been in--on the broadcast side of the communications industry for a number of years and who lives in Beaumont, Texas, who is now working for the Hertz Foundation--I mean the Hearst Company, which is primarily a newspaper, and two grandchildren, one 13 and one 7.  And my daughter-in-law, who is an excellent teacher who just started teaching a couple of years ago, an at-home mom until a couple of years ago, and she's a teacher.  So, you know, I just--that's my family and my sister who lives in Memphis.  And I have just--lots of friends, and I do a lot of traveling.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there anything I should ask you about before I ask you my last question?
Speaker 2: I can't think of a word--I, I couldn't believe we gone talk this long.  I kept on sayin--when you said four hours, I said there's no way we could talk four hours (laughter).
Story_ID: 45105
Speaker 1: Okay, well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: You know, I would like to be remembered as someone who was authentic and who truly cared about how people were able to live their lives to the fullest, who had a hand in helping make things better.  And, and then a person who really--as my husband used to tell me, he said, "Gayle, I think you"--He told people that Gayle collects friends.  But I have lots and lots of friends and--who have been--who have just been my family, because I've lost a lot of my real family, my sisters, my--my mother [Gloria Morgan] and my father [Archie Morgan].  A lot of death in my family, and I've had this family of friends for a lot of years that have kind of kept me together.  And so I'm very--I feel very blessed, as a result of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you very much.
Story_ID: 45106
Speaker 1: Okay, this is the "Cable Television Business" magazine, 25th anniversary edition.  And the cover of this edition is myself and Bryan Lamb, who--Bryan Lamb is the founder of C-SPAN.  And we were being honored as distinguished Vanguard winners, which was an award given to cable television executives who had contributed both to the their community and industry.
