Story_ID: 664829
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My full name is Jose Francisco Grinan [HistoryMaker Jose Grinan]; J-O-S-E, F-R-A-N-C-I-S-C-O; and the last name, G-R-I-√ë-AN, but it has a tilde over the first n which gives it the (pronunciation) n sound.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your name is a Cuban name?
Speaker 2: Well, it's Spanish.  My heritage comes from Cuba, but I think that's because the slave masters gave their names to slaves in Latino countries; Cuba was one.  And that's I guess how the name originated.  There is another Jose Grinan now, but he's a major socialist politician in Spain.  And every once in a while, (laughter) our--how should I say--our Googles get crossed.  But then I know when it's total Spanish, it's not me.
Speaker 1: Right.  And so, the history of Spanish names is much the same as the history of our English names--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --we had acquired during slavery.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I say, you know, those who were in charge of the slaves basically did give their names to the slaves.  And it just stuck, and it stayed that way, and Grinan is who I've been.  My mother's [Sylvia Grillo Grinan] side of the family is Grillo or Grillo, which means grasshopper (laughter).
Speaker 1: What does Grinan mean?
Speaker 2: There is really no definition for Grinan at all that I know of.  My father [Jose Grinan] never told me anything about it, and neither did his parents [Luisa Falero Grinan and Quintin Grinan].
Speaker 1: Like you know, with Jones or Williams, I don't know what they mean, you know.
Speaker 2: But I happened to look up Grillo one day, or Grillo one day.  And on the crest, which is a European crest, there was a grasshopper, or a locust.  I prefer grasshopper (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes.  And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: July 24, 1952, Clara Frye Memorial Hospital in Tampa, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now, is Clara Frye Memorial Hospital a black hospital?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was all black.  And she was a midwife who basically took care of folks in the community.  And I guess as a tribute to her--because she initially started out in the house, and she had people perform surgery on kitchen tables until they had a hospital.  And it was where all of the black folks in Tampa went, because you were not allowed to go to Tampa General [Tampa General Hospital, Tampa, Florida].  You were not allowed to go to St. Joseph [St. Joseph's Hospital, Tampa, Florida].  You weren't allowed to go to any of the other hospitals at all.
Speaker 1: I'm glad I asked that, and I'm glad you answered to it, too, you know.  So, and sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Right now, I'm the senior morning news anchor for Fox 26 [KRIV-TV] in Houston, Texas.  I've been here almost twenty-one years.  Considering I told myself I was going to be here two years, I think that is an amazing thing for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is May 8, 19--2014.  What am I talking about, 19--2014.
Speaker 1: All right, and where are we at the present?
Speaker 2: We're in Houston, Texas.
Speaker 1: All right.  Fifty percent of the people say 19--but, all right, so--
Speaker 2: I think that was because I gave my birthdate as 19--and--
Speaker 1: More than likely.
Story_ID: 664830
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask, and--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --we're kind of keeping a record of them now.  They only require a short answer.  The first question is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Latino, Creole food.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year?  That would be Christmas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Cayman Brac in the Cayman Islands.
Speaker 1: All right.  And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Something my godfather [Francisco A. Rodriguez] who taught me how to speak said, that has always stayed in my mind, "For all your days prepare, and meet them ever alike; when you are the anvil, bear; when you are the hammer, strike."
Story_ID: 664831
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, I'm going to ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Jose Grinan] side.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But we'll start with your mother's.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Her name was Sylvia Cecelia Grinan [Sylvia Grillo Grinan], but it was Grillo before it became Grinan.  And that's S-Y-L-V-I-A, C-E-C-E-L-I-A, G-R-I-L-L-O; and you know, Grinan, G-R-I-√ë-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think her date of birth was May 12, 1915.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where?
Speaker 2: She was born in Tampa, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  Do they, do they have roots in Cuba?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.  My mother's side of the family I'm told came from a province called Camaguey [Cuba].  And they came--
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: C-A-M-A-G-U-E-Y, Camaguey.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And well, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay.  In Camaguey, that's where I'm told the family originated.  They were all cigar rollers who came to the U.S. to roll cigars in Tampa, Florida, which was the new cigar capital of the world.  A gentleman by the name of, a Spaniard by the name of Vincente Martinez Ybor, which Ybor City in Tampa is named after.  He was a very, a very good businessman.  Because in addition to wanting to sell cigars around the world, he needed people to work for him.  What he did was offered people jobs.  He would give them a place to stay.  They paid rent.  He also made sure that there was a store.  So, if you wanted to buy rice, beans or anything of that nature, you could do that.  If you worked for him for ten years, the property was yours.  That's how my grandmother [Amparo Valdez Grillo] became a property owner.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting.  That's--
Speaker 2: It really is.
Story_ID: 664832
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's a lot more fair than some arrangements I've heard of.  I've heard of people that kept their own countrymen--I mean the Hungarians in Ohio had a compound with barbed wire around it.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: And you had, they were--you were paid with the company's money.  And you had to shop in their store, and you couldn't leave.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: Well, but you have to think in terms of Tampa [Florida] back then.  That's where the Rough Riders were trained to go to Cuba.  That's where malaria started, because there was nothing but swamp around Tampa at that time, except for Ybor City.
Speaker 1: Ybor is--
Speaker 2: It's Y-B-O-R.
Speaker 1: Y--okay, Y-B-O-R.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is, you know, a small neighborhood in Tampa.  But it's where I grew up, everything was Spanish.  I had a chicken market next door to the house.  We never had to buy eggs.  They would always say, "Boy, go over there and go talk to Chino," who was a Chinese-Cuban.  And he'd say, "Stick your hand in the cage, get some eggs, and go home."  And I would do that.  Back then, the neighborhood was what you would consider to be a neighborhood.  The grocery store gave you credit if you didn't have the money.  They used that red butcher paper.  And everyone in the neighborhood spoke Spanish.  So, I grew up speaking Spanish, but had to learn English in order to go to school.
Story_ID: 664833
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  But, now--
Speaker 2: Back to my mother's [Sylvia Grillo Grinan] family?
Speaker 1: Yeah, back to your mother's family, now, now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  It is my understanding that my grandmother, who became the property owner, had several children in the U.S., or in territorial waters, which would make them U.S. citizens back then.  But then there was one who was born in Cuba who was not a citizen.  But she had five kids, and when they said they weren't going to give her citizenship, she basically said, "Okay, well, here's six Americans, or five Americans, you take care of them."  "Hold it, you've never gotten public assistance?  You've always worked?  We're going to give you your citizenship and you can continue taking care of your kids."  So, she became a citizen that way.  But I think a lot of people had children in the United States in order for their children to become American citizens, which would give them a better chance of becoming a citizen later on.
Speaker 1: Now, what was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Amparo Valdez [Amparo Valdez Grillo], A-M-P-A-R-O, V-A-L-D-E-Z.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, she was one of the--
Speaker 2: The original cigar workers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that came over with--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Ybor.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now, there's a--
Speaker 2: She and her husband, Antonio [Antonio Grillo].
Speaker 1: There's a particular skill required, or some, in rolling cigars.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Not that I can do it.  But you have to learn how to do it, and have an apprenticeship to figure it out.  It's not a--
Speaker 2: Well, I wouldn't say an apprenticeship or anything like that.  If you wanted to move up in Cuba at that time--because cigars were a big thing, Cuban tobacco.  And Vincente Martinez Ybor initially had a factory in Havana [Cuba].  And a lot of folks worked in his factory to make cigars, and those cigars were basically sold all around the world.  And it was something that they grew up doing.  My godfather [Francisco A. Rodriguez] rolled cigars; his wife rolled cigars; my uncles rolled cigars.  The only one who didn't roll cigars in my family, I guess, was my father [Jose Grinan], and he was a tailor.  And then his father [Quintin Grinan] was a tailor.
Story_ID: 664834
Speaker 1: It's an interesting story--here's a story in Martin Delany's book, 'Blake' ['Blake: Or the Huts of America'] about a conversation between two white men who were slave owners.  One was from the North and was questioning the way southerners did things, and suggested that the southerners hated black people.  And one of the southerners, one southerner said, "No, no, we don't hate them, we just try to keep them in their place."  And then he uses cigar rolling as an example.  He said, "That cigar you're smoking, do you know how that's made?"  And he said, "Well, how?"  And he said, "Well, they actually lick the cigar to seal it and everything."  He said, "And we smoke it, so we don't hate them that bad."
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: "We keep them in their, you know, try to keep them down.  You know, that's what our"--
Speaker 2: You bring up an interesting point.  When I worked in Miami [Florida], I had a lot of Cuban friends.  And I mean folks who were born in Cuba, but they fled Castro [Fidel Castro] to come to the United States.  Sometimes it took a very long time for them to leave the country.  A good friend of mine, Raul Pedroso, who is still in Miami right now, a self-taught photographer, does great architectural photography.  He used to tell me about--at first you could fraternize, but then all of a sudden he didn't know why they didn't want to be around him.  But I said, "Look here, that's Jim Crow."  That was Jim Crow.  And if you look at a lot of universities in the South--I don't want to say the racism was continued--but a lot of the white Cubans sent their children to the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi], Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia], and schools like that.  Because they were white, they would fit in.  But I think they also were taking in the sentiments of those who were around them, who did not really care too much for black folks back then.
Speaker 1: Now, the image of what a Cuban is, is one that's very confusing, I think, for Americans.  They really don't know how to classify a Cuban.  If you look like a Cuban, to most Americans, probably not.  Because they see Ricky Ricardo when they think of a Cuban, who becomes an honorary white person on some level.  I mean, am I making sense?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, I understand what you're saying.  And I do think that a lot of times, they do think that Cubans are of a lighter hue.  But more than half of the population is mixed, or black entirely.  There are classifications.  My father [Jose Grinan], when he came to this country, the color that he had on his documents was called pardo, which is a tone of brown with red in it.  He was classified a mestizo.  His father [Quintin Grinan] was classified a mestizo.  My grandmother [Luisa Falero Grinan] was classified a mestizo.  But when we came here, we were niggers, and that was plain and simple.  And my father didn't understand that.  But I'm glad he didn't do anything to really protect the family in a violent way.  Because I mean there were many times when he would talk at home about, "I don't know why they did this.  I don't know why they did that."  And then my mother [Sylvia Grillo Grinan] would have to tell him, "It's because of Jim Crow.  It's because we're not supposed to be over there after six o'clock at night.  We're not supposed to do these things."  And my friend in Miami, he had to learn the exact same thing.  I told him, "If somebody calls you a nigger, you knock the hell out of them."  Because he didn't know what the word was.  It's not in his language.  But then again, when I was going to Our Lady of Perpetual Help [Tampa, Florida], they were calling me neechee.  And the phrase was "Neechee, neechee, son of a bitchee."  I didn't know what neechee was until I went home.  And my father said, "They called you what?"  I said, "They called me neechee."  "Don't you let them call you that."  So, when we were playing softball one day, the bat just happened to hit the pitc- the cat- the catcher in the head, by mistake.
Speaker 1: That just happened to be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I was not called neechee after that.
Story_ID: 664835
Speaker 1: Yeah, so would you--this is--in terms of your ancestry--the stories in your family--and from what you understand, we know there's some kind of race stratification in Cuba, or Cuba, as people would call it there.  But is, how does it compare to, you know, racism in the United States?
Speaker 2: How does it compare to racism in the United States?  Racism in the United States can be very blatant and very open.  I think in Cuba, you have it with those who are considered the aristocracy, but they were always white. And that's what they perpetuated, because the people of color always worked for them--cleaned their bathrooms, cleaned their buildings, cleaned the streets--did all of those things, which to a certain extent the same thing happened here.  But there was just something totally different about the way a Cuban would respond as opposed to how an American would respond to the same situation.  There, there's something that my grandfather [Quintin Grinan] told me about, and I guess you can find information in some books about it.  I want to say in the early 1900s, it may have been the 1890s, there's a general by the name of Maceo, Antonio Maceo [Antonio Maceo Grajales].
Speaker 1: The Bronze Titan, right?
Speaker 2: He is basically the man who created guerilla warfare.  Even though the U.S. is credited with getting the Spaniards out of Cuba, it was really the tactics of Antonio Maceo which was, "Okay, you get in front, you hit them.  They're going to go towards you.  Okay, hit them from behind, then they split up.  And then you come in from the center, and you have them separated and surrounded."  But I don't how I got off on that tangent.  Anyway, I was in Mexico City [Mexico].  In the presidential palace [Palacio Nacional] there's a life sized portrait of Maceo, which really surprised me.
Speaker 1: All of the--and I was told by a black Texan who was one of my mentors--that all the Maceos in the United States, like Maceo Parker who played with the James Brown band are--their name is attributed to Antonio Maceo, the Bronze Titan.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: The Bronze Titan.  They read the papers, they knew--
Speaker 2: Okay, I did not know that.  But I do know that the day my mother [Sylvia Grillo Grinan] was honored by Cubans in Tampa [Florida], the Hispanic Woman of the Year, that was the day I met Maceo's granddaughter, and her name was Remember Maceo.  And I was like strange name, but it means a lot.
Speaker 1: That was the, one of the last and the most publicized slave revolt in the history of North America, the Cuban--
Speaker 2: But going back to what my grandfather was telling me.  They fought, just like the white Cubans, to get the Spaniards out--black folks in Cuba.  When the Spaniards were gone, they wanted equal rights.  "We fought with you, come on, give us what we deserve."  Depending upon who you talk to, there was a massacre of thousands of African American men, meaning black Cubans, because they just wanted to wipe out those who wanted to fight to get rights.  My grandfather would tell me stories about that.  They were coming through the neighborhoods getting dark skinned people and getting rid of them.  I don't know why it was done, but they said that was the time back then.
Story_ID: 664836
Speaker 1: Yeah, and then how did your, your family feel about Castro [Fidel Castro]?
Speaker 2: How did my family feel about Castro?  Well, my father [Jose Grinan] knew he was Communist, knew he was a Socialist.  But he also knew how he grew up.  And he was of the mind that Castro was going to make things better for people who had the worst lives in Cuba.  And to a certain extent, he did.  But in the process of doing that, he did things that did not go along with what we in society think.  Some were executions--someone pulled out of a home, put on the street--boom, dead--because they had some tie to either a casino, the mafia, the U.S. government, or something of that nature.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess it would be a good time to point out that Cuba, prior to Castro, was almost like the playground of--like Las Vegas [Nevada] is now, but only probably worse in terms of vice and--
Speaker 2: Well, Cuba was the place everyone went to--Havana [Cuba], I should say.
Speaker 1: Havana, yeah.
Speaker 2: People went there because you had the casinos, you had the jai alai frontons.  Whatever you wanted, you could find in Havana.
Speaker 1: Under the reign of Batista, right?
Speaker 2: Fulgencio Batista, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Some have told me had African blood, you know.  But I don't know how true it is.
Speaker 2: There's a phrase that some Latinos know.  Puerto Ricans know it, and some Cubans know it.  It's called, la mancha de platano.  Now platano is, you know, the banana or the plantain.  And mancha is the stain.  And then someone would say, "You really don't know where your grandmother was, do you?"  So, you may have that stain in you.  It may not show up, because you do know that there are black folks who are the blondest of the blond, and then they can be the darkest of the dark.  And there's a whole bunch in between.
Story_ID: 664837
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, that's interesting.  Well, any rate, back to your mother [Sylvia Grillo Grinan] though. Now it's good that we got that history, though.  So, your mother was born in--
Speaker 2: She was born in Tampa [Florida].
Speaker 1: In Tampa.  And now, what did she say about growing up?
Speaker 2: What did she say about growing up?
Speaker 1: What was it like?
Speaker 2: There's a, there's a book that has a lot of information regarding growing up in Tampa, 'Black Cuban, Black American: A Memoir,' written by my uncle Evelio Grillo.  Every day she went to school, came home; had to fix rice and beans.  Sometimes they didn't eat meat, because there was no meat.  But that was her job.  She had to fix the meals every day for the family, and yeah, in school.  She used to travel.  Back then, families used to travel back and forth to Cuba.  She spent a lot of time in Cuba, as did some of her brothers as well.  And that's where she met my father [Jose Grinan], at a place called la sociedad de color, the colored society.  But they would always be in this large banquet room--tuxedoes, gowns, you know, everybody trying to look good.  And for all of the women, you would see their mothers or fathers right next to them, the chaperones.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that's where my mom and dad met.  They would also go to a park in Havana [Cuba], which I don't think exists today.  There used to be a beer called Polar beer, or Polar.  And they had gardens similar to I guess the way Busch Gardens [Busch Gardens Tampa Bay, Tampa, Florida] started out--these little bridges over little ponds.  And everyone wants to get on the bridge and the ponds, so they can take pictures in their Sunday best.  You know, it was one of those type parks that they went to.  And it was basically nothing but black folks in Cuba doing this.  And many of them brought those same habits to the U.S.  There was a club called La Union Marti-Maceo [Sociedad La Union Marti-Maceo, Tampa, Florida], the black Cuban club.  It was initially joined with El Circulo Cubano [Tampa, Florida], which was the white Cuban club.  But in 1899, they had to separate because of Jim Crow.  And in 1999, they asked me to come back to Tampa to emcee a program to bring the two together--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: --a hundred years later.
Story_ID: 664838
Speaker 1: So, the, as you were saying earlier, Antonio--
Speaker 2: Maceo [Antonio Maceo Grajales]?
Speaker 1: --Maceo's revolt against the Spanish--because there was still slavery in Cuba--
Speaker 2: No, no, slavery had--slavery ended earlier in Cuba than I think it was here.
Speaker 1: No, eighteen ninety--until the 1890s [sic. 1886], you know.
Speaker 2: Well, okay, okay.  But those were the people who basically fought against the Spaniards.
Speaker 1: Right.  And so they--
Speaker 2: They were campesinos, they were people from the countryside.  And it was my understanding--because my grandfather [Quintin Grinan] was a free man, so I don't know.  He was never, I guess he was a slave earlier.  And then he was free, lived in Santiago [Santiago de Cuba, Cuba], and from Santiago moved to a place called Remedio de las Villas [Remedios, Cuba].  It's on the northeast coast of Cuba, if you can consider a northeast coast of an island that looks like a boomerang.  Across was a fishing village Caibarien [Cuba].  And people from those two communities, they were considered sister cities.  One was on one side of the bay, and the other was on the other side of the bay.  In Remedios, that's where my father [Jose Grinan] was born, and that's where I guess most of our relatives on my father's side were.  The, my mother's [Sylvia Grillo Grinan] side, I really don't know too much about.  All I know is that they came from Camaguey [Cuba].  Antonio [Antonio Grillo] died of tuberculosis; that was my grandfather.  He died of tuberculosis in Cuba.  But in fact I don't think he was ever brought back to the U.S. for burial, he died there.  He was going to Cuba for treatment, because you wouldn't get the treatment in the United States back at that time.  And that's what he went to do, but he died in the process once he got there, a few weeks after he got, got to Cuba.  And that's in the book, 'Black Cuban, Black American' ['Black Cuban, Black American: A Memoir,' Evelio Grillo].
Story_ID: 664839
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wonder how the, the U.S. goes into Cuba right after Antonio Maceo's [Antonio Maceo Grajales] forces defeat the Spanish, basically, and defeat the Cubans (laughter) basically, and dominate them for the next--
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, which is not a good--I mean I'm suggesting too, that a lot of the--maybe the racial attitudes--have something to do with the U.S. being in there so long.
Speaker 2: That, that may (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) According to some of the--
Speaker 2: That may have--
Speaker 1: --actions.
Speaker 2: --that may actually be the case.
Speaker 1: You know--
Speaker 2: But when you look at--Antonio Maceo fought the countryside, and it was their war of independence.  We called it the Spanish American War.  My father [Jose Grinan] never called it that.  It was his guerra independencia.  My grandfather [Quintin Grinan], that's all he talked about.  It was not the Spanish American War.  The Spanish--the Americans got in because of the Maine [USS Maine (ACR-1)].  But we were fighting this long before, and we were fighting it long afterwards.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.  The book by Rubin Weston who used to teach at Central State [Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio], called 'Racism in U.S. Imperialism' ['Racism in U.S. Imperialism: The Influence of Racial Assumptions on American Foreign Policy, 1893-1946'] about the U.S. invasion of Cuba and the Philippines in the name of fighting against the Spanish, where they acquire these territories.  But that's a, anyway--
Speaker 2: Now, now, the unit that went to Cuba came from Fort Hood [Texas].  And once they finished in Cuba, they went to the Philippines.  And coincidentally after they started using Camp X-Ray [at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base, Cuba] for terrorists that were captured in the Middle East, it was the unit from Fort Hood that was reactivated to go to Cuba to relieve the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps], who were doing guard duty.
Story_ID: 664840
Speaker 1: Yeah you were telling us about a portrait of Maceo [Antonio Maceo Grajales].
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I have a--it was given to me by my father [Jose Grinan].  And it's a portrait of Antonio Maceo.  It's not on canvas, it was painted on a piece of wood.  The frame is probably forty, fifty, sixty years old.  But I don't want to have it redone, I just keep it the way it is, because my father gave it to me.  And he was one who had always talked about Antonio Maceo, Antonio Maceo, what he did in Cuba--how he did it.  And in fact, I do believe that probably around 1909, it could be 1919, black people in this country were looking for males who could be role models.  Maceo was one, but his name was removed from all books here in the U.S.  So, no one would know about this man who was a general who defeated an army.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, there was some remnant, though, in terms of these names.  As I said, like Maceo Parker and other Maceos.  Every city in the U.S. you'll find some black Maceos.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And they say (pronunciation) Maceo instead of Maceo.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It's the--
Speaker 2: Same difference.
Speaker 1: It's a tribute, though some--most of the time it's forgotten, as to who he actually was.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But in the old days, you know, old school teachers taught about him--you know, with pride.  So--
Speaker 2: But he was, he was always a name that was mentioned at home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's interesting.  We interviewed Togo West [HistoryMaker Togo D. West, Jr.], the general, the black general who was in the Clinton administration [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], he was named for the Japanese admiral [T≈g≈ Heihachir≈] who defeated the Russians.  His grandmother [Mary Chinn West] named him that simply because a man of color had defeated white people--
Speaker 2: Togo.
Speaker 1: So, it, you know, and she was from that era.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so, she grew up in that era.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And it's, I mean people were hungry for some kind of victory in an age of lynching and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Story_ID: 664841
Speaker 1: But your mother [Sylvia Grillo Grinan], now did she finish school?  Did she have a chance to go to high school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.  My mother, my mother went to Booker T. Junior High [Booker T. Washington Junior High School; Booker T. Washington Middle School, Tampa, Florida].  I don't know which high school she went to, unless it was Booker T. that went all the way to the twelfth grade.  She started school at Bethune Cookman [Bethune-Cookman College; Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida] in, I think the late '40s [1940s].  And that's where she got pregnant and had to drop out of school.  I was the fourth child, and I came after a break of eight years, so to speak.  So, I was kind of a mistake, but I'm glad I was a mistake.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, mom had to come back to Tampa [Florida].  She had me, took care of me for a while.  My father [Jose Grinan] had, my father had brought his family from Cuba.  So, they had a tailor shop 7th Avenue in Ybor City [Tampa, Florida].  And he was also a tailoring instructor at Don Thompson high school [Don Thompson Vocational School] in Tampa during the '40s [1940s].
Story_ID: 664842
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now, let's get your father, some of your father's family history, we'll--we'll get them together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, what's your father's full name?  Can you give us his name and spell it for us (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His name was Jose Luis, L-U-I-S.  And this part I'm going to have--his other middle name was Tranquilino, T-R-A-N-Q-U-I-L-I-N-O, Tranquilino.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then last name Grinan [Jose Grinan].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, Tranquilino means calm.  He was far from that, so I don't know where that name came from (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, something to aspire to, I guess.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And what, what is date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: July 6, 1910.
Speaker 1: And was he born in Tampa [Florida]?
Speaker 2: No, he was born in Remedios de las Villas in Cuba [Remedios, Cuba].
Speaker 1: Okay.  How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: R-E-M-E-D-I-O-S, d-e--lowercase, d-e;--las Villas, l-a-s lowercase; and V-I-L-L-A-S, is Villas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your father's side?  What's the story?
Speaker 2: What's the story?  My grandfather, Quintin [Quintin Grinan], he--I guess he did not really say he was a slave, but apparently he was for a while.  But he was tasked with going to some of the other islands to find workers to come back to Cuba to cut cane [sugarcane].  It was called el centro, you know, that's the sugar plantation.  And he went to Cuba, went to Haiti, Dominican Republic, and convinced workers to come back to Cuba and cut cane.  He did that for a while and then the family moved to Remedios where my father was born.  But my grandfather knew someone who was a politician who wanted to run for the presidency.  So, he asked my grandfather to come to Havana [Cuba] and help him with the campaign.  In Latin American countries, if you win, you win big.  If you lose, you lose big, too.  So lock, stock and barrel, brought the entire family to Havana.  And the candidate lost the election, so they were stuck in Havana. But luckily, he had a skill, he was a tailor.  So, they opened up a tailor shop in Old Havana [Havana, Cuba].  And I was there last year.  All I wanted to do was just go and take a picture in front of the door.  It was a shotgun type of a business.  You had your front part where you would do your measurements and you'd do your sales.  There was a curtain that separated the next part, where you change your clothing.  And after that was another curtain.  Those were the living quarters in the back.  And it was on la Calle Bernaza entre Teniente Rey y Murallas.  My father told me that when I was a kid, and I still remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when I went to Cuba, it was like, "Oh, you want to go where the factories are?"  "Yeah, exactly."  So, we went there and took some pictures in front of the door, that's all.
Speaker 1: Is it occupied today?
Speaker 2: No, no.  No, it's not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just a large metal door covering it.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, your father came back to, your grandfather had to move back, move to Tampa.  Or--
Speaker 2: Because of my mother [Sylvia Grillo Grinan], my father moved to Tampa.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I do believe that he didn't love her, but she was his ticket to come to the U.S.  I think love eventually developed, and he stayed with her for twenty-six years.  But I don't--initially he was in love with her.  She was gorgeous, he was a man; he wanted to do what he wanted, "Oh, you're from America, too?  Oh."  So, he married her in Cuba in an A.M.E. church [African Methodist Episcopal].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when they came to--my father--she came back.  But he didn't come until Pearl Harbor day, December 7, 1941.  And it was his luck--he kissed the ground like Pope John Paul [Saint Pope John Paul II] used to do whenever he got to a new country--he kissed the ground--looked up and got hit by a truck at Port Tampa [Port of Tampa; Port Tampa Bay, Tampa, Florida] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: That was, that was his introduction to the United States.  But I mean he healed well, and everything was okay.
Speaker 1: That's a remarkable story (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, I have a few remarkable stories.
Story_ID: 664843
Speaker 1: So, now, now is, is there a story about how your parents met?  You told us where, but is there a little story around it?
Speaker 2: I don't know the story around it.  My dad [Jose Grinan] just thought she was gorgeous, and he wanted to get next to her.  And when he found out she was a U.S. citizen, he, I think started thinking, this is my way to get out of here.  Because they were not poor, they just didn't have no money to spend.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your father, did he already have some children in Cuba?
Speaker 2: He never said anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I thought you had said something about--
Speaker 2: He never said anything about him having children before he met my mother [Sylvia Grillo Grinan].  He probably did.
Speaker 1: But they had children before you were born?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, three, I have three older sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I'll ask you about them in a second.  But when you think about your parents' personalities--their sense of humor, how they walk, how they talk; their talents--who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My father.  Hot headed, short tempered.  But see, I think my father, because he was only 5'3", had a Napoleonic complex.  And he had to prove that he was a man back then.  And it was funny for me to see him when he was in class with, let's say, a football player who was like 6'5".  And he'll come by with his ruler and pop him on his back, "Boy, I told you."  Pop.  And you know, they cringed.  And I'm like, "He could kill you, Papa." (Laughter), "No, he ain't going to do that."  So, I think I really took after him, not that I have a Napoleonic complex.  But I think I have his attitude, his, his outlook on life.  And I think I learned from him, once you find your love, you stay there.
Story_ID: 664844
Speaker 1: Now, what did your father [Jose Grinan] do for a living?  He--
Speaker 2: He was a tailor.
Speaker 1: Tailor, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He went to the University of Havana [Havana, Cuba], took up chemistry and mathematics; graduated with a degree in both.  But when he came to the U.S., they weren't worth a hill of beans.  So, what he had to do to get teacher certification, was to go to Florida A and M University [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida].  And that's also where my mother [Sylvia Grillo Grinan] got her degree, because she eventually did go back to school.  I think I was about seven or eight years old.
Speaker 1: Yeah, when you said he was teaching, you know, I didn't--so, did he teach tailoring?
Speaker 2: He taught tailoring and design.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Because that was the only thing he knew how to do.  When he first came, he worked at a place called Franklin's Men's Store, which is still in existence on Franklin Street in Tampa [Florida].  We were able to survive a lot because of what I consider to be mafioso money.  Because he was a tailor, folks would come in.  He would, "Oh, hey, I'll give you a double breasted this time.  It'll cover up your--you're gaining weight.  Your stomach, you know, we can cover that up, you know.  We can make some pads on the shoulders and make you look big and everything."  That personal treatment got him tips.  So, he was making four dollars a week, but they would tip him twenty dollars every time they came in.  So, he was able to buy a building, and then they started a tailor shop.  And then he brought his family from Cuba to help run the tailor shop.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I hope I'm not confusing you.
Speaker 1: No, no, no, I understand.  It's, now it's clear.  Now, it's pretty clear.  So, was your father satisfied?  Did he miss not having a career in mathematics or did he--?
Speaker 2: I don't think it really bothered him, because he was a good tailor.  And he could teach that, and he always had my grandfather [Quintin Grinan] to depend on.  If he got something wrong, my grandfather made sure he got it right, because my grandfather really learned the trade.  He was the slave master's tailor, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So, that's where he got that skill.  And from being in the house, then, "Hey, you want to go to another country and find some workers?"  So, he had privileges that I think most others did not have.
Story_ID: 664845
Speaker 1: When enslaved Africans were finally freed in Cuba, then the institution had been there a long, long time.  You know, it was--
Speaker 2: And it was more brutal than here in the U.S.  I mean even though they would give the names to children who were produced from slaves, it was a brutal society.  I think Michener [James A. Michener] writes in his book 'Caribbean' about a situation in Cuba where, to prevent a rebellion, they got a pregnant woman and put her up on a pedestal and cut the baby out.  Nobody's going to do anything after that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and that was actually done here too.  But, you know, but it's, you know, I hear what you're saying.
Speaker 2: I mean it's--and see, I can't even fathom something like that.  Water generators--and I know this was done in Jamaica, and I'm pretty sure it was done in Cuba as well.  Paddle wheels with glass stuck in each of the paddles.  So, while you're strapped up, you had to--(gesture) but you were turning that wheel every time you stepped.  And if you misstepped, you cut your foot.  These are the type of things that my [paternal] grandfather [Quintin Grinan] would relate to me.  And then I'd see little mentions in books.  It's like, well, maybe it was true.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Because sometimes those things are really hard to fathom.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Story_ID: 664846
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about your siblings.
Speaker 2: My siblings?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: The oldest one is Delores [ph.], the middle one is Carmen [ph.], and the youngest one is Sylvia [ph.].  Delores, we call Lola.  She got married at an early age, sixteen, and kind of left the house.  Yolanda [ph.], Sylvia, the youngest was the one who acted as mom when mom [Sylvia Grillo Grinan] was not around.  She was the youngest, but kind of given the responsibility of taking care of me while I was growing up.  Because my mother had finally gotten her degree and she was teaching.  She had been a secretary for a couple of principals.  And once she got her degree, she was teaching.  So, she didn't have a lot of time to stay around the house when I was a kid.  So, it was Sylvia who had to take up that responsibility.  Excuse me--Carmen was more of the band person.  You know, she wanted to be in the band and, you know, whatever that, I don't even know what it was.  But it was like a xylophone that you carried, and you played it.
Speaker 1: A glockenspiel, I think.
Speaker 2: I don't know what it was called (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I do remember from my childhood Sylvia playing basketball.  Because they used to have basketball teams that were women or girl basketball teams.  And that was just about at every school.  And then when I started growing up in junior high school and high school, it's like, "Well, where are the ladies teams?  Where are the girls teams?"  There were none.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a picture of the South that I've heard of over and over again, that girls basketball was big in the South.
Speaker 2: It was, it was.
Speaker 1: In the '30s [1930s], '40s [1940s], going into the '50s [1950s], and then all of a sudden--
Speaker 2: And then all of a sudden, it just disappeared.  I don't know why, but I know my sister did play a lot of basketball.
Speaker 1: Oh, well, I can verify it.  I've heard that story a number of times.  You know, we've interviewed some big time girls basketball players.  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, Tennessee and Alabama and other places.
Speaker 2: And you find out that they had them, but all of a sudden they disappeared.
Story_ID: 664847
Speaker 1: Right.  So, okay.  So, when you were growing up, your family consisted of your mother [Sylvia Grillo Grinan] and your father [Jose Grinan] and you've got three older sisters, yourself and then did your grandparents live with you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was, there was Quintin [Quintin Grinan].  Well, when my father brought them to the country, they stayed with us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Quintin, and we called her Mama Luisa.  She was Luisa Falero [Luisa Falero Grinan], my father's mother.  And they stayed with us.  Amparo [Amparo Valdez Grillo], my mother's mother, because she was a property owner, she eventually started a little rooming house which had rooms for her, rooms for the family.  And she rented every other room to ladies, but they could not bring any men into the house.  I mean, those were her rules.  And these were the days when you had the iceman deliver ice that you took to the kitchen and you put on top of the icebox, so the cold came down and kept the milk and the water and the vegetables and everything else cool.  And the iceman came twice, sometimes three times a week.  And if he didn't come, the icehouse wasn't too far.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, what were, did you grow up in the same neighborhood the whole time in--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I grew initially on 7th Avenue, because the tailor shop was there.  We either stayed in the back of the tailor shop--and it was next door to my other grandmother's rooming house.  So, I had kind of two places I could stay, but they were right next to each other.  But then the thing in the '60s [1960s] called urban renewal came.  And then everything on 7th Avenue in that particular block was removed.  And we lived on, let's see, it was the first home that my father purchased.  It was 2314 13th Avenue in Tampa [Florida].  Right now, it's the onramp for Interstate 4.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this seems to be true in lots of major U.S. cities, where there's a highway ramp now where there used to be a black business district.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, now, okay.  What were--so, the family moved then from 7th Avenue to where?
Speaker 2: To 2314 13th Avenue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they still had the tailor shop, and my other grandmother still had the rooming house.  It's just that now we were in a concrete building.  You know, no more wood walls and stuff like that.  It was actually a concrete home.  And my father was very proud of that, purchasing a home.
Story_ID: 664848
Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: On 7th Avenue, Sunday morning was probably one of the best mornings you could imagine.  The smell of coffee being roasted, just wafted through the air.  And then you also had the bakeries cooking bread, which, I guess we would call French bread, because you know, they come in loaves that are long and thin.  But it was just the smell of fresh bread and the smell of coffee being roasted.  And that was just half a block away from the house.  So, Sundays were, you know--.  And then once you smell that, you go to Mass, you come back, and then you have breakfast. Because back then you weren't supposed to eat before you went to Mass.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was the area on 13th Avenue where the tailor shop was?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  The tailor shop was on 7th Avenue.
Speaker 1: 7th Avenue, okay.  Was it, was this a new black business strip, or had it--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, it was a black neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Black neighborhood, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, black neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Was there a name for it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I know they have that one in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was just on the outskirts of Ybor City [Tampa, Florida], between Ybor City and Belmont Heights [Tampa, Florida].  But it really didn't have a name.
Story_ID: 664849
Speaker 1: Okay, now, where did you start school?
Speaker 2: You mean like first grade?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: First grade I think was at Meacham Elementary School [Tampa, Florida].  And I went there because my mother [Sylvia Grillo Grinan] was the secretary for the principal.  And one of--I know you mentioned you were going to ask about a favorite teacher.  And I guess when I was in elementary school there, my favorite teacher was Mrs. Broughton [ph.].  I can't remember her first name.  And she had two sons.  One was my age, and we were in the same class, Kenneth [Kenneth Broughton (ph.)].  And we were just very close.  I'd go to his house because it was like ten blocks away, and he'd come to my house.  You know, we'd play ball, fly kites, you know, do what boys do.  Played football, played baseball in the open field.  And it was just a thriving neighborhood [Ybor City, Tampa, Florida], you know.  It's just that it was all black.  I never really had any contacts with folks until the--I guess the '60s [1960s].  And that was because, I guess, of the movement that was taking place in the country.
Story_ID: 664850
Speaker 1: Okay. And meanwhile, now, you're born in '52 [1952]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But in, was it '56 1956], that's when the Cuban Revolution ends?
Speaker 2: In '59 [1959].
Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959], yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The traffic back and forth, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, you used to travel back and forth.  In fact, I was there in '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Before--because my father [Jose Grinan] (laughter)--it's very strange and unusual right now.  Because, okay, last year I went to Cuba looking for distant relatives.  Because I had addresses and phone numbers that I hadn't called and used in more than twenty years.  But I went with the hope that they would still be in the same place.  I go back.  Yes, I find the grandchildren of the people I knew.  And they're amazed that I know so much about them.  I knew so much about their grandmother.  But what I haven't told them is that, "I think your grandmother was my daddy's girlfriend for a while before he got married to my mother [Sylvia Grillo Grinan]."  Because they both came from the same town, Remedios [Cuba], and they both moved to Havana [Cuba].  And they just stayed in touch when they were students going to school, and afterwards.  And when I went as a journalist in 1978, I think we had gone to a Cuban prison called El Combinado del Este [Havana, Cuba].  I had gone through a lot of high school yearbooks in Miami [Florida] just to look to see, and see what names--, "Okay, he was captured."  So when I went to the prison I could say, "Your name is Yoenio [ph.], no?"  "Yes, how do you know that?"  "Well, your daddy told me to tell you hello, and he's looking forward to your returning."  Emotional moments in a prison.  Coming back from the prison we were staying in el Hotel Nacional [Hotel Nacional de Cuba, Havana, Cuba].  At that time, Cubans were not allowed inside.  So, we were getting off the bus and this little old lady just stood right in front of me, stopped my path, "You look just like your papa."  "Excuse me?"  And then she started running down my pedigree.  She knew my grandfather [Antonio Grillo], she knew my mother's mother [Amparo Valdez Grillo]; she knew my grandmother on my father's side [Luisa Falero Grinan].  She just knew everybody.  And it's like, "Who are you?"  "Well, I'm Amelia [ph.].  Don't you remember coming to my house as a child?"  "Are you the lady who had canaries?"  "Yes, yes."  You don't know what stuff like that does to somebody's mind.  Very, very, emotional.  Because it's tapping into a past that you really didn't know about.  Now, I had to bribe a taxi driver to go to her neighborhood, because this was in 1978.  You weren't supposed to walk around in Cuba if you were an American.  You know, everybody's going to be watching you.  And I could tell you some stories about being watched in Cuba.  Amelia cooked me rice, beans and pork.  And I had to ask her, "Where did you get all of this?"  "We have our ways, Jose [HistoryMaker Jose Grinan], we have our ways."  And she gave me a silver dollar, a Jose Marti silver dollar [Cuban peso] to give to my father, and I did that when I came back.  But Amelia, interesting story.  In I want to say the late '30s [1930s] or early 1940s, Communists had truckloads of food, and they would go through neighborhoods.  "You want a bag of food?  You could feed your family for two weeks with this, but you have to sign this paper."  A lot of people signed the paper.  In 1960 when Amelia left her house with her bags and went to the airport to get on a plane to go to Miami, they pulled out this piece of paper and said, "Is that your signature?"  "Yes, but that was so long ago."  "We don't admit Communists to the United States."  So, she had to turn around and go back home.  Now, if she didn't have her son staying in that house and her grandchildren staying in that house, she would have been homeless, have no place to go to.  I asked her in 1980 when I was there, "What happened?"  That was '78 [1978].  "What happened to the canaries?  You know, I remember some, you know, all these canaries.  You had a patio, you had all of these cages--big, two big cages."  She said, "Jose, I was not going to let that man profit off my hard work."  She's talking about Castro [Fidel Castro].  So, what she did was open all of the cages and let the birds go free.  Because she was not, she wouldn't have been able to make any money on them, because the society was changing into a Socialist society.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, she said, "You know, I can't be free, but I'll let them go."
Story_ID: 664851
Speaker 1: We were talking before this started about Al Lopez Field [Tampa, Florida], and--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --the Reds [Cincinnati Reds] were there.  I don't know what other Minor League teams [Minor League Baseball] were around, but I know the Reds were.  That was their--
Speaker 2: That was their winter home.
Speaker 1: Their spring training home, yeah.
Speaker 2: Winter home, spring training, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: When they weren't playing in Cincinnati [Ohio], around the country, they came to Tampa [Florida].  Al Lopez Field, which is out in, it used to be on Himes [Avenue] and Columbus Drive, if I'm not mistaken, which is now property I think that's owned by the new stadium there [George M. Steinbrenner Field, Tampa, Florida].  But it was a place where, when they were in town--because you also had the Tampa Tarpons, and they were the Minor League team.  And that was the team that fed players into the Major League [Major League Baseball] sometimes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the Tampa Tarpons, they needed a field to play in, so they had this piece of property a long, long time ago.  And it was named after someone who had gone to the majors from Tampa.  I think it was the first professional baseball player from Tampa, Al Lopez.  So, they named the field Al Lopez Field.  And that's where the Tampa Tarpons played; the Grapefruit League, so to speak.  Cincinnati was there during the winter, and it was an amazing place.  Because where else were these poor people in this town going to see the New York Yankees, the Cubs [Chicago Cubs], the Dodgers [Brooklyn Dodgers; Los Angeles Dodgers]? All these teams came to Tampa to play.  And those stands at Al Lopez Field were full.  That kind of reined off in I think the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s].  But I remember as a kid in the '50s [1950s], "Let's go to baseball."  You know, and then there was an amusement park across the street.  So, you could turn it into an entire day--baseball game, amusement park, bumper cars, merry-go-rounds, roller coasters, and all of that stuff.  And then the airport [Tampa International Airport, Tampa, Florida] was not far from there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I would have guessed it would be a big economic boost to the area, having Major League teams there during the winter.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you know, I didn't know what it was--I'm not, don't have a first hand account of it, but that's--
Speaker 2: It was a nice place to go to.  Wasn't fancy at all.
Speaker 1: But you know, the Major League players, at one time I think there were quite a few players from Cuba in the Major Leagues.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It was starting to wane, you know, as the tensions with the Castro [Fidel Castro] regime, you know, kept escalating between the U.S. government and Castro.  But I think Leo Cardenas was one of the Reds down there, and of course you had--
Speaker 2: You had Vida Blue.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And a whole bunch of others, I can't remember them, their names offhand.
Speaker 1: I didn't realize he was a Cuban.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Vida Blue, okay, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was really Vida Blue (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 2: And I remember watching baseball games on TV.  Back then you couldn't say, Jesus because that was Jesus.  So, they called Jesus Alou, "Jay Alou, he's at bat.  His brother Felipe's [Felipe Alou] over there on the other side of the field."
Speaker 1: Yeah.  They put their names up sometime.  Because I remember, you know, "Je- ,"--
Speaker 2: They didn't want to put a Jesus in the South, I can tell you that (laughter).
Speaker 1: They used it in, you know, Ohio and in Illinois and other places.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But they wouldn't, they'd call them (pronunciation) Jesus they would not call them Jesus you know.  Of course, that would be in English.  But, yeah, yeah, so, Cuban baseball players were big.
Speaker 2: And then they are second generation--well, first generation--maybe second generation--Americans of Cuban descent who played Minor League ball.  One I really remember, because he was a friend of my father [Jose Grinan], Chico Arenas [Alberto Chico Arenas].  I don't know Chico's real name, but he was just called Chico Arenas.  He was a shortstop.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know (unclear) is a name for--
Speaker 2: That's still a--
Speaker 1: Jesus right?  It's short, I mean--
Speaker 2: We never called anybody--you know, I mean if you were Jesus we called you Jesus.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But you wouldn't see it on TV, it would just be Jay Alou (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Alou brothers were really big stars--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were.
Speaker 1: --in baseball.  Felipe Alou--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and (unclear), Matty Alou.
Story_ID: 664852
Speaker 1: I think the most popular TV show ['I Love Lucy'] featured, you know, Ricky Ricardo.  You know, I mean as the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Back then that was the only thing that people identified as Cuban.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah. (Laughter) And my father [Jose Grinan] would make those big sleeve ruffled shirts, you know.  Men would walk around with them.  He would make the large dresses for the ladies.  My mother [Sylvia Grillo Grinan] never had to buy a gown.  My father just said, "Go to a magazine, and see what you want."  And he'd come back and he'd have it done in two days.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did your school, did Meacham School [Meacham Elementary School, Tampa, Florida]--what was the population like?  Was there, it was an all-black school you were saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Meacham?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, okay, Meacham--there was Carver [George Washington Carver Junior High School, Tampa, Florida] I went to, which was named after George Washington Carver.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's where my mother, that was where I was in the first grade.  That's where Mrs. Broughton [ph.] was.
Speaker 1: So, you started at Carver?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And Meacham is in the middle of Central Park Village, which was considered the hood in Tampa [Florida].  But there's a lot of history there that a lot of people don't know about.  Ray Charles used to play in the Pyramid bar [Pyramid Hotel, Tampa, Florida].  And it was a thriving community--you had movie theaters, you had restaurants, you had dentists, you had doctors.  You had a library not too far, you had schools, which was Meacham.  And then also St. Peter Claver [St. Peter Claver Catholic School, Tampa, Florida], which was a block away from Meacham.  But this was all in the middle of the projects.  I mean, projects surrounded the schools, and it was called Central Park Village.
Speaker 1: There's something else intentional here--the naming of this school, St. Peter Claver, after a South American abolitionist, St. Peter Claver, you know.
Speaker 2: I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I found that out maybe about ten years ago.
Speaker 2: All I knew is that he was black, and he was a saint.  And that's what we, you know, kind of revered. "Wow, we've got one," (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah, so, interesting.  So, so, well, were you a good student in school?
Speaker 2: My parents forced me to be a good student. (Laughter) They really did, because my mother was an educator, my father was an educator as well.  So, yeah, I did a lot of studying, they made me study.  I remember using flashcards every night, "What's that?" "What letter?"  "What's that phrase?" "What is that phonetic sound?"  I was doing pretty good in school.  But then after I got into junior high, I started seeing girls and all this stuff.  I kept my grades up, but they were not where my parents wanted them to be.  But they were satisfied with what I did.  They were always concerned that I was not going to make it.  But I'm glad before they died, I could tell them that, "I've, I've done good because you left a good foundation.  And I just wanted to thank you for that."
Story_ID: 664853
Speaker 1: What was your ambition in school?  Did you have a vocation that you had set your sights on?
Speaker 2: Lawyer, and that was because of my godfather.  He was an amazing man himself.  He tried and translated a case in the 1950s before translations were commonplace.
Speaker 1: Now, what was your godfather's name, I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: His name is Francisco, which is where my middle name comes from, Antonio Rodriguez [Francisco A. Rodriguez].
Speaker 1: Now, was he trained in Cuba or in the United States?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no.  He--so you're getting into a lot of history now.  We called him Panchito, so if I use Panchito, you know who I'm talking about.  But then also his father [Francisco Rodriguez] was called Panchito.  The youngest Panchito was a good public speaker; he was an attorney; he was a sergeant in the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps].  I forgot what school he was educated in, but during the '60s [1960s] he made it possible for African Americans to go to Florida State [Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida] and the University of Florida law school [University of Florida College of Law; Fredric G. Levin College of Law, Gainesville, Florida].  He made sure that that would happen.  He, because he was an attorney, and because his office was right off Central Avenue where the hood was, he represented the longshoremen's union [International Longshoremen's Association], which was upstairs from his office.  You had a recreation center across the street, you had the theater down the street, and the Pyramid bar [Pyramid Hotel, Tampa, Florida] around the corner.  And that's where, I think, as a child he took me looking for somebody.  And there was this man playing the piano way in the corner.  I'm like, "You ain't got no light back there."  "Don't worry, he blind, he can't see."  But he played music.  But he was also a heroin addict, because Central Avenue was known for heroin.  That's why my parents [Sylvia Grillo Grinan and Jose Grinan] never wanted me to hang out there.
Speaker 1: So, this is Ray Charles we're talking about?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, yeah.  So, he spent a lot of time in Tampa [Florida]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I think so.  But in the movie, 'Ray,' there's only a little scene in Tampa.  But he, he stayed there for a while.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where I think he got hooked on heroin.
Speaker 1: Now, okay, so, he's a--so he's like a neighborhood hero?  I mean people see him as an advocate for civil rights?
Speaker 2: Oh, for Panchito?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  He--put it this way.  I would go to his house.  He's the one who taught me how to speak, taught me how to use non-threatening gestures as opposed to a threatening gesture.  And I would go to his house, and I'd see the mayor.  Okay, what's he doing here?  Eventually, because this mayor had a few unscrupulous dealings, and since my godfather was associated with him, he was disbarred.  But this was after he had done a lot of stuff.  He defended a lot of folks who were migrant workers, because he spoke the language.  I mentioned he tried and translated a case.  It was someone who was charged with murder.  And he actually tried and translated the case at the same time, so the guy knew exactly what was going on, because he didn't understand English.  He was a good tennis player, wanted to be a professional tennis player.  And because he was all of these things, I wanted to follow in his footsteps.  I didn't want to be a tailor.  "I ain't going to sew.  That's a lady's job.  I don't know why my daddy's doing that."  That was my attitude.  So, I was very rebellious, but I did want to become an attorney.
Story_ID: 664854
Speaker 1: But I dropped out of college, or got drafted shortly after I dropped out of college (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, now, let's get you to high school--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --before we get you to college. We'll get--so, where did you go to high school?
Speaker 1: I went to high school at Jesuit High School in Tampa [Florida]. Tenth, eleventh, and a part of my senior year.  And the other part of my senior year was at Plant High School, H.B. Plant High School [Henry B. Plant High School, Tampa, Florida].
Speaker 2: So, did you graduate from Plant High School?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Is that who Plant City [Florida] is named after, too?
Speaker 1: No, no [sic.].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I don't think so, I think that was another Plant. Because H.B. Plant was in the Palma Ceia area of Tampa, which was kind of the ritzy area, white ritzy area.  And Plant City is way on the other side.  Forty miles on the other side of Tampa was farm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, farmland.
Speaker 2: And it may actually have been named after plants (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, I don't think they were named after plants.  Probably someone by the name of Plant, but I don't think it was H.B. Plant [Henry B. Plant]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --the guy the school is named after.
Speaker 2: All right.  So--
Speaker 1: We used to go out there and pick strawberries, because that was considered to be the strawberry capital of the country.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, alright.  So, now, Jesuit High School, I mean, so you--why were you only there until almost graduation?
Speaker 1: Interesting story.  When you go to a, I don't know whether you know about Jesuits.  They're very strict, and they can be hands on.  And I mean hands on you.  I was in a study hall, and at that time Catholics were supposed to be in Mass.  "We don't care if you went to Mass on Sunday, you go to Mass twice a week here."  Okay.  So, we as Catholics--mandatory.  But the Jews and the Christians didn't have to go to Mass, they went to study hall.  So, one day I went to study hall.  And then the prefect of discipline, who was Father Revor [ph.], walked in, looked around, "Mr. Grinan [HistoryMaker Jose Grinan], would you stand?"  "Okay."  "Mr. Grinan, aren't you Catholic?"  "Yes, father."  "Don't you know you're supposed to be at Mass?"  "Father, we have exams coming up, and I thought I could use this time to study for the exams."  And he hauled off and hit me.  All my friends went (laughter) because that's what they did in high school.  So, because they did that, I just gained my composure and I hit him in the jaw.  And he said, "Follow me to my office."  "Okay."  Because my father [Jose Grinan] did a lot of dealings with the Hillsborough County school system [Hillsborough County Public Schools]--because he had moved into a position of night principal, basically in charge of vocational education at night--he was able to get me a transfer before an expulsion showed up on my records.  So, I got a transfer to Plant.  That's why I went to Plant and graduated from there.
Story_ID: 664855
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, how--what kind of student were you in high school?  Were you a good student, and what were you interested in?  Were you thinking about law when you were--?
Speaker 2: I was thinking about law.  But I also knew that since I was in high school, I was starting to see other things.  I knew I didn't want to be a teacher.  I knew I didn't want to be a tailor.  But law was what was presented to me, because my godfather was an attorney.  And he had a nice house, he had nice cars.  So, why would I not want those same things, and why would I not want to be an attorney?  And as a student, I think I was--I wasn't the top notch student that they wanted me to be, but I didn't do all Cs.  I mean there were Bs and A's, and you might have one C.  Insofar as a favorite subject, I guess it would be speech and theater.  I was in an organization, or extracurricular organization, called the National Forensic League [National Speech and Debate Association].  And then there was also the Florida Forensics League.  A mentor, who was a scholastic, not a priest, he was studying to become a priest.  But in the Jesuit order [Society of Jesus], you have to be the age of thirty.  Mr. Ruppert was, I think twenty-seven, twenty-eight.  And he taught you gestures, he taught you how to speak, he taught you how to weave words together to create a picture.  In our classes, we listened to a lot of poetry that was really popular music.  But he, he would have the words written, so you could see what he was talking about. Simon and Garfunkel: the night sat softly on the trees ['Patterns'].  And it would go on, and it's like, "Oh, yeah."  But he put music to it.  I was like, "Wow, that's poetry."  So, he made us look at things a lot differently.  And he was the speech coach for the NFL.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: And he asked me to come out and do some stuff.  And I did crazy stuff.  There was a thing called Student Congress, where you present a bill and you argue in favor of it.  And then someone else argues against it.  Guess who argued both ways and won?  I argued for military conscription and I argued against military conscription, and won, because they'd never seen anybody do that before.  And I was just trying it to see if they'd let me do it, and they did.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: But he, he encouraged me a lot, he taught me a lot.  And I was one of his winners.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so, this voice is recognized early as a talent.
Speaker 2: I think so, but I didn't know it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so, here you have Panchito [Grinan's godfather, Francisco A. Rodriguez], and you have your speech coach.  They recognize that you have a gift, you know, in using your voice.
Speaker 2: I didn't tell you about the tournaments that I was in, that he coached me for:  Optimist Oratorical Contest [Optimist International Oratorical Contest], 1965, '66 [1966].  No black person had ever been a part of that.  But he kept telling me, "You can win this, you can win this."  And the speech that year was I think, Optimism, Youth's Greatest Asset.  And then the next year it was Patriotism.  And I forgot what the other tagline was.  But he was a learned man.  And I know you don't hear that word very often, but he was a learned man.  He taught me about Bucephalus.  Do you know who Bucephalus is?
Speaker 1: It's--
Speaker 2: Or what Bucephalus is?
Speaker 1: It's a horse, right, it's a horse.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: He said, "Look, let's do it this way.  The scene is an ancient courtyard.  The gentlemen in waiting are alarmed and concerned over what is about to happen.  The finest equestrians in the land have not been able to ride one particular steed.  However, this man by the name of Alexander walks up to the horse, turns his face towards the sun, mounts him, and rides off.  That was the conquest of Bucephalus."  And then I'd go on with the rest of the speech.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But I mean he would always draw a picture, and then move on to the point, because he catches you with the picture.
Story_ID: 664856
Speaker 1: So, your--your speech teacher was--what was his name again, I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Which--Ruppert.  I can't remember his first name, but his, he was Mr. Ruppert, R-U-P-P-E-R-T.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Mr. Ruppert, okay.  Was this an African American teacher, or--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, these were all white.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The only African American at Jesuit [Jesuit High School, Tampa, Florida] was Mr. Rusev [ph.], and he looked exactly like Bill Cosby, only he had straighter hair.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, it didn't do him any good then, though, because Cosby wasn't there yet, I guess.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, he was getting there, he was, that's right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he, I was told he eventually went to Africa to be a missionary, a Jesuit missionary there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mr. Ruppert, as well as Mr. Fitzsimmons [ph.]--well, Mr. Fitzsimmons I think got married to Sister Patrick Mary [ph.] from Tampa Catholic [Tampa Catholic High School, Tampa, Florida].  And then he went to New Orleans [Louisiana], started teaching postgraduate British Literature.  I don't know what Sister Patrick Mary was doing.  And Mr. Ruppert also ended up in New Orleans.  A cousin of mine who was attending Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] said he went to a coffee house, and he couldn't believe that Mr. Ruppert was up there playing guitar and singing in the coffee house.  He told me that the reason he went towards the priesthood was because he wouldn't get drafted, he would get an education in religion, he would get an education in theology; he would get an education in English and philosophy; all he had to do was be celibate.  And for a good looking man, I don't know how celibate he really was (laughter).  But he was a good speech teacher.
Story_ID: 664857
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now did you get a chance to be in any productions in high school?
Speaker 2: Not really any stage productions.  Well, at Plant [Henry B. Plant High School, Tampa, Florida], yeah, there was a play.  I can't remember the name of it, but I know the initial character, when it was done on Broadway, or off Broadway, was the same man who played Rochester [Eddie "Rochester" Anderson] for Jack Benny.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Eddie Anderson.
Speaker 2: It was a stage play that he--
Speaker 1: 'Cabin in the Sky'?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no, no.  This, it was only one black character in this play.
Speaker 1: Oh, only one?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: And that was the character I played.  But I also knew that he had done the original version, and I think it was off Broadway.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can't remember the name of that play.  But it was about crazy people in a house (laughter).  And the character I played wasn't crazy, but I had to deal with all these folks.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm thinking 'Arsenic and Old Lace' [Joseph Kesselring]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, not that one, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, at any rate, but, but--now this is--you are, in '69 [1969], you're getting ready to graduate from high school [Henry B. Plant High School, Tampa, Florida].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Black actors are being recognized, I think publicly, for the first time, you know, really, I mean since, I mean you got--'64 [1964] I think Sidney Poitier wins an Academy Award [Oscar] for what's that?  Not 'Lilies of the Field.'  Was it 'Lilies of the Field'?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Lilies of the Field.'  So, and by '69 [1969], you have the so called blaxploitation movie scene going on with a lot of black actors getting lots of work (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I can remember '70 [1970], '71 [1971], '72 [1972].  You had 'Shaft,' you had 'Super Fly'--that genre of films--exploitation, so to speak.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, Jim Brown movies.  In '68 [1968] 'Uptight,' they had a pretty decent cast in it.  I mean well, this is the era when--
Speaker 2: When things started happening for--
Speaker 1: --Bill Cosby's got a TV show.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: You know, [HistoryMaker] Nichelle Nichols is on 'Star Trek,' you know.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll gets her own show ['Julia'], you know, blacks on Broadway. The Negro Ensemble Company [NEC] is starting to jump (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the Black Arts Movement is taking off.
Story_ID: 664858
Speaker 1: Were there riots in Tampa [Florida] after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated in '68 [1968]?  You, you would have been a junior (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was not there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm gonna tell you where I was on the day Martin Luther King was assassinated.  A speech tournament, Miami [Florida].  Mr. Ruppert was our coach.  I was giving a speech titled, black power.  But it was black economic power, not anything violent.  And it's strange.  We had twenty-four rounds, and I had twenty-three first places, and won twelfth place.
Speaker 1: So, you think you might not have been treated fairly?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was not treated fairly.  Because the person who gave me the twelfth place questioned me about why I was there.  And all of a sudden I'm leaving, going back to our hotel, and I hear that Martin Luther King was just assassinated.  So, all I could do was just sit on the steps and pray and cry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you, when you got back to Tampa, did the school do anything special for Dr. King's memory?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: They didn't do anything special, because I think in some communities, Dr. King still was not accepted.  He was accepted after his death in a lot of places.  But during his life there were always those, "Oh, we don't know if we want to get associated with him."  And I think that was the attitude with some folks.  So, no one really, you know, did anything big. Yeah, you knew what he did, and you knew that he was assassinated, but we've got to move on.
Speaker 1: Now, was his, was his--
Speaker 2: And see, things after that started getting--I don't want to say more violent. But then you had H. Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin], Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture].  You had those movements, and then everybody on campus, black power.  You know, the pick in the back pocket that had the fist on it.  We all had afros that came out to here.  We were making a statement.  There are probably pictures in The Tampa Tribune of me wearing a dashiki before people wore dashikis, because my daddy [Jose Grinan] was a tailor, and he made them.  I was doing a voter registration thing in front of the courthouse.  I had forgotten about that totally.  But my mother [Sylvia Grillo Grinan] was the one who I went with to do these things.  She integrated schools in the State of Florida.
Speaker 1: Now, was--
Speaker 2: She was the first person to be invited to be a part of the League of Women Voters.  She went to a lot--she ran for office.  She would take me to a lot of these churches where she was trying to get votes.  And everyone was saying, "It's so nice to have you people here."  And I'm like, "Why are they saying you people, mama?"  "Well, we're different, we're different from them."
Speaker 1: And did she work with CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] or the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: --or any of those organizations?
Speaker 2: Well, she was a member of the Urban League [National Urban League] and the NAACP.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she did a lot of stuff on her own with the help of Panchito [Grinan's godfather, Francisco A. Rodriguez], the attorney.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But I can remember some times when (laughter)--typical old Latino way of campaigning.  You got two loudspeakers on top of the car (laughter), you know, connected to a luggage rack.  You have signs on the side of the car and signs up top.  While my mother was driving, I'm, "Vote para Sylvia Grinan School Board District Cinco."  And then we'd go to the hood, "Please vote for Sylvia Grinan, District 5 [Hillsborough County Public Schools District 5]."  I mean it was, it was--so I grew up in a semi-political atmosphere.  And yeah, it was because of my mother, she was very active.  She was one who wanted to bring people together, and I think she succeeded in that to a certain extent, because people recognized her for what she did; she helped people.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in Florida, though, they don't talk about a lot of the tough state to change.
Speaker 2: Well, Florida was considered the vacation land.  "Y'all ain't got no races down there, y'all ain't part of the South."  Hey, Miami [Florida] is the only place where you have to be north--or you have to go north to be in the South.
Story_ID: 664859
Speaker 1: All right.  So, 1969, on the verge of graduation, you're--did you get good counseling about where to go to school from Plant City High School [sic.]? Plant High School [Henry B. Plant High School, Tampa, Florida], rather (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was just going to go to--excuse me--after Plant, I was just going to go to the University of South Florida, which was, you know, in the northern part of Tampa [Florida].  And that was no problem.  The day I graduated from high school, I basically moved out of the house and told my parents [Sylvia Grillo Grinan and Jose Grinan], "Okay, thank you."
Speaker 1: Well, where did you go?
Speaker 2: The first night was a motel (laughter).  And then I went out on campus.
Speaker 1: Did you have a job or anything?
Speaker 2: Well, I started working at a, it was a Grand Way department store.  And I moved into an apartment with two white guys, one who was a brother to a lady I had dated in high school, or we went on a couple of outings.  And then the other was just someone who needed a place to stay.  So, we split the rent.  It was $155, and we paid fifty-five dollars each, basically, and that took care of everything.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And so, I could go to school since it was right down the street from the school, and then go to work.
Story_ID: 664860
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  So, and you started going to the University of South Florida [Tampa, Florida]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Majored in speech and theater back then.
Speaker 1: All right.  And were there any--so you were there how long before you got drafted?
Speaker 2: Just a year, because the draft notice came, if I'm not mistaken, in November or December of 1970.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was that like?
Speaker 2: No, I'm sorry, '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Did you have a good experience there?
Speaker 2: In the [U.S.] military?
Speaker 1: No, at the University of South Florida.
Speaker 2: University of South Florida?  I think so, I think so.  But it was, you have to think in terms of the time.  Sixty-nine [1969], '70 [1970], Afros, everyone trying to do black power.  We had a group called Uhuru sasa, which means freedom now.  Playing drums--we were imitating The Last Poets and Gil Scott-Heron.  Those were the folks that we idolized on campus at the time.  And we just hung out.  There were a lot of things that distracted us during that period of time.  Some of my friends got involved in drugs.  Some of them are no longer here.  I don't know whether it was because of those days, or what.  But I do know that they're no longer here.  But things also--folks who were crazy in a way that you had never seen, went to some guy's dorm room, and he had irons upside down braced with beakers on top of them.  I'm like, "What the hell are you doing?"  "Oh, I'm making mescaline."  "You're making what?"  But they were doing it in their bedroom, in their dorm rooms, and then selling it on campus.  I was like, "You're making this stuff here?"  "Yeah, I'm a chemistry major."  "Oh, okay."  So, there were a lot of things going on during that time.  Acid, everybody was on acid out there.  And I'm like, "What is this?"  I can remember the demonstration that followed the Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] shootings, because every college in the country had a demonstration.
Speaker 1: Right.  This is what, May of 1970?
Speaker 2: I think so, somewhere around there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, around May of 1970.  I don't know the exact date was.
Speaker 2: But there was a big march in Washington [D.C.].  And I was one of those who hitched a ride and went up to D.C. sleeping in front of the Washington Monument, taking a bath at Union Station.  You know, we got some dishwashing liquid and poured in there, and we just got in with our clothes--crazy.  And then when you went back out to confront the police with your flowers (laughter) and their guns--.  I just happened to have some relatives in D.C.  And one was in charge of--some of those folks who were with shields and weapons.  And he came up to me and said, "Get your behind out of here.  You go to my mama's house now."  "Why are you telling me that?"  "Go to my mama's house now."  "Okay."  I did, and some of the folks I came with from Florida were in the hospital, because there was a confrontation between police and them.  So, I'm glad Nelson [ph.] told me to do that, because I probably would have been one of those who was a hothead, talking back, doing what I wasn't supposed to do at the time.  And I know I probably would have gotten hurt.
Story_ID: 664861
Speaker 1: Okay.  But then you were eventually drafted, because you were in school kind of off and on, right?
Speaker 2: Back then if you don't have a con- if you didn't have a continuous record of being in school, your classification, [U.S.] military classification, could change.  So, initially I was 2-S, which was student deferment.  But I had to pay rent, so I had to work.  I mean there were times when you'd be out in front of University Center [University Center Drive, Tampa, Florida], "Hey, you got a quarter?"  And you'd end up with thirty, forty dollars.  But then there were days when that wouldn't happen.  So, I got a job sweeping floors.  And then they put me on the floor as a salesman in the hardware department.  And I wasn't making great money, but it was enough for me to pay my rent and buy some food--
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and continue going to school [at the University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida].
Story_ID: 664862
Speaker 1: During these days, was your voice an asset?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No--didn't use it for anything. I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you consciously try to use it for--?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean there were a couple of productions at the University of South Florida [Tampa, Florida] that I was involved in.  But that was it.  I didn't really do any public speaking, or anything of that sort.  And that was where I saw the announcement for 'The Daredevil' (laughter).  I was going to make seventy-five dollars a day.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a movie produced by George Montgomery?
Speaker 2: I don't know whether it was produced by George Montgomery or by Gordon Solie.  And Gordon Solie is the guy who made wrestling what it is in Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He owned the Sportatorium [Tampa, Florida], which every Saturday morning you could go up there and get in for like fifty cents, and watch Tojo Yamamoto and Taro Miyake and Lou Thesz, and all of these old, old, wrestlers.  Because Jack Brisco, you know, folks like that, they were always there.  You know, and on a Saturday morning if you didn't go to the Carver Theater [Tampa, Florida] or the Lincoln Theatre [Tampa, Florida] with six Nehi bottle caps (laughter)--.  And you could sit there all day with one of those Charm lollipops [Charms Blow Pops] that was about this big (demonstrates)--doing that all day--watching Mantan Moreland and everything else that was on that screen.  You just had to be outside when your parents were out there to pick you up.  So, I mean that was, you either went to wrestling or you went to the movies on Saturday mornings.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I preferred wrestling at the time, so I would go to a lot of wrestling matches.  And then they also had wrestling on Tuesday nights.  So, I would ask either my scout master or my dad [Jose Grinan] to, "Let's go to wrestling tonight." "No, you got to go to school in the morning."  "Oh, okay."
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is interesting.  I never--okay--
Speaker 2: But Gordon Solie, he owned Golden--I think it was Golden Gate Speedway [Tampa, Florida], where they shot the movie.  He owned the racetrack; he owned the Sportatorium with the wrestlers.  I knew his son because he was one year behind me at Jesuit [Jesuit High School, Tampa, Florida].  And he was Gordon Solie, Jr. [Gordon Solie]
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, the movie was about a stock car--
Speaker 2: It was stock car races, and Montgomery was trying to make a comeback, so to speak.  He had been a driver, I think had a wreck.  That was the set up premise.  He had been a driver before, something had happened, he was out of racing for a while.  And this was going to be his comeback race.  And I was in my first race, I was a character who was in my first race.  I was a horrible actor back then.  I mean when you see the scenes, it's like, "Arghh." (Laughter) But they were paying seventy-five dollars a day.  For someone who is getting--what is it?  I think the minimum wage back then was like $2.65.  It may have been three and a quarter [$3.25], but I know it wasn't much.  And the chance to do seventy-five dollars a day, "Yes, I'm game."  And there were a whole bunch of us who came out, and they picked me.  So, it was like, "Okay, thank you very much."  But Gordon Solie I think owned the track, and I think he may have produced the movie.  And the premise, George Montgomery coming back into the racing field.  And I was in my first race.  I think I was Ray Butler.
Speaker 1: Ray Butler?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that was the name.  And Sidney Poitier's cousin [Cyril Poitier] was one of the actors in the movie.  And do you remember a commercial, Cold Bear Wine?  It had a young lady in white hot pants.
Speaker 1: Cold Bear Wine?
Speaker 2: And she had a, and it was Cold Bear Wine.  She was the character who was my sister, who screamed when my car crashed (laughter).  So it was, it was, it was fun; it was interesting.  But it was really one of those movies you see at 3 o'clock in the morning when you're half awake.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'The Dare Devil'--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --starring George Montgomery.
Speaker 2: Yes, not, not, not 'The Dare Devil' that most people are thinking about.
Speaker 1: Not the comic book action hero (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --but the, but the stock car driver.
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.
Story_ID: 664863
Speaker 1: All right.  So, but, the, the--so you got drafted, though, in nineteen seventy--
Speaker 2: It was '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Seventy-one [1971], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because I went in April of '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: All right.  So, so, you were basically drafted into the [U.S.] Army.  Did you, you never had any ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So, you went right in as an enlisted man?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean eventually I was accepted into OCS, Officer Candidate School.  But with three months left in the [U.S.] military, I went to my commanding officer: "I thank you so very much for all of your support and all of the things that you've done to help get me into Officer Candidate School.  But I have to tell you, I'm going to ETS."  And that's expired time in the service. Excuse me, this is my daughter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERUPTION)
Speaker 2: All right.  So, you're in the Army, but, and you were declined officer's candidate school.  Had they chosen you as an officer's candidate, it's a good chance in those days you might have been sent to Vietnam.
Speaker 1: No.  Because Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] had started to deescalate when I was, when I graduated from my AIT training, Advanced Individual Training.  So, I don't think they were sending anybody over there.
Speaker 2: So, this is--
Speaker 1: They were trying to find a way to bring people back.
Speaker 2: This is--
Speaker 1: That was in '72 [1972].
Speaker 2: Seventy--
Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972] when--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --Nixon was deescalating.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I was in--because I was in the last group of draftees ever drafted in this country.  And they were doing the lottery back then and they were going from 001 to 180, which is basically half a year.  My number was four (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it frightened me for a while.  And this is probably the first time I'm going to say this publicly.  Because my number was four, and because I was not in line with the Vietnam War back then, I went to D.C. [Washington, D.C.], and I figured they're going to look for one black person in a city that's 85 percent black.  Good luck in finding me.  But I realized that the only jobs I could get were janitor, dishwasher, busboy--and that was not me.  I really quit one job as a waiter, or busboy, because of some young lady who spoke to me in the wrong way.  And I just politely put the food in her lap and walked away.  So, then I started thinking about the military.  I went to a, I was about to join the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps].  And had they taken a little longer time, I might have joined them.  But I'm there at six o'clock in the morning.  And you follow this yellow line all the way from one room, to another room, to another room, to another room, to another room--where you have test here, you have an examination over here, "Our people are looking at you over here."  And then when you get to the final room, about 12:30 in the afternoon, everybody's in there.  "Now, raise your right hand."  It's like, "No, no, no, no, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait; just a minute.  This was not supposed to be induction, this was supposed to be informative."  So, I left there and I just realized, you know, I may as well go back down to Florida and go in where I was supposed to go in.  So, that's what I did.  I think I stayed up in, in D.C. for a couple months.
Speaker 2: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then it was just not worth it, because I couldn't find a job, I couldn't do anything.
Story_ID: 664864
Speaker 1: Now, in the [U.S.] Army, though--from what I have here, you got involved in film production?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, tell us how that happened, and what you did.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Initially, I was supposed to be a camera equipment repairman.  I want to say that was 41 Ekco.  I don't get along with ready kilowatt very well--ready kilowatt, meaning electricity.  They had a power pack that you used in jungle warfare that basically recharged itself. But it had a flash that you could use with your 4 x 5 camera, or any other camera, because it was very bright.  It had 950 volts--475 in one capacitor, 475 in another capacitor.  And when you take the top off, you should hear a (makes sound) which discharges the capacitor, so you can work in them and not worry about getting shocked.  Every day they would put in a different bug, and you had to find it.  One day my bug was--you're going to hear the sound, but 950 volts will still be there.  So, I went probing, and literally got thrown up against the wall.  And all I could say is, "With all due respect, sergeant, this class can go straight to hell."  And he said, "Okay, you go straight to the kitchen."  So, I was literally peeling potatoes by hand, even though they had a potato peeler.  And they were going to send me to 11 Bravo, which is infantry at Fort Benning, Georgia.  Very despondent at the time.  I was at, where was it, Fort Monmouth, New Jersey.  And Sergeant Fossil [ph.], a black GI who had just come from Italy came out, saw me out on the step drinking a bottle of wine, and said, "What's wrong?"  "Oh, well, I'm getting ready to go to 11 Bravo.  Right now, they got me doing KP, kitchen duty."  And we started talking, and after the conversation he said, "You don't need to go to infantry, you need to do something else.  I have been accepted into a motion picture photography class, and they have another one starting very soon.  Would you mind if I throw your name out?"  "No, not at all."  He did more than throw my name out, he spoke on my behalf (pause) and got me out of infantry, and got me in this photography class.
Story_ID: 664865
Speaker 1: Now, all I think I knew at the time was Polaroid (gesture) (makes sound) you remember that?  That's what I thought I could do, the only thing I could do.  But then they give you a camera, and they give you a hundred feet of film every morning.  And they want you to come back with a story with no sound, no words.  And you can do that: long shot, medium shot, close up, cutaway; long shot, medium shot, close up, cutaway; long shot, medium shot, close up, cutaway.  If you had that sequence of pictures, an editor will love you.  Just hold them for seven seconds.  So, we would do that every day, and we would critique all of our stuff.  You shoot your stuff, you process it.  And then you sit back in a theater with all of your peers, all the other soldiers, and you critique, and you get laughed at (laughter).  But then if you want to improve, you improve.  I had an opportunity after the class, because apparently I excelled in it, and didn't know I was going to do that.  I was offered an interview by [U.S.] Secret Service, offered a position on Air Force One, as one of the photographers.  Again, "With all due respect, sir, I don't really agree with many of the things that President Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] agrees with.  So, I prefer not."  "Okay, you go to White Sands Missile Range [New Mexico]," which is out in the middle of the desert, but it was a good place to learn how to shoot.  We did not just what you would consider normal cinematography, we also did high speed documentation cinematography, four hundred frames per second.  We had one camera that had a motor on the shutter. And it was a cylindrical shutter that had three openings.  You had a motor on the film, a motor on the shutter.  Both are going (makes sound) and you've gone through a hundred feet of film (laughter) just that quick.  You process it, you have to cut out all of the flash frames.  And then everything that you shot, instead of it being at normal motion, its slow motion.  That's how they were able to determine hit distance, "Okay, we need to correct that three degrees."  Missed distance, "Oh, we have to correct this over here."  That's how they would calibrate it.  The first 3D [three dimensional] images that you saw on computers, those were done at White Sands Missile Range.  Because we had to set up cameras--twelve o'clock, three o'clock, nine o'clock, six o'clock--and sometimes have regular cinematography cameras to shoot, in addition to that.  All of the cameras that were on the circumference were all electric.  Well, I shouldn't say electric, they all had an electric tone that put a line on all of the film.  So, when all of the film is fed into a computer, those lines align up.  This camera from three o'clock lines up with this camera from six o'clock, this camera lines up from nine o'clock, and then it creates that image from each one.  And when a projectile goes through--because you always had tracer rounds that you'll see--that's how they determine, "Well, we need to correct this.  We need to raise it a little bit or lower it a little bit, you know, or adjust it."  I did a lot of that, wish I had worked in the animation room.  That's where you have a lot of civilians who are drawing, because everything was done by gels back then.  You did the drawing, you shot three frames, next one; three frames, next one; three frames, next one.  And the table was probably twelve, fifteen feet long.  And the camera was suspended, looking down.  The guys who worked there got jobs at Disney [The Walt Disney Company] (laughter).  That's why I wanted to do that.  But they said, "No, you do this."  And it taught me how to shoot film.  And that's how I got into the business I'm in right now.  I was a shooter, making other people look good.  Then, once one person didn't show up for work, they asked me to use my voice.  I did that, and literally the rest is history.
Story_ID: 664866
Speaker 1: Had--did you consider your voice an asset before you, they asked you about it?  Or had you forgotten about it (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I basically had forgotten about it.  When I got the job, as I said, I was a photographer.  But I also recovered the silver from the drain.  And they're like, "You do that, too?"  I'm like, "Well, we had to do it on paste, why not do it here?"  So, they, I guess they saw something in me that they didn't see in somebody else that they had hired, because I got their money from the drain. (Laughter) It was pure silver, you know.  It was like, "You got a bucket of this stuff?"  "Yeah, and it's still more down there, too."  And I think back then silver was three dollars an ounce.  (Laughter) Do you know what a bucket full of silver would have--?
Speaker 1: So, the silver nitrate--
Speaker 2: So, they enjoyed me.  And that was where I learned how to use a displacement recorder.  And only people who do film know about a displacement recorder.  So, you don't have lip flap.  You take the sound back twenty-four frames on this one particular machine.  And then when you play it on the air, there is no lip flap, they just talk.  So, I learned how to use that.  I was--I loaded the film, shot the film, processed the film, ended the film, and recovered the silver.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you--
Speaker 2: So, my voice was not anywhere in the picture.  And then when I did start using my voice, I had already been doing Friday night football games--climbing the tower and shooting high school football games.  I didn't have any weekends of my own, but these were things I, I enjoyed doing.  I didn't know it was going to be what I would do for the rest of my life.
Story_ID: 664867
Speaker 1: Now this is--now you were--you did this, you were in the [U.S. military] service until '75 [1975].  Is that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --correct, okay.
Speaker 2: April of '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: All right.  And you're out in White Sands--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --at the (unclear)--
Speaker 2: White Sands Missile Range [New Mexico], then to the Air Defense Board [U.S. Army Air Defense Board], which was physically located on Fort Bliss [Texas], but it did not take orders from Fort Bliss.  It took orders from Army Materiel Command [U.S. Army Materiel Command], which is basically test and evaluation units.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what kind of work did you do there?
Speaker 2: Oh, that, that was cinematography--same thing, same thing, only it was more still.  I worked with the people who photographed the first atomic bomb.  Yeah, they showed me pictures, and they're out there and everything is just flat and white.  Conrad (Unclear) [ph.], I will remember that name, short stocky guy; but good at what he did.  Plus, do you know how hot it gets in El Paso [Texas]?
Speaker 1: How hot it gets--
Speaker 2: How hot--
Speaker 1: How hot it gets?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  It gets to be like 110.  The Air Defense Board where I worked, it was a nice cool fifty degrees every day, because it was a photographic lab (laughter).  You know, you have to have the chemicals at a particular temperature.  So, "Hm, do I want to be out in 110, or do I want to be in here at fifty?  I think fifty will be better for me right now."  So, it was--it--I did it out of convenience for myself.  I didn't want to be out in the sun, even though we had to go there quite a bit.  But I didn't mind being in the building.  I didn't mind, you know, working in the lab.  I didn't mind making prints.  And sometimes we had to do five thousand prints overnight.  And then they would be distributed to all of the AMC commands, Fort Meade, Maryland [Fort George G. Meade, Maryland], someplace in Oklahoma, Fort Sill, Oklahoma, and a couple of other places, so the generals could take a look at the test that we photographed the day before.  And then sometimes we had to do the exact same thing the next night, and we'd get tired of looking at the same thing (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, when you were coming out in '75 [1975], what was the plan?  Or, was, what was your plan?
Speaker 2: I had no plan.  There was a lady who I was dating, and I was just going to stay with her and then figure out what I was going to do.
Speaker 1: So, this is in?
Speaker 2: El Paso.
Speaker 1: El Paso, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because I was at Fort Bliss.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  El Paso is right on the Rio Grande, right, right on the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --on Mexico, so.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, major border crossing.
Story_ID: 664868
Speaker 1: So in '78 [1978] [sic. 1975] you come out.  And now in '75 [1975], you're hired by KTSM?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: AM, FM [KTSM Radio], TV [KTSM-TV]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in El Paso [Texas].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, how did that come about?
Speaker 2: I think they put an ad in the paper that they needed a photographer and someone who knew about processing film.  So, I went and I applied for it.  The news director at the time was Jeff Gates.  He tested me on, "What do you know about the processing process?" "Well, da, da, da, da, da, da.  This is what--you know, you load here, and it, you know, goes through everything and, you know, then you get the reel in the back, and then we go edit it."  He was impressed, so he hired me as a photographer.  And what I was doing was making the other, the other reporter, because Jeff also reported, look good.  And I was utilizing the skills that the [U.S.] military had taught me.  "Long shot, medium shot, close up, cutaway."  It worked great in meetings, at city council, county commission, anything.  And I had fun doing it.  Then one day a reporter--the reporter I used to make good--look good, didn't show up for work.  He, he liked tequila (laughter).  So, he didn't come to work one day.  And I knew he was probably hung over like I don't know what.  But Jeff said, "Okay, it's on you today."  "Excuse me?"  "It's on you, Ernie's [ph.] not here.  So you're going to have to shoot it, you're going to have to report on it, you've got to take some notes.  And you're going to have to come back and process the film and edit all of the film, you know, and cut the track."  "You sure?"  He said, "Yeah."  I did it that day, and he asked me the next day, "Do you think you can do that again?"  I said, "Well, yeah."  He said, "Okay, well, this is your camera.  Ernie--you're shooting your own stuff from now on."  So, now he had two reporters (laughter) instead of just one.  And I'm happy, I'm making a hundred and fifty dollars a week, ooh.  And that was the most I'd ever made, because my salary in the military was two hundred and thirty-two dollars a month as an E-5 back then, with three years in.  And they're going to pay me a hundred and fifty dollars a week?  Come on, yes, I'll take it.  So, that's what I did.  And I'm glad I did, because I learned so much from people in that newsroom.  A guy by the name of Howard Fox, who I had a lot of disagreements with because he was a Mormon--taught me how to listen to four radios, because there were speakers in each corner of the room.  And when a particular thing is said, "Okay, you call, call the fire department, call the police department, call the ambulance service." Because you're listening to scanners.  He taught me that.  He also taught me how to do radio.
Story_ID: 664869
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you, you had a mentor there in El Paso [Texas] that was, that was teaching you how to listen for the wire services on the--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) radio? Well whatever.
Speaker 2: --not wire services.  You know, police, ambulance, fire, those, those are all on scanners.
Speaker 1: Scanners, right.
Speaker 2: And we had speakers in every corner.  And he was good at hearing something and then calling the agency.  "Look here, we have this story," da, da, da, da, da da.  He'd type it out and then when he had his radio broadcast he would do it.  And I was like, "Is that how it's done?"  "Yeah."  So, he taught me how to do all of this and be in the studio.  And if you can't speak, there's a cough button that you would press so you could--(cough), and no one would hear it, and then you'd just let it go and continue on--little things like that.  But he was a good writer, had a very good voice.  But he and I would always argue about why black folks weren't in the Mormon church [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints] as ministers (laughter).
Speaker 1: What was his position?
Speaker 2: He said he just follows the tenets of the church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, he was big on a lot of things that they did. Sometimes he would bring in bushels and bushels of apples.  I'm like, "Where did you get all this?"  "Well, we picked all of these things over the weekend.  The entire congregation went up to such and such a place and we picked all of these apples.  Some will go to the market, some--and these are the ones I brought home.  And I figured I'd just bring them into work."  "Okay, I'll take some."
Speaker 1: Well, those were the days when the Mormons officially didn't believe that black people had souls, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.  But I think I may have changed his attitude, or his mind, about a lot of things.  Because he became a friend, so to speak.  I mean we didn't go out and have dinner, or anything like that.  But at work: "Jose [HistoryMaker Jose Grinan], this is what is happening today.  This is what you might want to check on.  You can pick up the broadcast after eleven o'clock if you're here.  If not, I'll just go ahead and take care of it."  And he did not mind.  But then he--you have to think in terms of the station itself, KTSM [KTSM-TV] in El Paso.  It was AM, FM [KTSM Radio, El Paso, Texas], and television.  FM was more of your easy listening music back then.  And AM was NIS, the News and Information Service at NBC--started a long, long, time ago.  And all of the news was on a reel, so to speak.  You know, at such and such a time you had business; at such and such a time you had music; at such and such a time, you go local.  And it was twenty-four hours.  So, Howard [Howard Fox] was always on the air.  And when I was there, "Want to do it?"  "Yeah, why not."  And then I'd do it, and he's like, "Okay, we'll work on something."  After a couple of weeks doing that, they made me the Saturday morning newsman.  So, I did football games at night (laughter), until about 11, 11:30.  And I would go to the station and basically sleep either in the newsroom or in the lobby.  And then at four o'clock, I'm giving the news.  And--
Speaker 1: So, is this on the radio, or--?
Speaker 2: Yes, this was on the radio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And a few months after that, I started it for television.  But the station, to me, was one of the most unique in the country.  It had a rotunda.  And if you know anything about sound--if you're in the middle of a rotunda and you say something, you hear it all around you.  So, what I would do is get my scripts and sit on the floor under the rotunda and say it out loud to see what it sounded like.  So, that's how I kind of perfected just pacing and talking and using the voice.  It was, it was very strange.  The first day I went to the station to go talk to Jeff [Jeff Gates] to see about the job, I walked in.  And they apparently tell the receptionist to greet you when in you walk in the door, because the door is about twenty-five, thirty feet away.  But as you're walking, they're talking to you, so you really respond.  But if you're under the rotunda, you kind of pause for a second, because you're hearing yourself.  But I liked sitting on the floor when no one was around, reading out loud.  It's an unorthodox way of doing stuff, but I think it worked for me.
Story_ID: 664870
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, so, you're developing your, your chops I guess as an announcer, as they say.
Speaker 2: Well, when, when you have folks who are encouraging you, they're supporting you, and they see something in you that you don't even see--yeah, okay, I'll play along, I'll play along.  And I did not know that it would become something that I would do for the rest of my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I enjoyed helping people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, the same year that you join--no, so you're there from '75 [1975], I guess, to '78 [1978]?  Is that--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: For three years.  And what happened?  Now, you went to Miami [Florida], right?
Speaker 2: Well, first to Tampa [Florida].
Speaker 1: Then you go--
Speaker 2: First to Tampa.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You came back to Tampa--
Speaker 2: See, I stayed--when I said I like to help people--that was why I stayed in El Paso [Texas] for a while, still working [at KTSM Radio and KTSM-TV].  Because there was a black deputy marshal who had come to El Paso.  Now, he didn't look totally black, he looked like he could have been Mexican, or he could have been someone from the Middle East.  And he had a weapon on him at all times, because he was a marshal.  He was in a bar doing his undercover work, and police came in and pistol whipped him and took him to jail.  Now, there were only a couple of people in El Paso who knew that he was in town as a deputy marshal and he'd been doing some undercover work.  The police officers who arrested him were not among those who knew.  But when they took him to booking, either a sergeant or a lieutenant walked by and said, "I think you need to find a nice way to let him go."  But--his name was Frank Percy.  The thing is, after I saw him in federal court--I was in the courthouse, and I saw a man who was a serious law enforcement officer turn in his badge and his gun after being ordered to by a federal judge.  His wife was there with him, and he walked out very despondent.  I introduced myself to him, and he told me what was going on and what had happened.  I said, "Hey, that's not fair."  (Laughter) So, from El Paso, I started doing these stories on Frank Percy.  All of a sudden, the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] out of Washington [D.C.] was responding to this little reporter in El Paso.  And I'm like, okay, I must be on to something.  So, I just kept up with Frank Percy and his wife, who was Puerto Rican.  So, we got along very well.  And the day he got his job back was the day I told his wife, "Do me a favor.  Make me a big pot of Cuban coffee, because I'm on the road tonight."  And I was gone, I left.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And from there, I eventually went to Florida and started working at WLCY in Tampa.  I was working at a country and western radio station from six until one in the morning, driving to Tampa from St. Petersburg [Florida], and then being at work at WLCY-TV at nine o'clock in the morning.  And the guy who was working the radio shift before me would prepare my newscast for six p.m. for me.  I'd do whatever I had to do for the five o'clock news--get in my car and go to the radio station and be on the air at the radio station 'til one o'clock in the morning.  That was too much after two and a half months, three months.  I just couldn't do it anymore, so I decided that TV was going to be where I was going to go.
Story_ID: 664871
Speaker 1: So you end in Miami's WC (simultaneous--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) WCKT [WCKT-TV; WSVN-TV, Miami, Florida].
Speaker 1: WCKT.
Speaker 2: After Tampa [Florida], I went to, to Miami [Florida], yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, I mean was it easy to get this job, or did you have to know somebody there, or what was it?
Speaker 2: In, in Miami?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I went door to door.  I knocked on doors, literally, had my videotapes with me.  Got in to see the folks at the ABC affiliate, got in to see the folks at the CBS affiliate.  And when I got to the NBC affiliate, they looked at my tape and said, "When do you want to start?"  "When do I want to what?"  So, then I went back to Tampa and turned in my resignation [to WLCY-TV] and started work in Miami, I think about two weeks later, three weeks later, something like that.
Story_ID: 664872
Speaker 1: So what's going on in Miami [Florida] in '78 [1978]?
Speaker 2: What was going on in Miami in '78 [1978]?  The repatriation of Cubans.  Thousands of Cubans were returning to the U.S. because they either had dual citizenship or they were considered--yeah, I guess it was just dual citizenship.  Or, their father was American, and they were allowed to come.  And the thing is, when you see people who hadn't seen their relatives in twenty years--and they're all waiting out on the tarmac, thousands of people.  And then somebody gets off a plane and walks--and you see a crowd--just family--crowds surrounding them, hugging, kissing, tears--some of the most emotional moments as a reporter.  It was an amazing thing.  And then came Mariel [Mariel boatlift] in 1980, which was totally different from everything else that I had ever done.  Because they created tent cities under freeways, and that's where they kept some of these people, in Miami proper.
Story_ID: 664873
Speaker 1: Yeah the McDuffie riots of 1980 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In 1980.
Speaker 1: So, let's talk about that, I guess.  That's--so, you're on--just for the record--now, you're covering--what's your schedule at WCKT [WCKT-TV; WSVN-TV, Miami, Florida]?
Speaker 2: WCKT?  I worked three days during the week, and I was the weekend anchor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I did the six and eleven on Saturday and Sunday night.  And I'm trying to think whether it was a Saturday or a Sunday.  I can remember what happened. (Laughter) As soon as the verdict came down, I knew what was going to happen in Miami [Florida].  I just--I felt it, I knew it.  We had a white photographer, "Yeah, yeah, we're getting ready to go down--."  "No."  "I don't work for you."  "Let me make sense.  You go to Liberty City [Miami, Florida], you're a dead man.  You go down to the Overtown [Miami, Florida] police station and the metro Dade police [Miami-Dade Police Department], and you hang out there.  Let R.C. Lee and me go into the hood."  (Laughter)  R.C., very jovial, very happy, husky guy.  We drove--everything was blocked off.  But--
Speaker 1: Before, just, let me just ask.  What, what happened?  What was the situation that precipitated this?
Speaker 2: What precipitated the violence in Miami is that four hundred miles away in Tampa, Florida four police officers--who admitted to killing McDuffie [Arthur McDuffie] and throwing his keys on the roof of the building and making sure that evidence was scattered about so nobody could find it--they were acquitted.  And the people in Miami, they were angry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it started out with people in Liberty City, because the freeway runs through Liberty City.  So, you have hood on one side, and hood on the other.  So, what they were doing was getting tires, throwing the tires to the median, so the car has to come off to the side.  And as soon as the car came off to the side, a brick came through the window.  Then police started cordoning off the area.  R.C. Lee and I, I knew the projects.  So, we went, we went through the clotheslines in the back.  And when we got down into the area, R.C. said, "Don't be a super nigger today."  I said, "What do you mean?"  "Don't you be a super nigger today."  So, we get out of the vehicle, we're surrounded by folks who are really ticked off.  "You represent the white man."  "No, no, no, no, no, we're here to get your story."  I made one mistake.  A sparrow flew over, and I went like this (gesture). "Aw, he scared."  Then R.C. says, "We got to get to the van real quick."  A white couple got lost, and came through that neighborhood.  And all of the anger was at them.  R.C. Lee said, "Let's get the hell out of here."  I got in the van, we pulled off and sped away.  When we got back to the station, got out of the vehicle--and all I could do was look at a hole that was behind where I was sitting, a bullet hole.  That's when your knees give out, (laughter) and you fall to the ground. Because you're in a situation that you didn't know what was what.  And I didn't know somebody had shot at me until we stopped the van.  And that was when I knew--I was just scared after that.
Speaker 1: You know, during this time period, 1980, almost through--well, through the '80s [1980s], you know, there are like about four?
Speaker 2: There were several.  I left--
Speaker 1: The McDuffie riot in--
Speaker 2: I left in '82 [1982] to go to, I think the Satellite News Channel, and stayed up there for a couple of years.  Even though we were only on the air for a year and a half, I still had a contract that completed a two year cycle, and after that ended up in Miami again.  And I think during the time that I was gone, they did have a riot, and then they had several others.  But I had done enough time in Miami, so I was trying to find someplace else to go.
Story_ID: 664874
Speaker 1: I did a few more years in Miami [Florida], this time at the, the CBS affiliate, which changed over to an NBC owned and operated station.
Speaker 2: Now that's the--
Speaker 1: That was WTVJ [WTVJ-TV, Miami, Florida], which changed over.  And then, a syndicated program out of New York [New York].  And the reason I went was because of the people I'd be working with.  Reese Schonfeld, Ted Kavanau--these are the folks who--no, that's 'Crimewatch Tonight.' Satellite News Channel was--the guy who started ABC's morning news ['Good Morning America'], Tom Capra, Frank Capra's son, David Horowitz, 'CBS Evening News' producer, Adam Clayton Powell III, the news director.  And I'm trying to think who else.  It was a great operation, had wonderful people, great writers.  And it was the first satellite, actual satellite, news channel.  We beat CNN on a lot of stories, because we were twenty-four hours live.  And back then CNN was half hour on, half hour off; half hour on, half hour off.  So, during the half hour that they were repeating that first half hour, we would break stories, and that gave us the advantage.  But something happened, and I found out on 'Entertainment Tonight,' which was a new program that year, I found out on 'Entertainment Tonight' that I was losing my job.  I was like, "Excuse me?  Tom, what's going on?"  "It'll be okay, Jose [HistoryMaker Jose Grinan].  Don't worry about it, don't worry about it."  "Tom, 'Entertainment Tonight'--."  "It's a new program, they don't have any credibility."  "Yes, okay."  So, about ten days later, it folded.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then I headed back to Florida.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, you went to Miami.  Satellite News Channel was, was, was located in--
Speaker 1: Stamford, Connecticut.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Stamford, Connecticut, okay.
Story_ID: 664875
Speaker 1: So, back in Miami [Florida] was it--when you got back in '84 [1984], was it, was it easy to get another job in Miami?
Speaker 2: I'm not going to say it was easy.  I think the news director at the CBS station knew I had worked there before, so I knew pretty much the town.  Those in the Cuban community, which was primarily my beat, they knew me, you know.  Some called me a Communist sympathizer.  And it's like, "Okay, I don't care what you call me, just don't hurt me."  The Cuban community accepted me, and the black community there accepted me.  So, I was, I guess I was an advantage for the station.  So, it worked.  And then after that came 'Crimewatch Tonight,' which was Orion [Orion Pictures Corporation] television pictures, venturing into what was almost reality TV back then, but it wasn't quite.  What 'Crimewatch Tonight' did was revisit old crimes, and try and do them in a different way than they were reported initially.  And it worked.
Speaker 1: Now, who broadcast 'Crimewatch Tonight?'  That was--
Speaker 2: It was--
Speaker 1: It was--
Speaker 2: It was nationwide.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and it was on--
Speaker 2: I don't know what--because it was one of those programs that stations had to buy.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, it was a syndicated show.
Speaker 2: But see, we lost in New York [New York] because they put us up against nightly news.  You don't do that in New York City, unless you (laughter) have a major, major program that's going to get everybody's interest.  But that was not 'Crimewatch Tonight.'  And I knew--you go up against the news in New York, you ain't going to win.  And we didn't--
Speaker 1: So this is, what year is 'Crimewatch Tonight'?
Speaker 2: I want to say 'Crimewatch Tonight' was '90 [1990], '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It may have been '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I stayed at TVJ [WTVJ-TV, Miami, Florida] another four years, if I'm not mistaken.
Story_ID: 664876
Speaker 1: Were you like--okay, so you were in Dallas [Texas] when you did crime- 'Crimewatch Tonight'?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, so. I got kind of mixed up on here.
Speaker 2: After 'Crimewatch Tonight'--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --went down to Florida and really had no job for a while.  So, I started a little PR company [public relations] to do banquets, meetings, and things of that sort; it paid my child support.  My sister was letting me stay with her, so I didn't have to pay rent.  And I would give her something.
Speaker 1: How long had you been married, and how did you meet your wife?
Speaker 2: Well, that was wife number two.  Wife number two, I met at the station, WCKT [WCKT-TV; WSVN-TV, Miami, Florida].  She was working up in engineering.  And one day I saw her walk into the station when I was going out.  And I turned around, "Excuse me, what is your name?"  I mean I was head over heels for this woman.  But that only lasted what, seven years.
Speaker 1: Well, that's not--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was, we started having differences in religion and things like that.  And it's like, okay, I'm sorry, I am not going to quit my job because you want me to go door to door.  I'm not going to do that.  So, if these folks come into my house again, I'm gone.
Speaker 1: So, was she a Jehovah's Witness?
Speaker 2: She wasn't at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she was being converted by some South African Jehovah's Witnesses.  Now, this was during the time when there was still apartheid.  And I was feeling, "Sweetie, this is my house.  I don't want South Africans, white South Africans, in my house.  I don't care if they're Jehovah's Witnesses, I don't want them in my house.  And the day you go door to door, I'm walking out the front door."  So, she went door to door with them, and I packed up and left.  And that was in 19--I think 1988.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, you had like a--so, how many children did you have by the time, by 1991?
Speaker 2: Two, two.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1: One from the first marriage, and then--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, they were both from her.
Speaker 1: Both from her, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The one who just called a little while ago, and then her younger sister [Angelina Grinan]--younger sister, born in '87 [1987].  Amora [Amora Grinan] was born in '83 [1983].  And I just couldn't stay in Miami [Florida].  So, 'Crimewatch Tonight' came up, and I went (makes sound) up to New York [New York].
Story_ID: 664877
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, that's in New York City [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, okay.  And 'Crimewatch Tonight' was on for how long?
Speaker 2: Twenty-six weeks (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: Half a year (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  And then, so, but you eventually moved to Dallas [Texas], right?
Speaker 2: After I went back to Miami [Florida]--
Speaker 1: Came back to--yeah.  Oh, after--you go back to Miami again?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, did you work in Miami when you got back?
Speaker 2: No, that was when I had the PR company [public relations], after 'Crimewatch Tonight.'
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  So, PR company in Miami.  And so, that didn't--I mean--
Speaker 2: And I, I would do freelance work.  And the reason--a lot of people ask me why I didn't go back to Miami to go to work.  There's a video that was played back in 1983, '84 [1984], it might have been a little later.  It was called the Miami boycott video. I wrote a lot of it, a lot of the--I'm not going to say a lot--but some of the video tape came from my files.  And it was a buddy of mine who was producing everything and said, "Look here, I'll give you five hundred dollars."  And I said, "Okay, cool, you want me to write?  Okay, I'll write, you know, and I'll give it to you."  Then they gave it to an attorney, who made some changes.  They gave it back to me and said, "Look here, we're going to cut this."  We cut it, and it was sent to every black fraternity, and every black sorority, and every black chamber of commerce, and every black organization that they could think of.  So, Miami lost millions of dollars in black business.  And whose voice was it?  And whose writing was it?  And sometimes you can still see that piece, because PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] will play it every once and a while.
Speaker 1: So, this is a conscious decision to use your talent to help the community?
Speaker 2: At that point, yes, yes.  I mean I'd been doing that.  My attitude was, "I'm the person who can sit in the city council meeting when you can't.  I'm the person who can go to that crime scene when you can't.  My job is to tell a story that you understand."  People say you have to be objective.  You cannot be objective in anything you do, because your experiences are different from mine, totally different.  And the next person's experiences are different.  But I always thought as a journalist from the people I have run into--because I don't have a degree, I don't have the background to do what I do.  But I did it.  People said, "No you can't."  I said, "Watch me."  And now, they are watching me.  But you can't be objective, but you have to be fair.  And that's what I was, fair.  Some people would say that's, what is it, advocacy journalism.  Sometimes there has to be advocacy journalism if there's going to be any change from something that's wrong.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They're not going to teach you that in a school.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: They're going to teach you to be objective.   I didn't go to school, so I'm not, I don't think that way.
Story_ID: 664878
Speaker 1: You know, Miami [Florida], as we were saying before, is a hot place in the '80s [1980s] and going into the '90s [1990s], too.  I mean in terms of the racial tension in that town, I mean it's really red hot so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, but see the thing is, there was so much going on in Miami.  Sure, you had racial tensions, but you also had the Cocaine Cowboys.  I know there were literally shoot outs in the middle of the street that we had to cover.  The Miami River Cops, I remember this perfectly.  These guys went to the Miami River, they stole 150 kilos [sic.] of cocaine from somebody who they told to jump in the water, thinking that he knew how to swim.  He drowned, so then there was a murder charge that they eventually had to get them with as well, in addition to the cocaine.
Speaker 1: So, this is--
Speaker 2: So, you had a whole lot going on in Miami.
Speaker 1: So, this is what the TV show, 'Miami Vice' was about, that kind of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --cocaine battles and, you know--
Speaker 2: But it came up afterwards, after all of that.
Speaker 1: Right, right, okay.
Speaker 2: But see, in 1980 you had Mariel [Mariel boatlift], you had the riots, and then you had the Cocaine Cowboys.  That's a lot for one city to handle.
Story_ID: 664879
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were talking about the national attention Miami [Florida] was getting in the news in those days for, you know, a lot of--
Speaker 2: You had a lot going on. Nineteen eighty [1980], you had Mariel [Mariel boatlift] that began.  You also had McDuffie riots, and then you also had the Cocaine Cowboys.  That's a lot for one city to handle.  I think that was probably the year that the police officers decided to go to Glocks, instead of having a revolver.  Because they found out that, "These guys are shooting fifteen rounds and not reloading, and we have to get a reloader and shoot six, and reload again and shoot six."  They were outgunned, so they went to semiautomatic weapons--Glocks.  And now, that's the norm for any police officer, or a similar weapon.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But Miami was just, it was a place--if you wanted to hone your skills, oh, you could hone your skills there, because there's going to be a lot to do.  And a lot of it may be federal, because you got border patrol, customs, immigration.  Every federal agency had concentrated itself down in Miami because of the influx of Haitians, because of the influx of Cubans, and the influx of drugs.
Speaker 1: That was the time of Ronald Reagan's [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] war on drugs, you know, too.  This is--so, a lot of federal money, you know, spent.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.  There were some--okay, I'm going to tell you about one particular story that I did with, I want to say, customs.  The person who was in charge of customs at that time was Special Agent O'Brien [Patrick O'Brien].  Now, I attended a news conference where there were these .45 caliber Ingram machine guns, a whole bunch of them they had seized--forgot where they had seized them.  Now, what they did was cut them all up and drop them in the ocean.  Three years later they show up on the streets, welded together, and they were being used.
Story_ID: 664880
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is a--you know, of course, they made movies about all of this--the 'Miami Vice'--and then you got like 'Scarface' with Al Pacino--all of this, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was real.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this was all real.
Speaker 2: This was real.  There was nothing fake about that.  Mariel [Mariel boatlift]--a lot of people; "Oh, well, yeah, it was just a whole bunch of people."  Mariel started because Reverend Manuel Espinosa made a trip to Cuba and he spoke with Fidel [Fidel Castro].  And Fidel said, "Yeah, okay."  He came back to the U.S. and said, "Hey, if we take boats down there, we can get our families."  Yeah, you might get your family, but then you're going to get somebody who's been in prison for ten years that they don't want to take care of anymore.  You're going to get folks from an insane asylum that they don't want to take care of anymore.  You're going to get the dregs of society.  And that's exactly what they sent, in addition to family members.  But what was so sad is that everyone who went and came back had their boat seized by U.S. Customs [U.S. Customs and Border Protection].  They're entering the U.S. without documentation, and then they were fined a thousand dollars per person on their boat.  There's a, I don't know whether he's still alive.  But there was a bail bondsman that I used to meet--well, I met him under a bridge, because I used to go fishing; that was my relaxation.  A stressful day--I go under the bridge, drop my line and just sit there and watch the fish jump and relax.  I'm not the only who did that.  I see this guy walk up, we start up a conversation, "Oh, you a bail bondsman?"  "Yeah."  "Can I get your card, we'll get some stories and stuff like that?"  And it worked.  But he had a yacht.  I saw it along the Miami River, and I saw a long line of people.  I went to the yacht, "Look here, is Jack [ph.] here?"  "Yeah, he's down below."  "Could you call him and tell him Jose [HistoryMaker Jose Grinan] is here?"  Jack came out.  I said, "Jack, I know Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] said we'd open up our arms to all of these freedom loving people.  But Customs is taking every boat that's coming back.  Do you want to lose this?"  "Oh, Jose, but it's a chance to make a whole bunch of money, come on."  I got on the boat, went down into the hole.  There was probably half a million dollars in cash that people were paying him to go to Cuba to pick up a relative to come back, because he had a big yacht.  It's like "Do you want to lose it?"  "No."  "Jack, don't do this."  He did not lose his yacht, because he gave everybody back their money. Because I knew what was going to happen, because they did it to everybody else.  But it was quick money for folks.  And they were, "Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah."  Because people were paying five thousand dollars per person, "You go pick them up and bring them back." Sometimes ten thousand.  I'm trying to figure out where they get this kind of money.  I mean these are folks who don't live in mansions.  You know, they live in one story homes in Little Havana [Miami, Florida] and Overtown [Miami, Florida], in Liberty City [Miami, Florida].  And they can afford five, ten thousand dollars for one person?  And sometimes they were bringing back an entire family.  I mean it was just amazing.  But it was Reverend Espinosa who started that.
Story_ID: 664881
Speaker 1: So, do you think the drugs and the, you know, there's the connection here (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Cocaine Cowboys?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Cocaine Cowboys and the Mariel situation [Mariel boatlift].
Speaker 2: Because many of those who came from Mariel--and this was, okay, let me explain this.  Many of those who came were criminal, but some were not.  But they had to engage in criminal activity here in order to feed their families.  The guy who negotiated the peace at--it was a federal prison in Oakdale, Louisiana [Federal Correctional Institution, Oakdale].  The guy who negotiated the peace was a lieutenant in the Cuban Navy [Cuban Revolutionary Navy] who defected to come to the U.S.  But he couldn't find a job because he didn't have any documents.  So, he dealt cocaine.  He got arrested, sent to prison.  He was getting ready to be sent back, but then they stopped that, because those who were going to be sent back were going to be persecuted.  He was a good man, but he had to feed his family, so he did something wrong.  And there were a lot of folks who were in the prison who did something like that, got caught, and they were thrown in prison.  Now, if they had a job, if they had all of these other things, they would not have had to go to prison.  But it was, it was, that was an interesting time.  I think that was '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then in fact, that ended with Bishop Agustin Roman who--remember when I said sometimes you just have to help people?  I should not have done something as a journalist, but I did it as a human being.  People in Oakdale, Louisiana, they didn't have Bishop Agustin Roman's personal number.  I did, because he was the bishop for the Cubans in Miami [Florida].  I had to have it, because he was one of my contacts.  So, I wrote the number down in my book, and I put my book at the end of the table and told Carla Dudeck--and I remember her name because she was the attorney who was representing all of them, "Carla, there may be something down at the end of the table that you could use."  And they went, looked, called the bishop, and he was there the next day.  And it ended that day.  Nobody else got hurt.  And it was an amazing thing to see all of these hard core inmates--I mean they had ripped up the inside of the prison.  They had made weapons out of the beds; they had done everything.  And they were really ready to fight the corrections officers, National Guard [National Guard of the United States], anybody.  But they didn't.  And when the Bishop came, he got on the back of a pickup truck and rode the circumference around the gate.  And it was amazing to see all these tough guys drop their weapons in a pile, get on their knees.  And the Bishop blessed them all, went to another group--blessed them all.  And they dropped the weapons.  Was I wrong in leaving the number?  I think I did the right thing, because I didn't want to see a blood bath, and they were ready for a blood bath (pause).  I guess I'd think twice about doing it now, but I thought I was helping people.  I didn't want to see a massacre, because that's what the National Guard would have done.
Story_ID: 664882
Speaker 1: And then (laughter), and then I was sent to Atlanta [Georgia] after that.  After the Oakdale prison ended [Federal Correctional Institution, Oakdale, Oakdale, Louisiana], I was at the airport.  You know, we're all getting ready to go back to Miami [Florida].  And they said, "No, no, no, Mr. Grinan [HistoryMaker Jose Grinan], your ticket is from here to Atlanta."  "Excuse me?"  So, I had to go to Atlanta, because the reporter who was there got laryngitis.  So, I was there when they sang 'Happy Birthday' to Carla Dudek from a federal prison.  They all sang, "Happy birthday, Carla."  And that was the first time I did a live shot for a network, CBS, nationwide.  I didn't have much to do with that, other than report on it.  But I spent eighteen days on the road, missed my Thanksgiving with my family, but I was having problems with my wife anyway at that time, so I didn't mind being on the road.  But it was an unusual experience, because I'd seen the reunification of families, very, very emotional.  And then now I'm seeing something that's totally different.  These are people who came from a different country, they did something wrong, they're in prison.  They want to send them back, but if they send them back, they might be executed.  So, why let the National Guard go in and shoot them?  And I think about that a lot, whether it was the right decision.
Speaker 2: It seems like it was the right decision.
Speaker 1: Well, nobody got killed.
Speaker 2: So, so, all of this is in Miami, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --then you--
Speaker 1: And then I went to 'Crimewatch Tonight.'
Story_ID: 664883
Speaker 1: And we talked about what happened there.  So, but '91 [1991], I guess, and, and the latter part of '91 [1991], you go to Dallas [Texas], right?
Speaker 2: Ninety-two [1992].
Speaker 1: Ninety-two [1992]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now this is W?  This is KDFW [KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas]?
Speaker 2: No, you're right, you're right.
Speaker 1: It was '91 [1991]?
Speaker 2: It was '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Because it was '91 [1991] to '93 [1993].  In '93 [1993], I came here [KRIV-TV, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, KDFW.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about that experience.
Speaker 2: The experience in Dallas, how can I put this?  I don't think my news director wanted me there, first off.  But the assistant news director, I had worked with in Miami [Florida], and she knew I was a good reporter and I was a good backup anchor.  So, she was very instrumental in hiring me.  She shielded me to a certain extent, or protected me, from her boss who didn't want me there.  Because that's what he told me in the interview, "You know I don't want you here."  I said, "Yeah, but you do need a good reporter, don't you?"  "Yeah."  Okay, so he hired me.  To me, it was one of the best things in the world, because I now had insurance for my kids [Amora Grinan and Angelina Grinan].  I'd be able to take care of my child support, and not have a problem at all.  It's just that I won't have my children around me.  But I was a summer dad.  I mean they always came to hang out with me during the summer. Bought them everything, sent them back, you know, after three months.  But it was good, because they rejuvenated me; they revived my spirit.  And working in Dallas, it was different I must say, because I'd never been in sort of a western type town.  But then I found out that Fort Worth [Texas] was really a nice place, because I worked in the bureau in Fort Worth after working in Dallas for a while.  And the people over in Fort Worth, you walk down the street, they don't know you but they say, "Howdy, how you doing?"  In Dallas, they look right through you and keep going, as if you don't exist.  So, I mean you got two communities, one a little pretentious (laughter) and then the other, just down homey.  And I liked working in Fort Worth, because, because of that.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dallas, it was okay.  I mean I covered some major stories there.
Story_ID: 664884
Speaker 1: Now, one we have notes about is the Luby's Cafeteria massacre.
Speaker 2: Ooh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What happened there, and what was--?
Speaker 2: You don't know what happened at Luby's back then (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Well, we want you to tell us.
Speaker 2: A guy by the name of George Hennard--I don't know how crazy he was.  But he was crazy enough to go inside a Luby's restaurant [Luby's Cafeteria, Killeen, Texas] and just go to tables and just fire, just shooting everybody.  I think twenty-something odd people were killed.  He went back to the bathroom, and one of the officers who responded went back there.  And before Hennard could shoot the officer, the officer shot him.  But can you imagine standing outside of a door with a camera and there's one body, there's another body, there's another body, there's another body.  I called the assignment desk, "Look here, we got four or five of them."  "You stay and you do all of them."  "Okay."  So we watched twenty-something bodies come out of the same door, looking like they were on the same gurney, with the same sheet on top.  That was rough on me.
Speaker 1: Now, this is the deadliest shooting rampage in American history until the Virginia Tech massacre in 2007 [at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia], right?
Speaker 2: And then there was also the Branch Davidian compound [Mount Carmel Center, Waco, Texas].
Speaker 1: Right.  So, that's--
Speaker 2: That's another, when I was at KDFW [KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you--
Speaker 2: And then there was a similar explosion in Alamorgordo [New Mexico].  No, no, no.  Not Alamogordo, it was a Mexican town.
Speaker 1: Guadalajara [Mexico].
Speaker 2: Guadalajara.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I walked into a gymnasium and saw more than a hundred and fifty bodies.  The stench was horrible.  And there were other young reporters, "Oh, yes, we're going to go in."  "Sweetie, if you don't have a strong heart and a strong mind and a strong stomach, don't walk in there.  Because the first thing you're going to do is throw up.  And then everybody else is going to throw up, because you're throwing up.  Look in the door, but I wouldn't advise you to step in there."  Because there were just bodies laid out, it was a gymnasium.  And then people walking by lifting--trying to see if that was their relative who died.  And I couldn't even understand it, because when you walk through the city, there were these large craters.  I mean let's say the street level was here, the door to somebody's apartment was here.  All of this had been cut out.  And then there's the street, the house on the other side.  Because the sewer was full of gasoline, and somebody threw a match in the sewer, and everything, (makes sound).  And it wasn't just in that one spot.  It was around the corner--take another turn, take another turn.  It was--
Speaker 1: How did this happen?  How did the gasoline get in the sewer?
Speaker 2: I think from the airport.  And it just leaked and stayed there, and at one particular time, the fumes caught fire and (makes sound), and blew up.
Story_ID: 664885
Speaker 1: Yeah the--now the Branch Dravidian [sic. Branch Davidian] was a standoff that lasted a few days, right?
Speaker 2: That lasted a long time.  I was (laughter)--
Speaker 1: It was a long period (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I was in church.  And I was paged, and didn't answer my page.  And then when I got out of church, "Where the hell are you?" "I'm at church."  "Look here, come to the station right now."  "Well, I need to go home and change."  "No, no, no, come to the station right now."  I got to the station, "The helicopter's there.  You're going with so and so and so."  And we were gone.  And I'm like, "I ain't got no clothes, I ain't got nothing."  "Well, you might be back later today."  "Yeah, right."  I think I did fourteen, fifteen days, something like that, in Waco [Texas].  And we had, we had set up scaffolding, because the compound [Mount Carmel Center], from where were--where we were placed by the federal authorities--was so far away that you couldn't see anything.  So, you had to get up high.  And a lot of the pictures that you see that are nighttime surveillance video, not--they're almost like moving X rays.  It's not infrared; it's something totally different, developed I think by the Japanese, University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin], I think.  One university was utilizing it, and somebody had one in the back of their truck.  And he came by and said, "Look here, y'all need to try this; you'll be able to see."  And it was amazing, you could see through the dark.  You saw every cow out in the field, you saw people walking behind the wood building in the compound.  And I think federal authorities use that today.  But it was amazing, and our station [KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas] had the video; and you could see everything that was going on, even though it was pitch black.
Speaker 1: This is some kind of a thermal--
Speaker 2: No, I don't think it was thermal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It wasn't thermal.  But you saw--and I'm really, I'm amazed.  He offered it to the federal authorities then, and they didn't want it.  And then as soon as we started using it, guess what (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, who do you think--I mean looking at it objectively I guess--who do you think is at fault here, with the Branch Dravidian situation?  Was it Koresh [David Koresh] or Janet Reno?
Speaker 2: See, I know Janet, I knew Janet Reno from Miami [Florida]; she signed off on my divorce.
Speaker 1: That's right, she was from-
Speaker 2: I really don't think she was at fault.  I do believe that first off, they had an arsenal inside that compound.  Whether all of the weapons were legal, I don't know.  But he had an arsenal.  They talked about, somebody talked about the raid the day before.  So, they knew somebody was coming.  And then when they arrived, that's when they just started shooting.  And then you had a couple of officers, a couple of agents who died.  And then the place was surrounded, and we were there for a long time.  The tank hit a lamp that was an oil lamp, or a gasoline lamp, because all of the electricity had been cut off.  There was no power out there.  And the generators were outside.  They weren't going to come outside and use generators.  So, everything was either candlelight or lamps.  And I think one was in the area where the tank's barrel hit.  It fell.  The, the, the liquid or whatever it was spread, and that is what started everything, because it was a wood structure, it was going to burn.  But, you know, you cover it.
Story_ID: 664886
Speaker 1: Now, were you in, were you based still in Dallas [Texas] then, or?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Because you shortly went over to, to Houston [Texas] here, right?
Speaker 2: I came here to Houston in August of '93 [1993].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  How did that transition take place?
Speaker 2: Coming here, the woman who protected me in Dallas became one of the higher ups in the FOX system.  She told me about the possibility of a job here in Houston.  I had already sent my tapes, and nobody took a look at them.  So, I, like, "Yeah, right, okay."  A buddy of mine, Clif Caldwell, who's still up in the Dallas area--they were having the NABJ national convention [National Association of Black Journalists] here in Houston.  And he came over to my house and said, "Look here, get out of bed, we're going."  "I ain't got no place to--."  "Get out of bed, we're going."  So, I ended up driving down to Houston with him.  And while I was here, I called the station, and my friend called the station.  And she told them, "Look at his tape."  They looked, "Yeah, okay, well, if he's in town, ask him to come on down."  "Okay."  I came down to the station.  They had a female anchor already who they were going to put on the morning, because this is to start a morning newscast at seven a.m.  I came down, we started talking.  They wanted us to do an audition, and it was perfect.  She and I were like high school buddies, or junior high school buddies.  That's how the relationship worked out.  Sometimes there's chemistry, sometimes there's not.  This time there was more chemistry than you could imagine.  And the GM [general manager] at the time, he saw the tape and said, "Yeah, would you like to work here?"  "Yeah."  "Okay."  And then he walked off.  (Laughter) So, I had to go back to Dallas, give my resignation--
Speaker 1: Now, I get the feeling this is exactly--
Speaker 2: --and I was down here (laughter).
Speaker 1: --how it happened, too.
Speaker 2: So, so I ended up working down here a couple of weeks later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was because the news director in Dallas was not going to renew my contract.  But I asked him, "Would you allow me to work for you until I find something?"  And he said, "Sure."
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you joined KRIV-TV, FOX affiliated here in Houston, Texas?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what have been the highlights?  Well, you got here in late '93 [1993] as the big gubernatorial race was going on between Ann Richards and George W. Bush [George Walker Bush].
Speaker 2: They already had political folks.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, you didn't deal with any of the--
Speaker 2: No.  My concern and the concern of my bosses at the time was to get on the seven o'clock newscast.  And our lead in was Rush Limbaugh (laughter).
Story_ID: 664887
Speaker 1: Now, this is FOX.  But in, in, in Texas--but I've been told in other cities that local FOX news is not controlled by News Corp the way the national FOX is (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, most, most local, most local stations that are either owned by FOX or affiliated with FOX--and this is an O and O [owned and operated]--they don't do the line that the network does.  FOX built up its credibility with programs like 'In Living Color,' black.  They built up their credibility and viewership with comedians who had late night talk shows with the dog pound.
Speaker 1: 'The Simpsons.'
Speaker 2: They, there were things that helped FOX elevate itself.  Now, these are in communities where people got attached to these programs.  You can't change that and still keep your viewership.  You can't put everything in the network down and spread it through your locals, because your locals may not all like that.  Then you lose your viewership, then you lose revenue.  And I don't think they want to do that.  I think FOX has some real smart general managers.  They have to do certain things, because it's FOX.  But when you're thinking in terms of local, I think the approach has to be a little bit different.  You have to think in terms of your demographics, the people you represent, and I don't think they all watch FOX.  So, if you put FOX there, then they may not watch you.
Story_ID: 664888
Speaker 1: All right.  So, KRIV-TV FOX [Houston, Texas], and you were talking about the, the affiliation and (unclear) and how they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the network, yeah, is our guide.  But I don't think we have to follow everything that they do.  I mean there's some things--okay, there are business reports; sometimes there are editorials, commentaries, and things of that sort.  But I don't think we could, as a local station, do FOX network news 24/7.  I think that would decrease our viewership quite a bit.
Speaker 1: You said the lead in for the news--
Speaker 2: At that time.
Speaker 1: --was--
Speaker 2: It was Rush Limbaugh.
Speaker 1: No longer, though, but-
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, no, no (laughter).
Speaker 1: It was Rush Limbaugh, okay.
Speaker 2: And that was one of the reasons I think it was hard to make inroads into the early morning news market here.  I mean, we had goose eggs as ratings for a long time (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now Houston [Texas] is a town that I guess has a history of some liberal, thinking.  You know, the mayor, I think at the time, was [HistoryMaker] Lee P. Brown.  You know, I don't know.  It was just a different kind of atmosphere that is not your Rush Limbaugh kind of town--not, you know--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, you're right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, I mean they eventually got rid of Rush Limbaugh.  But then we also moved--you had to fill up the programming.  So, what we did was move to a 6:30 newscast.  So, we were doing news from 6:30 to 8.  Then they decided to extend that to six a.m.  So then it was six to eight.  "Oh, we can make more money; let's do it eight to nine."  (Laughter) And then within the past two years, we decided to do four a.m. to ten.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it's six hours of news in the morning.
Speaker 1: So you come in from, though, from six to--
Speaker 2: Six to nine.
Speaker 1: Six to nine?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I do three hours on the air, and then also do the midday newscast.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, your day is basically six to one?
Speaker 2: Well, no, five a.m. until one.
Speaker 1: Five a.m. until one, okay, all right.
Story_ID: 664889
Speaker 1: You were talking about the National Association of Black Journalists, now--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you were involved with the NABJ since 1978, is when we have--
Speaker 2: Second year that they were in existence.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I may still have that tee shirt, too (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was able to go to that because I got whoever did the tee shirts to put WCKT [WCKT-TV; WSVN-TV, Miami, Florida] (laughter) prominently on the tee shirts.  It was Baltimore [Maryland] that year, if I'm not mistaken.  And I was really convinced to go by a guy who now works at CNN, Greg Morrison.  And it was just something I had never experienced before.  But then also I was with the National Association of Hispanic Journalists when I was down in Miami [Florida] as well, and for a while when I was here, which is kind of odd sometimes.  In Miami, not so odd, because you have Puerto Ricans who are involved who are the same hue as me.  But when I came here, there was a gentleman who anchored at the other station, Sylvan Rodriguez.  There's an elementary school named after him [Sylvan Rodriguez Elementary School, Houston, Texas].  He died of pancreatic cancer.  Sylvan was a special person.  And he would always, whenever we saw each other, "Why don't you come to our meetings, Jose?  Come on, man, you need to come.  Your name is [HistoryMaker] Jose Grinan, you need to come."  So, I did, and I was active for a while.  But after he died, it was just totally different.  Not that I was rejected or anything like that, but there's just a different feeling I get from others that I didn't get from Sylvan.  Sylvan, he wanted to be the first reporter to go up in space.  That's all he wanted to do.  But he's an excellent reporter, excellent anchor, and a good all around person.  And I miss him.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  But, but, so, you're unique, because you're able to be a member of both the--
Speaker 2: You mean I go both ways (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in the National Association of Black Journalists.  But in fact, though, at one point they merged all of the groups.  I mean they, they had--
Speaker 2: No, that was, that was UNITY [UNITY: Journalists for Diversity].
Speaker 1: Not merged then, but that was--
Speaker 2: That was UNITY.  We were able to get together at a conference, one conference.  That was, that was in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] or is that Atlanta [Georgia]?  I think it was D.C.
Speaker 1: This would be like a confederation, I guess?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if it was a confederation--
Speaker 1: Not a merger--
Speaker 2: --but everyone was still independent. NABJ was its thing, NAHJ was its thing.  And then you had the association of Asian journalists [Asian American Journalists Association], and then the association of Native American journalists [Native American Journalists Association].  We were just all getting together to find out whether we shared common problems, whether we shared common goals, and how can this organization assist this organization, and how this organization might be able to help this organization.  The first unity, I think it was well worth having, because it brought people together who would normally not be together.  I haven't been very active the past couple of years.  That's what happens when you get married and you're taking care of grandkids, and stuff like that.  But the NABJ I think helped me become who I am, because it made me realize that there were others in the country who were going through the exact same thing I was going through.  And we were able to talk about it, and maybe come up with some strategies.  Earlier, I said, you know, I had my father's [Jose Grinan] personality.  Going to NABJ and talking with folks and finding out that I was not alone, helped calm me down, so I wouldn't hurt anybody.  Because there were times when I really wanted to hurt somebody, either because they said something or they did something, and I knew it was because of race.
Story_ID: 664890
Speaker 1: How do you--do you have a philosophy or a way of being able to deliver the news in a voice that may not be the majority voice, I mean, in terms of delivering an idea or a concept in the news?  I mean, I know Max Robinson struggled with that when they would ask him to identify African rebels in South Africa as guerillas--militants--instead of freedom fighters.  You know, I don't know.  If there's a--how are you able to deal with all of that, the differences in ideology or worldview?
Speaker 2: Well, sometimes I have to remind people that a disturbance where you have on one block--maybe somebody throwing a trash can at a window.  That's a disturbance.  If the entire neighborhood is going up, and you've got a whole bunch of people out there going into grocery stores taking stuff, going into the electronics store taking stuff, that's a riot--totally different.  And it's because of the size.  You know, I was in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] after--this is also from KDFW [KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas].  I was sent to USMCRD, which was United States Marine Corp recruiting depot in California [Marine Corps Recruit Depot San Diego, San Diego, California], Camp Pendleton [Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton, San Diego County, California].  Okay, but next to Camp Pendleton was where they trained everybody.  My story was supposed to be going through some of the training that Marines go through before they go out into the field.  You know, the swimming with fifty pounds on your shoulder; staying above water and helping someone who is injured being able to get out; knowing how to go through an obstacle course; the PT [physical test]; all of those things I was going through until the McDuffie riots.  Then--not McDuffie riots, "Can't we all get along?"
Speaker 1: Rodney King.
Speaker 2: Thank you.  So, they told me to go the airport.  So, the photographer and I went to the airport, and we caught a flight and went to L.A.
Speaker 1: This is '91 [1991], I think, right?
Speaker 2: We were on the roof of the CBS building.  And I had to ask people to turn off their lights.  It was like, "Well, why?"  "Don't you hear that?"  "Hear what?" (Makes sound), "Yeah, what's that, a bug?"  "No, those are bullets.  And the more you put those lights on, the more we become targets."  "Oh, oh, I didn't think of that."  (Laughter), "Okay, well, I'm thinking about it for you."  So, then everybody started their live shots from inside the building, because we were targets.  And you could see the city burning from where we were.  And then I think the next day or the day after that, we went through a couple of the neighborhoods.  And yes, I was very frightened, because it was a city I knew nothing about.  And when you're on somebody else's turf, you have to be wary and you have to be cautious.  And that's the way I felt that day, or those, those days I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know if that answered your question, though.
Speaker 1: Well, it was more of a question of pitch.
Story_ID: 664891
Speaker 1: You know, how do you--the flavor that you deliver something or, or the pitch of it from--you know, have you ever been in a situation where you didn't like the flavor of what you had to deliver or to figure out another way to say roughly the same thing, but in a different, with a different (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I have, but I can't recall any specific incident, because--
Speaker 1: Do you have the freedom to do that as a--?
Speaker 2: --I'm a stickler for, I'm a stickler for facts, and I'm a stickler for using the English language the way it's supposed to be used when it's written and then transmitted.  A lot of folks don't like me correcting them.  A lot of folks don't like me saying, "Look here, that's not totally correct.  Why don't you re-read that and see where it's different?"  And I'll give you an example.  A few days ago, a script talked about 80 percent of the funds going towards tuition and books for certain students--totally wrong.  It was 80 percent of the students used the money for books and tuition.  You've got to get on somebody about that, because if not, it's wrong.  And a fact is that which is, period.
Speaker 1: There's a power over television news where people say something from an anchor position.  It's often quoted as a fact, even though they might have gotten it wrong.
Speaker 2: Yes, that can happen.  And I think personally I'm careful as to some of the words that I use in describing certain things.  I think I'm a good spot news or breaking news person, because I don't panic you.  There are some people, "Oh, oh, we've got a bomb going off.  We've got police officers."  No, you can say the exact same thing, "An explosion took place at such and such an address; the authorities are on the way.  Right now, you need to stay close to your television or your radio just to hear."  And it's all in how you deliver it.  Do you want to panic people, or do you just want them to have the information?  And I think the information is more important.  And you know, somebody told me I had that ability and that skill.  And I mean I don't get hyped up or--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think we all remember how Walter Cronkite delivered the news on JFK's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] assassination with sincerity and concern, but not panic.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.  And I think when you're in a position like the one I'm in, you really have to have that inside of you, so you don't panic anyone, so you don't get people alarmed.  But you do let them understand what you're saying.
Speaker 1: What is the toughest part of being a news anchor?
Speaker 2: The toughest part?  I don't know.  I never really had to answer that question before.  For me, I don't know whether there is a tough part, because I look at it as a challenge.  Because I'm not supposed to be doing it, I'm not supposed to be where I am.  Like I said, I don't have a degree, but my knowledge comes from the school of hard knocks, and I've been knocked a lot.  But I, but I don't let that stop me from doing my job.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you've been recognized as one of the favorite news anchors--you know, at one time the best, they said in 2007 in Houston [Texas].
Story_ID: 664892
Speaker 1: You even had a--there's an incident where you actually were, were a personal hero.  You had to, you had to save someone in a, from a flaming vehicle in 2008, right?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Excuse me for a second.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The day was October 19th.  I know that, because that's my sister's birthday.  And the House of Blues [House of Blues Houston, Houston, Texas] was opening up that night.  And I had a ticket for me and my wife to go see The Blues Brothers.  So, we went to see The Blues Brothers, a good night.  And she said, "My niece is having a birthday party.  Let's go on down there."  Since it wasn't too late, yeah, because I wanted to say hello to my niece.  "Fine, no problem."  So, we're driving down the highway.  And I'm paying attention to the road.  And she says, "There's a fire off of on side."  "What?"  And I looked, and the car was actually on fire.  I stopped, ran down the hill to the vehicle, saw some people across the street, and I'm like, "Are y'all okay?"  "Yeah, but it's people still inside the car, we just came to watch."  I felt like saying, "What are you doing over there?"  So, I went toward the car, and it was on fire--the engine, the front part.  The car had flipped over, and I had to go in through what you would consider to be the sunroof.  It had popped out.  The woman who was in there was lying, because she had been thrown.  So, she was on the door, basically.  And me, like a crazy person, went in the vehicle.  I had to crawl in to pick her up with one arm, and still move back to bring her out.  The fire started getting a lot more intense, so I wanted to move very fast.  She was full of blood, blood was just everywhere on her.  So, I picked her up after I got around to the car.  And I'm getting ready to walk.  She slips out of my hands, and I fall down.  The stuff you see in the movies (makes sound) that's what happened.  And there was another woman inside, (pause) there was another woman inside the car.  And I was going to go back in to get her, and two people grabbed me, and said, "No, no, don't do that."  The--and it bothered me, because after the woman was on the ground, all these dudes came up, "Hey, she ain't got no underwear on, wow."  Yeah, she didn't have underwear on.  She, yeah, a whole lot of women don't wear underwear sometime when they're going to dinner, going out.  That's all they were concerned about.  I took off my shirt and tied it around her waist.  And you know, and the ambulance came.  Because there was no ambulance, there was no fire truck, there was nothing, just me.  I found out that the woman who died was the good seed.  The woman I saved was the bad seed.  And when I went to the funeral of the other girl--nothing but gangbangers, nothing but gangbangers.  Big gold hats off to the side--thugs, basically.  But they were thanking me for saving one girl.  And that is very traumatic, and I really hate to think about it, because it's done, it's over with.  But, yeah.  And I would hope that if that were me or my child, that someone would do the same.  And I didn't see it as risking my life, but afterwards when I thought about it (laughter), it was like, do you know what you did, boy?  Looking in the mirror, do you know what you did?
Story_ID: 664893
Speaker 1: Now, did, did you talk about it on the air?  I'm, I'm sure you did.  Was it--
Speaker 2: I'm the only one who had video, (laughter) because I was there.  After she was loaded up in the ambulance, I just started taking pictures.  And then I brought them into the station [KRIV-TV, Houston, Texas].  Nobody wanted to believe me.  I said, "Well, I'm going to leave it here anyway.  And I'm going to write the story, and if you want to use it, fine.  And if you don't, that's fine."  And they ended up using it, because it was bona fide.  I'm sorry, ooh.
Speaker 1: Well, I mean, yeah, but what you described, and the reaction of the people, is one that I think a newscast could--you know, you could reach people about what you should do in that kind of--
Speaker 2: But see, it's not my job to tell somebody what they should do.  My job is to give you enough information so you can make an intelligent decision on your own.  I mean, that's the way I see my job.  Maybe I'm wrong, but that's how I look at it.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: I'm not supposed to sway you.  I'm supposed to let you decide which way you want to go by giving you enough information for you to make a decision.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, but I--do you think there was some instructive kind of--I mean were you thinking about, you know, what to tell the kind of people that were standing on the side of the road?  Were you--?
Speaker 2: I wanted to cuss them out.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's what I really wanted to do, because they were there watching, not doing a darn thing.  And here I am driving by and then I stop, run down a hill trying to see if they're okay, "No, we weren't in the car, it's people still in the car."  How are you going to stand here and let somebody be in that car?
Speaker 1: Do you think that people are worse or the same as they used to be, in terms of disasters?  You know, because there's so many--Hurricane Ike struck that same year here, right?  In Galveston [Texas] at least.
Speaker 2: No, it hit Houston [Texas], too.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  But--
Speaker 2: You mean are people different in--
Speaker 1: Yeah, in--
Speaker 2: --in how they respond to things?  I think there is a generation, or maybe a generation and a half, that has been accustomed to blood and guts; if it bleeds, it bleeds.  And that is what they are used to.  So, when they see it, "Ah, that doesn't bother me."  And they're not realizing that that's a life, that's somebody.  Some of the gangbangers, you know, they think death is not final.  Whether that comes from television, whether that comes from books, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Video games.
Speaker 2: But many of them don't think that death is final.  You know, they think, "Oh, he's going to get shot and they're going to get up and walk away."  No, death is death.  And I think people have to realize that.  But you got folks who just don't care.  They have no respect for their family, they have no respect for their parents, they have no respect for society; they have no respect for you or me.  The question is how do we get them to have that respect?
Story_ID: 664894
Speaker 1: What are the stories around Hurricane Ike?  Any--
Speaker 2: Hurricane Ike, in a newsroom--okay, at this particular station [KRIV-TV, Houston, Texas], when we are threatened by a hurricane--and Hurricane Ike was one of those that got our goat.  We are all inside the building, those who are in the newsroom.  I mean, you have photographers, you're out at different locations.  And we're on the air non-stop, non-stop.  Sometimes we're doing two, three, four hours straight.  And you know, somebody else comes in to relieve you.  You try and get some sleep, and you do the exact same thing all over again.  But it's necessary, because people want to know that it's going to be okay.  They want to know where it is, and all of these things.  Ike did a lot of damage, especially down in Galveston [Texas].  But Galveston has now recovered.  Houston [Texas] got hurt, but as not as bad as Galveston.  But see, covering a hurricane, to me was nothing, because I used to do that in Miami [Florida].  You know, we used to chase hurricanes from Miami all the way up the coast to Carolina [South Carolina].  So, hurricanes--we used to have hurricane parties when I was a kid. (Laughter) But we lived in a brick house, you know, a concrete block house.  So, you weren't too concerned about the walls falling in, or anything like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you--did you cover the Astrodome situation [Houston Astrodome; NRG Astrodome, Houston, Texas] after Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] in 2005?
Speaker 2: No, I was not there.  But I do know of it, because we were always doing reports.  This community--I have to say Houston has come out of everything, and will come out of everything.  But it sometimes goes overboard to help people, and I think that's what happened.  The community wanted to help so badly, because once we saw those pictures coming from Louisiana and what was happening, the people were coming here.  I mean this was the next major city.  I mean, some did go to Baton Rouge [Louisiana] and places like that.  But this was a major area.  And I think some people, once they realize that they didn't have anything to go back to, they decided to stay.  And in some ways, they helped make the community better.  But then again, you also had gangbangers who came.  There are friends of mine who are federal agents whose job it was to work undercover.  You don't know how many times they were shot at by these folks from New Orleans [Louisiana].  I'm just thankful that none of them got hit, and they were able to have local authorities arrest the shooters.  But yeah, I'm like, "Well, why do you go in there?"  "That's my job, Jose [HistoryMaker Jose Grinan]."
Story_ID: 664895
Speaker 1: Now, you had a stroke in 2010?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: That left you with some double vision for--I don't know if you still (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, it didn't leave me with double vision.  That was one of the symptoms, a precursor, so to speak.  It's a very rare symptom, I'm told.  And the double vision was not side by side, it was over and under.  So, I was seeing two images, one here and one here.  And the first time it happened, it happened while I was on the air.  And I just asked my co-anchor [at KRIV-TV, Houston, Texas] if she could take a couple of my reads, because I wasn't seeing very well.  She looked over at me and said, "What's wrong with your face?"  "Nothing's wrong with my face."  But I'm not looking at my face.  There was a long commercial break, and by the time we got back on the air, everything had straightened itself out.  You know, me doing all of this (gesture). But as soon as I got off the air, I called my ophthalmologist who operated on my eyes many years ago to give me Lasik vision, so to speak.  And I went to see him and he told me it wasn't ocular, had nothing to do with my eyesight.  And he told me if it ever happened again to go directly to a hospital, and he would prefer one particular hospital.  So, about thirteen hours later, guess what happened?  My alarm clock went off, I was about to get up, the other alarm clock went off.  I wanted to get up to go over there, I couldn't.  So, I just sat on the edge of the bed.  I have this lamp, it's an antique lamp, but it has little monkeys and palm trees and stuff like that.  You know, I had a herd of monkeys in my room that night. (Laughter) I'm looking over there, and I'm just seeing strange things.  My daughter had just come in from work.  She was managing a lounge here.  And all I could do is, "Baby, come in the room.  I need you for a second."  She came in and freaked.  And, "I don't need you to do that.  Calm down.  I need you to go to my phone, and I need you to call Dr. January [Bruce January]."  And she did.  We spoke and I told him what I was going through, and he said, "Get to the hospital now."  The strange thing is I was going to try and drive to work.  And my daughter said, "No, you ain't driving nowhere.  I'm taking you to the hospital."  And there was a piece of paper the doctor gave me.  And I want to say it said arteriosclerosis, so something like that.  When I went to the hospital, the first thing they say, "Mr. Grinan [HistoryMaker Jose Grinan], aren't you supposed to be on TV right now?"  "Yeah, but arteriosclerosis, I think that's what it is.  Baby, go to the car and get the note out of the glove box."  But as I said that, they looked at me, "Bring that wheelchair."  They put me in a wheelchair.  And it's one of the strangest feelings, when you have no control over what you do, what's going to happen to you.  And I was scared, really scared.  But then I had to try and mentally make jokes about it.  You know, the doctor came in, "Can you tell me what time it is?"  "Doctor, which clock do you want me to look at?"  (Laughter), "How many fingers?"  "How many hands?"  (Laughter) So they were, you know, trying to figure out, "Well, what's wrong with him?"  They did realize I was having a stroke, so they started giving me some medications.  And it worked, whatever it was.  But I still had to go through some tests.  There's this new wing that they had in the hospital that had all of these lights, these new type lights.  So, I asked the doctor, "Doc, who's the architect?"  He was like, "Who's the architect?"  "Yeah, I want to try and figure out how he put all these lights up here, because I'm seeing a whole bunch of them."  But that helped me get through the stroke.  And I was out in--okay, I was admitted on the 1st, and I was out on a Saturday evening, and I was back to work a week later, because I had to prove to myself and to everybody else that the stroke did not take anything from me.  It scared me, but it didn't take anything from me.
Story_ID: 664896
Speaker 1: So, you've been at FOX 26 [KRIV-TV, Houston, Texas] how long now?
Speaker 2: In August of this year, '14 [2014], it'll be twenty-one years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, are you the longest serving anchor in the Houston [Texas] area?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, no, not at all.  There's Dave Ward at Channel 13 [KTRK-TV, Houston, Texas], who has been the main anchor for quite a few years.  He was here I think when Alicia [Hurricane Alicia] hit.  And also Tom Koch, who also works at 13.  He's been on mornings for longer than I have.  But he's also been on split shifts, working the morning--we will give you all the day, but you've got to be back here for six o'clock.  So, that's what he did for quite some time.  But longevity in the mornings is not common. It's usually three, four years, you're gone; three, four, years, you're gone.  But I think--and this is what I tell all new reporters who are African American or who are Latino, "Become entrenched in the community that you are about to report to.  Go to the meetings.  Meet the people, volunteer to emcee anything they want you to, because all they want you to do is be their cheerleader for a day.  But you will be rewarded because they like you, they want you, and they want to keep you."  I think those are some of the reasons I'm still here, because I went to retirement homes, I went to kindergartens, I went to elementary schools, went to Spanish elementary, or predominantly Spanish elementary schools, where the kids are like, "Ooh," because I'm speaking Spanish to them, talking to them in their language.  In fact, speaking Spanish better than they do, even though I don't think I speak it that well.  But it impresses the children.  What do the children do when they go home?  They talk to mama and daddy.  "You know who I met today?  He spoke Spanish, mom."  Okay, mom's curiosity, dad's curiosity--they turn in the next day.  I hear quite often from Latinos, "I watch you because of your English."  "Really?"  "I learn English from you, because you say Spanish things correctly, and then you say English, and I listen."  Okay, I'm a teacher and don't even know I'm a teacher.  And I, I get hit with that quite often.
Story_ID: 664897
Speaker 1: So, how, how important is this community connection, to you?
Speaker 2: I think it's very important.  It's--if I was not embraced by this community, and if I had not embraced this community, I don't think I'd be here.  I mean, it would have been those two years that I said I was going to be here.  But people, for some reason, like this old ugly dude from Tampa [Florida].  And they welcomed me, they supported me, and you know, they came to my defense even though there were times when I was going to be released because no one was going to renew my contract [at KRIV-TV, Houston, Texas].  But then when you have people in the community making phone calls, and saying certain things, and you know, they were my supporters, all I could do was say, "Thank you.  I don't know how to repay you other than emceeing your banquet or being your cheerleader.  You know, doing whatever I can."  You have a responsibility as a journalist, especially a journalist who's on TV.  You ain't there just because you're pretty.  You're there to do certain things.  And you have a responsibility to do some things for the people you're talking to.  And I think that's a responsibility you have to have.  And that also helps you become part of the community.  Now, if you don't give a crap, and you're planning on really moving in a year or two, don't worry about it.  But if there's any chance that you're going to stay, any chance, find out about the community.  I used to live over in what we call Asiatown. I used to call it Chinatown west, because it wasn't the original Chinatown here [Houston, Texas] (laughter).  They know me because I went to their stores, I shopped everywhere around there, you know, and I'd say hello to everybody.  They don't understand what I'm saying a lot of times.  But it's the smile, and they respond back.
Story_ID: 664898
Speaker 1: I go to the hood.  The only time I was afraid to go to the hood was when someone said I insulted [HistoryMaker] Minister Louis Farrakhan, "And may Allah have mercy on your soul."  "Is that a threat?"  Ooh, I don't think I'm going to ride in the hood and see the brothers selling newspapers today, because I remember what Muslims used to be like when I was growing up.  You get a baseball bat and break your shin.  Take you behind the building, and nobody knows where you went.  That's what they used to do, at least that's what they did in Tampa [Florida].  So, I had a fear, because of what was written in an email, "May Allah have mercy on your soul."  All I asked Minister Farrakhan about was prostate cancer.  And, "Do you think that you have done something that has created friction between communities here in this country?"  If that's insulting--maybe it was the way I said it.  Because we were supposed to be interviewing Minister Farrakhan and one other person.  All of a sudden, whoever was doing the PR [public relations] put two other people in there.  And it's like, "We can't do four people in two minutes."  So, I wanted to get to Minister Farrakhan to, you know, get that over with.  And you had to talk fast and you had to do it that way, because you're trying to get to somebody else real quick, because all you had was two minutes.  If they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is this on the newscast?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes.  And people mistook it.
Speaker 2: Now, have you ever been the host of, of a talk show?
Speaker 1: Well, there--there's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As such?
Speaker 1: We used to have a public affairs program called--it used to be a half hour program--in fact, two of them.  One was 'Hola Houston' and the other was 'Black Voice' ['The Black Voice'].  I used to do both of them.  I mean, I say it in humor, I've gone both ways (laughter).  So, so, and I think the station [KRIV-TV, Houston, Texas] allowed me to do that, and it worked.  I think I'm a good interviewer, because I don't always follow the script.  I listen and then ask about what I just heard, and then people kind of open up; they know you're listening to what they're saying.
Story_ID: 664899
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  And what are--and I think it fits into what we're talking about now.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: My main concern is the younger generation that has no respect for anything.  I knew there were some people that way when I was growing up.  But it seems as though it's just about in every neighborhood, every project--every apartment complex.  And violence is associated with that, whether it's violence against me personally, whether it's violence against a little old lady, or a child.  When I used to work in Miami [Florida] I hated to cover drive by shootings, because there was always going to be a child who was hit.  And that's one of the worst things for me, is to cover a child's death, because I'm a father, I have two girls [Amora Grinan and Angelina Grinan].  And if it's a girl, boy does that hurt.  My mother [Sylvia Grillo Grinan] did not raise me to hate.  She raised me to try and help.  I think that's why she tried to get into politics.  I think that's why she was a teacher.  My father [Jose Grinan], he did the teaching, because it paid him (laughter).  So, they looked at things differently.  We as a society need to find a way to get to young people, so they don't become more distant, and we don't become distant to them.
Story_ID: 664900
Speaker 1: I'm a big proponent for vocational education.  How many vocational high schools do you know of today?  My father [Jose Grinan] taught at a vocational high school [Don Thompson Vocational School, Tampa, Florida].  And when I worked at the Satellite News Channel, thousands of miles away from Tampa, Florida--I'm trying to find a gallon of milk in the evening.  And this is in Stamford, Connecticut, where they used to roll up the sidewalks at six o'clock in the evening, and there was nothing out there.  I'm walking around, somebody was sweeping the sidewalk.  "Sir, do you know where I can get a gallon of milk?"  "Are you the guy who was in the newspaper?"  "Yeah."  "You got that crazy name."  "Well, I don't think it's crazy."  "I knew somebody who had that name.  We called him Papa."  "You--let me see, you went to Blake High School [Howard W. Blake Comprehensive High School; Howard W. Blake High School, Tampa, Florida]?"  He said, "Yeah, how do you know?"  "Papa is my father."  And he said, "No!  Come into my tailor shop.  I want you to see what your daddy left to me."  The man had his own business.
Speaker 2: This is in Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And he was trained by your father in Miami [Florida]?
Speaker 1: Yes, in Tampa.
Speaker 2: Tampa, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  I mean, that--what can you say to something like that?  I mean that raised my father's respect in my mind just another notch, because he did something that affected somebody, and it helped that person.  And vocational--at the vocational high school my father taught at, he did tailoring and design.  Mr. Brown [ph.], who was in the same bay, because they were large bays, he did dry cleaning.  Everybody, the teachers, every--black society--not the folks who lived in the projects even though the school was by the projects--they brought their clothes to Mr. Brown to have dry cleaned, and to my father's class to have altered.  Then you had Mr. Thompson [ph.], who had brick masonry right next to that, in another bay. And after that you had auto mechanics, Mr. Govandez [ph.].  Then in the main building you had cosmetology, homemaking; and back then you had radio and television.  That was when you had transistor radios and tubes, all of that in one school.  Where do you find that today?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, everybody's not going to go to college.  We need people to lay carpets, we need people to put up TVs; we need people to do things that don't involve going to a college for four years.  I mean the guy who puts down the carpet, he knows angles better than someone who's taking trigonometry.  And he has to make sure that those angles and cuts are right on that carpet, because that's his money, that's his job.  But you don't have people who are skilled like that anymore.
Story_ID: 664901
Speaker 1: Now, what are you going to do--now after you retire? Well, you have a project you're working on now that, you know, goes beyond your, your job.
Speaker 2: I, I would really like to write several books.  And I have titles for one at least.  The other, I'll think about.  Well, I have two titles.  One, 'There's Blood on My Shoes' [ph.], and the other is 'I Know My Mama Cried Because She Integrated Schools' [ph.], and that was not easy.  She [Grinan's mother, Sylvia Grillo Grinan] suffered a lot, but never let me know.  And that was when I was going to OLPH, Our Lady of Perpetual Help [Tampa, Florida], which is a Catholic school near where she was in her school.  So, she would go to work, drop me off at school and then go to work.  But imagine, you're a new teacher at a school and you're trying to meet everybody, you know.  And the kids--the principal brings you into an auditorium where everyone--or a cafeteria at the school--where everyone's sitting down.  He brings you out front.  All of a sudden, everybody gets up and moves to the back of the room.  And all she could do is just look around.  The principal wanted to introduce her to everybody.  I mean, then you have the parents, "I don't want no black person teaching my kids."  By the end of the school year, those kids are hugging up to my mama.  And I don't care what their parents were thinking, those kids loved my mother.  If they didn't have a sweater, who bought it?  She did.  If they didn't have stuff, and my father [Jose Grinan] would get on her about that, "These ain't your kids."  She says, "They are."  I hope we still have teachers like that, because those are the people we're really going to change, because you have to start early.  And you have to keep it going, don't just start and stop.  It has to be kept going, and I think that's what happened in my life.  I had people who started early, and they didn't let me go by myself, and they helped me on my climb to success.
Story_ID: 664902
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing along, or, or, or incident along the way that you would change or do over again?
Speaker 2: I'd get a degree from a college or a university (laughter).  I mean, that's the only thing.  But it was important for me for my parents [Sylvia Grillo Grinan and Jose Grinan] to know that they did good, because they wanted me to.  They wanted me to be the first to graduate from college.  One of my sisters did that.  But I think they wanted me to be successful.  They took care of the girls, but they kind of let me take care of myself.  And I was able to tell both of them before they died, "You did good, you did real good.  Because I got a job, and I'm going to buy a house, I'm going to have a family; and those are all the things you instilled in me.  And they will happen, but I want you to know, you did good."
Speaker 1: Now, what today would you consider to be your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: That I was competent, capable, caring, and I was concerned about my surroundings, about the people around me, and also myself.
Story_ID: 664903
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about your daughters.  Now, you've got, you've got two daughters, you said?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: The oldest is Amora, Amora Christina [Amora Grinan].  And I guess you know amore is love in Spanish. The story is we didn't have a name for the baby when, you know, she was about to be born.  So, I was home drinking some Bacardi, it might have been Ronrico.  And I had gotten to the point where I was slurring a few of my words.  But I was in my own house, so it didn't matter.  And I started thinking, well, wow, this is love.  Oh, Christ, thank you.  Amore, Amora Christo, amore, Amora Christina, that's my love of Christ.  That's why I named her that.  And then the other is Angelina Michelle [Angelina Grinan], kind of sing songy; I like that.  I didn't have much time to spend with her, because she was two, maybe two and a half, when I left.  But I always stayed in touch.  Even though they were Jehovah's Witnesses, I would send gifts before Christmas, early part of December, or I'd try and see if they would arrive on the 6th of January, after Christmas.  My wife didn't know that the 6th of January is really the day that Latinos celebrate the Three Kings bringing gifts to Christ, the baby.  So, just as long as you didn't know that, (laughter) I would continue to do that every year.  I never told them, happy birthday. I asked them, or told them, "You're a little older today than you were yesterday, aren't you?"  Because I wanted them to know that I knew their birthday, but I couldn't say that, because that would cause problems with my ex.  I'd go to a dollar store, buy a whole bunch of combs, trinkets, barrettes, mirrors--stuff like that.  And I had to buy two, usually one pink and one purple, put them in separate boxes and send them to the girls, so they each had a box that they could open.  And I think they were all excited when they got stuff like that.  Those are the things that I did to stay connected.  And then my wife would send them to me in the summer.  And that was, I mean, we, we hung out.
Story_ID: 664904
Speaker 1: I used to take them to a, there's a place up in North Texas called Dinosaur Valley.  It's where dinosaurs were initially discovered here.  When my youngest [Angelina Grinan] was nine years old, she said she wanted to be a paleontologist.  And I had forgotten what the word was, so I had to go to the dictionary (laughter).  "Oh, you like dinosaurs, I've got something for you."  So, we went to this place where there's a riverbed.  It's maybe eighteen inches, but there're brontosaurus tracks all across there.  And then you go to other areas, there are excavations, where you see tyrannosauruses that they even uncovered the bones to.  How do you think a child responds to something like that?  "Oh, oh, wow."  And it was always an adventure.  We never had a vacation, we had adventures.  At Dinosaur Valley State Park, the river also has little paths that you walk alongside.  Sometimes the paths are broken.  The day I was there, there were these things hanging from trees--vines.  "Okay, I used to watch 'Tarzan' when I was growing up.  Baby, get on my back, one at a time.  Okay, hold on."  Swing out and come back to the other side.  "Okay, now I need you to go get your sister, and you'll be okay."  Swing back to the other side, (laughter), pick the other one up, and swing back over.  And then we continued on our way.  But it's doing things out of the ordinary with them that made them closer to me.  You know, we went to this--and I have video of this.  We went to this Fossil Rim [Fossil Rim Wildlife Center, Glen Rose, Texas], which is near Dinosaur Valley State Park.  Now, Fossil Rim has all kinds of animals.  And because I knew some of the folks there, they would always let me do the backstage tour, so to speak.  So, we'd be riding around and, you know, somebody who works there is with us, driving.  And it's, "Oh, you want to go see the giraffes?"  There were so many giraffes licking at my kids they both yelled, "Leave us alone, please."  And I mean, like four or five, six.  And they they're, "Unh huh."  Where else can you do stuff like that?  They have touched rhinos--I mean not looking through the fence--but reaching through the fence or them sticking their head through the fence and petting them.  Those are experiences I think they will keep for the rest of their lives.  Because I keep them, because they're special to me.  We used to go camping up there.  You know, daddy had to get up and fix breakfast.  Daddy had to make sure they went and got clean.  And then we'd go on our adventure, come back, daddy would cook dinner.  And then we'd just sit around talking, singing, and go to sleep, and do the exact same thing the next day.  For a long time, my children were my inspiration.  They were the reason I worked so hard, because I was going to make sure that they knew who I was, what I did, and how much I loved them.
Story_ID: 664905
Speaker 1: And what are they doing today?  You said your--
Speaker 2: My, my, my youngest daughter [Angelina Grinan] is married, she doesn't have any kids.  She married a nice young man in Aurora, Colorado.  Now, they live in Colorado Springs [Colorado].  My youngest is about to become a physical trainer.  She used to work as a production--well, not a production assistant--no, she was the associate producer under a producer for 'Judge Alex,' Judge Christina, Dr. Drew, who else, who else?   There's another doctor she did work for, and then Queen Latifah ['The Queen Latifah Show'].  So, she just left Queen Latifah.  She didn't agree with some of the things they were doing there.  So, rather than fight, you just leave, okay.  You got a lot of skills, you're intelligent; you can do something else if you want.  So, now she's on a health kick, wanting me to quit smoking and lose weight, and all of these other things.  And I think those are good things, and I'm glad she's pressuring me to do these things.  And I think she'll be good as a trainer, because she, she loves what she's doing.  And just as long as my children love what they're doing and they're happy doing it, you won't have a problem from papa; you won't have a problem at all.  So, they're both doing well, and I am so, so, very blessed and so very glad that they are doing well.  Because I know some of the options out there, to me, they're unacceptable.
Story_ID: 664906
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Oh, who I'm with now.
Speaker 1: Who are you with now?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.  It's, you're going to freak out with this.  I married a lovely lady [Kathryn Griffin Grinan] who was a former prostitute, a former drug addict, who had a habit of about twenty thousand dollars a month.  She used to be one of Rick James' girls, you know, one of those singing on--yeah.  She was the one who really brought girls to Rick James.  We met at a banquet and we just started talking, and things just kind of clicked.  She's no longer doing that.  What she does now is counsel trafficking victims which are in many cases, prostitutes.  And I say that because let's say you've got a sixteen year old who's arrested for prostitution.  She ain't a prostitute, she's been trafficked, because she did not decide to do that on her own.  Somebody turned her out, and that's the person you need to go after, not her.  Now, because she's been living in that, she has to be rehabilitated.  So, she realizes that you don't have to take money from the man all the time, even when you're not giving him sex.  You can find a way to get your own money.  You can get a job, you can do all of these things.  She, her program, which is called Been There, Done That--We've Been There, Done That, is now in the county jail.  I mean, the sheriff gave her a pod.  And these are women who are prostitutes--some trafficking, some drug addicts, and they're trying to get out of that life.  And that's what my wife does now.  She counsels, and then she has another at the Houston Recovery campus [Houston Recovery Center, Houston, Texas], which is at another, at a hospital.  Every Wednesday she has a meeting with the girls, because this is also part of the rehabilitation, to come back and talk about it.  But some of the things they say in there, you would be surprised. But these are women talking about what women do, and what women have done, and what they do to men, or what they used to do to men.  Some of them could be considered criminals because of some of the things they've said.  But in that room, no words leave.  They're just said there, and then you go on about your life after that meeting.  And she does that once a week.
Speaker 1: Okay, well--
Speaker 2: And she's a special lady, she's, she's calmed me down (laughter).
Story_ID: 664907
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as someone who cared about a community, especially the community that has wrapped me around their arms and made me feel not just welcome, but made me feel like I was always a part of that community, and that I did good.  Not did good, but I did good for the community, whether it was representing them or whether it was talking about them, or just being with them. I think I'm a down to earth person, and that's another thing I'd just like to be remembered as--someone who's--you know, they say everybody in TV has a big head (laughter).  I don't think I have the big head, and I'd like people to see me as who I am--someone not with a big head who's just like you, who puts their pants on in the morning, you know, and who goes and does a job and then goes home to his family.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: You're quite welcome.
