Story_ID: 209817
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Ronald, R-O-N-A-L-D, T. Gault, G-A-U-L-T.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born December 18, 1940 in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an investment banker for the firm of JP Morgan [Chase & Co.; J.P. Morgan].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is August 22, 2004.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're on the South Side of Chicago, at 1400 South Michigan Avenue.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  And before--
Speaker 2: In a production studio.
Speaker 1: Right, sort of a, yeah, make-shift one, I guess.
Story_ID: 209818
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions we always ask, and they're lightweight questions that just require a short answer.  The first one is sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Fish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue, yellow.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Golf resorts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Golf and tennis resorts, I should say.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Near the water.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Story_ID: 209819
Speaker 1: Well, I want to ask you about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about your mother's side and your father's [Charles Gault] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm going to start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give me your mother's full name and spell it for me?
Speaker 2: Lillian, L-I-L-L-I-A-N, B, for Beatrice, Gault, G-A-U-L-T.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Adams.
Speaker 1: Adams, okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born I believe in the State of Mississippi [Hollandale, Mississippi], and migrated to the State of Illinois with her parents as a toddler.  She's eighty-two years old now.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace your ancestors on her side?
Speaker 2: With some difficulty back to her mother, my grandmother.  That's about it, her mother's mother--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I mean, with ease.  I mean I could--at one point there was a project in the family to reconstruct the family tree, and we did some of that.  But it's now someplace that I can't find.  But with ease, I could probably go back to my great-great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was she born and raised in Mississippi, too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so your great-great-grandmother now that would be--she'd be, like, born during slavery or right after slavery?
Speaker 1: She would have been--I don't know a whole lot about her.  She would have been--
Speaker 2: Born during--okay, all right.  Do you know her name?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What part of Mississippi did they come from?
Speaker 1: Well, I think they came through the area that has the most direct access to the Illinois Central Railroad, to the South Side of Chicago [Illinois], at the end of the track for the Illinois Central Railroad, the I.C.  And I think they came from a lot of little dusty places that had easy access to that railroad.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My grandmother, her name was Naomi Adams.  And she married and out-lived several husbands.  She had two sons and two daughters.  And unfortunately, she died at a fairly early age.  I think she was probably born in the late 1890s, and she died when she was in her late fifties.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 209820
Speaker 1: Are there any stories from that [maternal] side of the family about life in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there are a couple of stories.  My grandmother's [Naomi Adams] brothers, according to the story, left in the cover of darkness one night following a run-in with a number of whites in a little small dusty town I would say, who lived near.  As it turns out, my brother's, my grandmother's brother, Tommie [ph.], or "Tomie" [ph.] as they call him, had been in the local store and had come out.  It was a hot, humid, Mississippi day, and he breathed a hard breath and a sigh from the stifling heat, just as two white men were riding up, or walking by.  And his blowing offended one.  And he asked him was he blowing at him.  And he said, no he wasn't.  And he said, "Well, I think you were.  And I think I should show you what that means, what the results will be."  So, the short of a long story, this guy confronted my grandmother's brother, and he was going to chastise him.  And my grandmother's brother was a grown man, and wasn't going to be chastised in such a way.  So, they started to fight, a fistfight, which was unheard of in those little dusty towns.  But in this situation, Tomie's friends intervened with moral pleadings, rather than with any physical defense of what Tommie was doing.  And they persuaded the other white men there to let the fight go on. "It's a fair fight.  Let them fight, gentlemen, it's a fair fight."  And Tommie, as it turns out, got the best of this fellow in this fight, and bloodied his nose and what not.  At any rate, he and his brother that night sent my grandmother's sister-in-law, I guess, away to the North.  They got their little belongings, what they could, and headed off for the railroad.  And they left Tommie and his brother there sitting on the porch.  And as the story goes, they knew that the whites would be outraged by this indignity, and they would come that night to teach them a lesson, whether it was a beating or a lynching or what have you.  It would be something along those lines.  And sure enough, they did.  And there was--horses were stomping and making a lot of noise down in the hollow.  And Tommie and his brother said, "Look, we hear you down there.  Unless you plan to come on up here, you know, it doesn't make sense for you to stay down there."  And they fired off a couple of rounds from the porch into this darkened hollow.  And the horses got to jumping and stomping, and that kind of ended it.  And the next day, Tommie gathered himself and left and went north.  And there is in that story, I think, the start of the migration for the Adams family, my grandmother's side of the family.  And they all came and nestled and settled essentially on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  A story not unlike others--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --from that period.  So, so, what year was it that--so it was during your grandmother's toddler years that she moved up, right?
Speaker 2: No, my mother [Lillian Adams Gault] was a toddler.
Speaker 1: Oh, your mother, okay, your mother.
Speaker 2: My grandmother was a young woman, with what had to be at that point three children--two sons, my mother, who was a toddler, and my aunt who was not yet born.  Because my aunt I think is two years younger than my mother, and she was born here in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, they really followed the brother--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean, your grandmother followed her brother.
Speaker 2: They came and established a place, and looked out after them and helped them get established.  And that was the start of it.
Story_ID: 209821
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Lillian Adams Gault] talk about growing up in Chicago [Illinois], and what it was like in those days?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I think her mother was, my grandmother [Naomi Adams] was a domestic during most of that time, you know, working for families that would employ her.  And the men that she--the various men that she was married to had different jobs, I guess.  The fellow she was married to that I remember was a Mr. Stevens [ph.].  And Mr. Stevens worked in the stockyards, he was a laborer in the stockyards.  And at one point Armour [& Co.] and Swift [& Co.], and other large meat processing companies had operations in Chicago.  And it was a source of employment for many semi-skilled and unskilled workers.  And this Mr. Stevens [ph.]--I always referred to him as Mr. Stevens, who was married to my grandmother, worked at the stockyards as I recall.  My mother and her sister and brothers lived, you know, pretty much as young kids lived in the city.  I don't think they felt that they were poor, necessarily, but from what evidence I've been able to gather, they certainly were poor.  I mean, they had few amenities in life, but they seemed to get by without being scarred or bruised by it all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what school did your mother attend here in Chicago?
Speaker 2: She went to, she went to DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois], and my father [Charles Gault] went to [Wendell] Phillips [High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, they grew up in what's now I guess is the historic black community there.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any good stories from your mother from growing up in Chicago from those days?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, this was--much of that was during the [Great] Depression.  And people with few skills and a limited education kind of lived hand to mouth, you know.  And while there was nothing that they could just really, you know, toot their horns about as far as having a great time or a wonderful experience, they went out, as young people did, to the Club DeLisa [Chicago, Illinois] and the Savoy Lounge [sic. Savoy Ballroom, Chicago, Illinois] on 47th Street.  And they listened to Nat King Cole and the other recording artists of that era, just as young people would do world-wide.  But there was nothing, there was no phenomenal experiences during that time that I can remember that they shared with me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  What's your mother's personality like, and what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother is retired.  Four years ago, my brother [Dennis Gault] and I persuaded my mother and my father, who is now dead, to sell the house that they lived in for many years on 84th [Street] and Dorchester [Avenue], a lovely little house.  He was in failing health.  He had a kidney problem, and in fact was on a dialysis machine that he could operate on his own, and was quite proficient at it.  But it left him tired, and certainly in no shape to climb the fourteen and fifteen stairs, internal stairs, in this house that they owned on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois].  And he had had a couple of episodes, so it made sense for him to have less space for him to manage, and fewer steps to walk up and down.  So, they moved into--at least we started negotiations with them--because it was a negotiation.  Because neither one of them wanted to leave this house that they owned, to sell the house and move into Montgomery Place, which is a managed care facility at 5550 South Lake Shore Drive.  I think that's the address, right across the street from the Museum [of Science and Industry, Chicago, Illinois].  And she managed to move in three years ago, just before he died.  And so he never lived there, but she has lived there since then as a retiree.  And it seems to be a fairly high quality of life there.  My younger brother lives in Chicago and has three kids, and they visit her frequently.  And she has activities in which she engages, and she thinks she's the best poker player in the world.  And they play penny ante poker I guess once or twice a week.  And she has some physical therapy classes she goes to.  So, it's a lot of things that she gets to do there that if she were living in a house by herself, she wouldn't do.  So, that's a comfort to us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: I have one brother, he's ten years younger than I am.
Story_ID: 209822
Speaker 1: Tell us about your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Charles, C-H-A-R-L-E-S, N, for Nathan, Gault, G-A-U-L-T.
Speaker 1: And what's his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Well, he died in 2000, and he was eighty-two years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was born in Mississippi, I believe it was Appaloosa [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he was born about 1918, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1918 or 1919.
Speaker 1: In Appaloosa, Mississippi?
Speaker 2: I believe it was Appaloosa.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Appaloosa, I'm not exactly certain.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what do you know about his ancestors on his side?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Well, his father was John [Gault].  I think his mother died at a relatively early age.  I did not know my grandfather nor my grandmother on my father's side.  But I'd heard stories about my grandfather.  He was a big card player, a fairly sturdy guy--nothing necessarily positive or negative associated with that.  He had my father, my Uncle Robert [ph.], Uncle Matthew [ph.], Aunt Hattie [ph.].  He had five children--and Uncle John [ph.]--he had six.  And my father out-lived them all.  And I think that's a function of having a lifestyle of having enough in terms of financial services and financial capacity to give himself some pretty good healthcare and attention over the years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When did your father move to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: He was a very small child.  So, for all intents and purposes, he and my mother [Lillian Adams Gault] were born and raised here, for the most part.  Although they weren't born here, they were raised here for sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a story from his side of the family about why they left Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Not that I know of.  My grandmother [Naomi Adams] was a great source of stories for me.  And at one point, I think when I was in high school [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois], I recorded all these stories and wrote them down and stored them away.  And they were a part, in fact, of a class project which dealt with both myth and reality--stories about Tommie [ph.] leaving and, you know, stories about haints and ghosts.  You know, and they would all get jumbled up, and you had to decipher truth from reality, and fact from fiction.  And that was a class when I was a high school student.  It was a very exciting project, so I had a chance to go by and talk with her about some of those stories.  I didn't have an opportunity to do that with my father's side.  There was no one, there was no person on my father's side that was, that had the same role to play in my life.  My grandmother babysat me and my cousin for her two daughters a lot.  And in fact, she lived with us at one point, because we had a flat building here in Chicago.  And my mother and father and I lived with my grandmother and her then husband, Mr. Stevens [ph.].  And so, I got a chance to dig much more deeply into the background on the maternal side than I ever approached on the fraternal [sic. paternal] side.
Speaker 1: Now, did you all ever decide to go back to Mississippi for any reason?
Speaker 2: No.  There was no inclination to return to the South, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting, you know, I hear that some people leave and never go back.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But then, I think there was a period in the '70s [1970s] when going home was going back to the South, living probably somewhat more modestly, and some people actually did it.
Story_ID: 209823
Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Charles Gault] have any stories about growing up in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He was, he went to [Wendell] Phillips High School [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  And he never did any jail time, or wasn't involved with the wrong element.  But then again he never went to college.  He finished Phillips and got a job, like most young guys.  He was drafted into the [U.S.] Navy, and managed to get a 4-F classification.  But he injured himself running into a wall while playing some sport, and damaged his knee.  So, he was not shipped out at the time that his company was.  And I don't know if he was scheduled to be shipped out, but peace was declared, so he managed to not be called.  But that's not quite the phrase he used, but he wasn't called to serve overseas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He worked not far from here for a number of years as a foreman, or senior supervisor, at an automobile company that did specialty work on tires.  And I think that's what it was, vaguely.  But this area along Michigan Avenue was at one point automotive sales and part heaven, I mean that's if you wanted to get something done (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they had a big Warshawsky's [Warshawsky & Co., Chicago, Illinois] store over here, Blue Star [Auto Stores, Chicago, Illinois], all of that.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Blue Star, and all of that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he did that for a number of years--
Story_ID: 209824
Speaker 1: --But in nineteen,--I guess it was in 1953, 1954, his [Gault's father, Charles Gault] life changed rather dramatically.  He'd always been a big sports enthusiast, and loved the Chicago White Sox.  And he was very upset all the time because the White Sox had such a poor team.  And on one occasion, he wrote to Gene Kessler, who was a columnist for the Chicago Sun-Times, K-E-S-S-L-E-R, I think it is, Kessler.  And this columnist would turn his column and space over to one of his guest readers each week.  And in fact, the column that week was entitled "My Beef," my beef with this issue and my beef with that, and my problems, et cetera.  And he published my father's letter, which was "My beef against the Chicago White Sox."  And that letter, the short of a long story, is that he criticized the White Sox for failing to look at the talent that they had right here in the city under their own noses--playing in the public parks, in the sandlot leagues, and in the high schools and colleges.  And while he didn't say it, the clear indication and suggestion was the White Sox failed to pursue this talent at that point and time--this is 1954--because of the color of their skin.  And if you recall during then, it was, while there were blacks and people of color in the leagues, they weren't dominant factors at that point.  All that's changed rather dramatically, I would say.  So at any rate, this columnist published this, and the very next day the Chicago White Sox farm team director and several of his assistants visited us on the South Side of Chicago at 4916 South Forrestville, I'll never forget that.  And in fact, they put a challenge to my father, "If you think you know talent, join us, don't criticize us."  And he, I guess the kernel of the story is he quit his job, without, as far as I know it, any retainer or cash inducement, et cetera, other than this challenge.  And fortunately, you know, they had a pay scale, and you got paid and all that stuff.  But that was clearly something he had never done for a living.  But he went on to become very successful at it.
Speaker 2: So, he became--
Speaker 1: And he did that for the rest of his life, and his whole personality changed.  I mean, he had been a fairly no-nonsense kind of person.  He would come home after an early evening, and we'd have a bunch of young kids, or not so young kids, sitting on our stoop.  And I guess we were fairly popular.  And he would come up and would say hello, and then he would start asking people where did they live.  Because he knew who lived in our building, right?  And none of these people lived in the building.  And he would say, "Well, you should probably go and sit on your own steps."  And so, it got to a point where people would see him coming, and they would just--if they knew no one there, or if they weren't with anyone in that building, they would just get up and leave.  So, he had a fairly stern demeanor.  But despite that he had sponsored baseball teams for us, his decision to join the White Sox changed--I think changed his life rather dramatically.
Story_ID: 209825
Speaker 1: And so for thirty-six years or so--or longer than that--because he [Gault's father, Charles Gault] was, he was with the Philadelphia Phillies when they won the pennant and won the [World] Series in 1980.
Speaker 2: So, he established himself as a scout?  Is that what he was?
Speaker 1: Yes, he was a baseball scout.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, he was a baseball scout.
Speaker 2: And he was so good that he even went to other teams?  I mean it wasn't just the [Chicago] White Sox?
Speaker 1: Well, he started with the White Sox.  And the White Sox won the pennant in the fifties.
Speaker 2: Fifty-eight [1958], yeah [sic. 1959, American League champions].
Speaker 1: But they never won the World Series.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  That's when they had the "Go-Go White Sox."
Speaker 1: Yeah, Minnie Minoso and all those guys.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And he left the Chicago White Sox for a better deal, I guess, with the Philadelphia Phillies.  And the Phillies won the pennant and the series in 1980 in a seven-game series against Kansas City [Royals].  And then they won the pennant and lost the series against Kansas City two years later, and he was with them during that period.  So, if he started in '54 [1954], that was 36 years, 36, 38 years of just a pretty rock solid career at something he really liked.  He would have done for--he would have done it just to do it, I think.  But the fact that he was getting paid for it, it was a career.
Speaker 2: Had he been a star player--
Speaker 1: He played in the, you know, he played in the, you know, Negro Leagues at the time, in which there were limited opportunities.
Speaker 2: Did he play here in Chicago [Illinois], for the Chicago American?
Speaker 1: Yeah, pretty much in Chicago.
Speaker 2: The Chicago American Giants?
Speaker 1: I'm not sure who he played for.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In fact, I don't think that he was an outstanding player--if he was or if he wasn't--because we never talked about any of his exploits as a baseball player.  And I'm sure if he had exploits as a baseball player, I would have heard about them.  He became a great friend with the local high school coaches, and was a particularly good friend with Jim Brown, Coach Brown, who coached that 1954 DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois] team that lost in the state basketball championship finals by a few points.
Story_ID: 209826
Speaker 1: Well, the rest of this baseball story is that he [Gault's father, Charles Gault] became a great friend of tmany he high school coaches, and Jim Brown in particular.  Because at that point--DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois], at one point, DuSable didn't have a baseball team.  Their claim to fame was basketball, as you know.  And my father, you know, had resources--baseballs, and bats, and most importantly some skills that he could share with the team.  So, he was around these high school coaches quite a bit.  But the team was just starting.  I mean, we had a zero team.  In fact, I never approached it very seriously.  And one day during spring training we were doing this thing called a pepper drill in the gym, just to kind of start being familiar with the timing of pitching the ball and trying to connect.  You'd have somebody toss the ball underhand, and you'd just hit it with the bat, bunt it with the bat, and somebody would catch it and throw it back and start the cycle all over again.  I had this buddy, and we both were going out for the team.  And we just thought it was the funniest thing in the world when this guy lobbed us this underhanded pitch.  We tee'd off on it in this close space, and that was really stupid.  But at any rate, the coach didn't think it was too funny either.  So, we didn't dress for this game.  So, when my father showed up to see us play, he said, "Well, where is your uniform?"  I said, "Well, they kind of want us to sit out this one."  But he never made a big deal of it.  So, he never pressed me to play more basketball, I mean baseball, because I played no baseball.
Story_ID: 209827
Speaker 1: That's the lead-in to his [Gault's father, Charles Gault] being interested in a guy named Wilbur Franklin, who was an All-State fullback at Dunbar [Vocational High School; Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], and an All-State catcher also from Dunbar.  He was about 5'11", but squarely built, a powerful guy.  He was hitting .400, .350, and .400, and could throw a runner out from a squat.  He was awesome.  He was a football player, a fullback.
Speaker 2: Wilbur--
Speaker 1: Wilbur Franklin.  And my father had been following this young guy as a freshman up through his sophomore and junior years.  This was very exciting.  This was going to be a big sign, the first big sign with the Chicago White Sox.  He had followed Denny McLain, and several other players like that.  But this was going to be his real first sign from an inner-city school, that would give testimony to this whole argument that he had made.
Speaker 2: So, he scouted Denny McLain?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: That's an interesting story.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, it is.  So, at any rate, so Wilbur Franklin gets an offer.  It was, as I understand it, a very attractive offer at the time, for any young player who is coming out of the public schools.  And then he gets this signing bonus offer.  He says he wants to go to college, and people want him to go to college.  So, the counter is that not only will we give you the money we talked about, the signing bonuses will cover your college tuition.  The thing you got to do--you've got to stretch it out over six to eight years, because you'll be playing baseball.  So, we will write into the contract that you will go to school during the off-season, et cetera.  So, there was some deliberation.  My father wanted to meet with him, Wilbur Franklin and his parents, and he did.  And he came away very disappointed, and he said that--he told my mother [Lillian Adams Gault] this primarily, but I was there, so I could hear it--that this young guy said that he wanted to play football for a Big Ten school and he wanted his parents to see him play football on TV, or his parents wanted to see him play football on TV.  If he had gone to Major League baseball, he was going to start in the Minor Leagues, and the Minor Leagues aren't televised.  And you won't be in the Major Leagues, even on the fast track, for two or three years.  So, putting all that on the table, his decision was to go the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and accept their scholarship.  I went to the University of Michigan as a graduate student.  So, he wasn't there when I was there, but when I did go, I got some of the buzz on what happened.  He broke his collarbone, both collarbones, or one collarbone during the spring training, and never dressed for a regular game.  So, there you have a lost opportunity thrown by the wayside.  Fast forward the story to some several years later, and Wilbur Franklin is coaching at DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois].  I don't know if he was the head coach, but he was like the assistant coach.  So, I look back at that story, and I think about it a lot and I smile about it.  Because Bernard Shaw, the one on CNN who died a couple of years ago--he wasn't the talent that this guy Wilbur Franklin was, but he was smarter, and he was around looking for advice and counsel and tips, et cetera a lot.  But it was Wilbur Franklin who said no to signing with the White Sox, and then got injured and didn't really play at the University of Michigan.  And I think my father probably took that as hard as they did, as time went on.
Speaker 2: So, Wilbur Franklin never tried to come back and play baseball?
Speaker 1: Never.  And I think they would see him as damaged goods, you know, with that kind of injury.
Story_ID: 209828
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents [Lillian Adams Gault and Charles Gault] met?
Speaker 2: Vaguely, I think that they were introduced.  He wasn't from the neighborhood where she lived.  And there was some tension with guys in that neighborhood, and they kind of overcame that.  And at twenty-one for him, and nineteen for her, they fell in love and got married.  And that's pretty much the story.  They stayed together as a couple until he passed in 2000, no separations.  It was a good family.  They were both good role models for both of us [Gault and his brother, Dennis Gault].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I would always kid them.  My father was the idealist and my mother was the pragmatist.  He would always take kind of the high road.  And I think that kind of captured my decision to go to grad school.  He said, "Why don't you do something important for yourself and be a lawyer."  And my mother said, "Well, how are you going to pay for that?"  (Laughter) And while they didn't cover all of the costs associated with college, they covered some of the costs associated with it.  And so, we today get a big smile out of that.  My mother has always been a pragmatist, and my father was always the idealist--and not dreamer, but more of a--let's look at the big picture for the opportunities kind of thing.
Story_ID: 209829
Speaker 1: What's your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory?  Well, see, it gets very difficult because some things you get told so often that it becomes a part of your whole lexicon of language and stories that you repeat to people.  But, do you actually remember that having happened, right?  That becomes an issue.  I mean going back, we used to live at 49th [Street] and Forrestville [Avenue] and 49th and Wabash [Avenue], right across from DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois] and down the street from Willard High School--Willard Elementary [sic. Frances E. Willard School, Chicago, Illinois].  No, [John] Farren Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois] was down the street, and DuSable High School was across the street.  One of the earliest memories that I have is that we had two Radio Flyer wagons, these two--and I had to be three, no more than four.  And our older neighbors, their names was Mack [ph.] and Slick [ph.], and they couldn't have been any more than ten or twelve.  Well, just Mack and Slick pulling me down--pulling me and my cousin, my aunt's son--and our wagons in these fierce races, which we thought would go on forever.  But looking at it, it wasn't any more than half a block.  And my Radio Flyer would be traveling at supersonic speed, and I'm holding on for dear life.  And Mack and Slick are out pulling the wagons, and their dog Rover [ph.] was running behind us.  And I mean all of that was right on 49th and Wabash.  I mean, I wasn't in any countryside or pastoral environment, you know.  So, that's one.  And the second one, that was just great fun.  The second one from that era was that these kids from Farren Elementary School, a half a block away, chased a young guy.  I don't know what happened to provoke this.  But it was the first experience that I consciously had of that kind of violence.  Well, they chased this kid and caught him just at the front of our house, as he was trying to go through the gangway.  In Chicago [Illinois], there are main streets and alleys.  I say that, because a lot of cities don't have alleys.  And he was just about to make the turn in that gangway to shoot into the alley.  And I think he could have been fairly secure and could have escaped.  But his shirt got caught and he tripped, and these twenty or thirty people are on him, and they beat him to a pulp.  And I remember being just horrified at that, for a three or four-year old kid.  That's a conscious memory.  Those are two conscious memories that I have that couldn't be more than I was three or four years old.
Story_ID: 209830
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What are some of the sights, and sounds, and the smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights, well that was a sight and clearly a sound.  These guys that used sell rags.  Not sell rags, collect rags.  And one of the sounds was they were saying, "Ye-o, ragman."  That's essentially what they said, but it was more sonorous than that.  "Ye-o, ragman."  It's a sound that's letting the neighborhood know that the ragman is coming.  If you have rags to give him, or to sell him, he's there to pick them up.  He would take those rags and then, I would assume, they would sell them to some factory or paper mill and get them recycled.  But he was probably just a very small clog in the wheel, because this guy usually either pushed a pushcart or he had a cart that was pulled by a horse.  They weren't, these guys didn't have cars.  They would have pushcarts or horse-drawn wagons.  So, that's clearly a sound that I remember as a young kid.
Speaker 1: What about smells?  Any smells?
Speaker 2: Smells.  Well, you know, these are first impressions for a young child.  And again, in that same age range, I lived on Wabash [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].  And the stockyards, Swift [& Co.] and Armour's [Armour & Co.], large meat processors, were on 42nd [Street] I guess and Union [Avenue] more west.  And there was a malodorous, malodorous--oh, my God, it just filled the air three or four times a week.  And I don't know why it happened those three or four times, but it was, it was so malodorous, it was stifling.  So, if you ask for a sight or a sound, that's the one that I remember very, very early.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's the negative.  I can't think of a positive, but that's the negative.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did the trucks ever come by with the animals on the way to the slaughterhouse?
Speaker 2: They would drive down State Street, not down Wabash.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that was, that was light stuff in terms of smell, compared with this malodorous waft of smell coming from the stockyards periodically.
Story_ID: 209831
Speaker 1: What did you like to do when you were coming up?  What kind of little kid were you?  And I want to call attention to one thing I think is, that's probably something you had to deal with.  Now, you got blue eyes, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Unless somebody's color is out on this interview, they can see this.  And these are your eyes, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And very few of us grew up with blue eyes.  So--
Speaker 2: It was never a problem.
Speaker 1: Never (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No.  It was a plus, more than a negative growing up.  So, it was never a problem.  Nor was it a problem for our son [Chuma Gault], who has light eyes.  And I think that those genes probably passed down from my father [Charles Gault], because he had gray eyes.  And my wife [HistoryMaker Charlayne Hunter-Gault] has sort of greenish eyes.  And so, I mean the big joke was that if our son came here with anything other than green eyes, my wife was going to be in trouble.  (Laughter) But there was never an issue for me or for him.  I got kidded about it as an, you know, adult in South Africa from time to time by my black South African friends who are Zulus.  You know, there, these color distinctions mean something--black, coloured, Indian, et cetera.  And so, I've been kidded by several of my Zulu friends saying, "Oh, man, you would be coloured, you would be coloured.  With those eyes, you would be coloured.  You couldn't participate in this discussion."  (Laughter) And so, it's kind of a joke, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you never had any, you never had any problems.  But would they open the doors for you, or anything?  Any advantages of having blue eyes?
Speaker 2: Only in romance.  None in business or school (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I thought I'd raise it, because very few people actually have blue eyes.  There's some gray and some green, and stuff, you know, but okay.
Story_ID: 209832
Speaker 1: What kind of kid were you, growing up?  What were you interested in, and what did you like to do?
Speaker 2: Well, I was very, I was, I think I was a fairly studious kid.  I liked to read, and I attribute that to my grandmother [Naomi Adams], more than anything else.  She would tell us these fascinating stories, and again, a mixture of reality, of Uncle Tommie [ph.] leaving Mississippi, to fantasy--the little boy sent to the store to get a pound of liver for his mother.  He passes the drugstore, and he sees a candy bar that looks so delicious.  And he says, "Oh, maybe I can spend a little of this money to get the candy bar."  And he buys the candy bar and doesn't get the liver.  The store closes, and he's going past the graveyard trying to figure out what to do.  And he decides to dig up a grave and steal a liver.  And that next night, there's (making a knocking sound)--"Who has my liver?"  So, she would mix all these stories together, you know.
Speaker 1: "I'm coming up the first step, Johnny (laughter)."
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, exactly, exactly.  (Laughter) And we would be, you know, breathing hard and sucking in our breath, you know, waiting.  And so she, that encouraged us to tell her stories as well.  So, before I could read, I would tell stories from cartoons to her; she would have us tell her stories.  So, I would imagine what was being said in the cartoon based on what was happening.  And although I couldn't read, that's what I would tell her.  So when I started to read as a young kid, I was just a voracious reader, westerns for the most part.  And I must have read every story of western personalities you could read, from [James Butler] "Wild Bill" Hickok, to [George Armstrong] Custer and Geronimo and the like.  And that was just fascinating to me--
Story_ID: 209833
Speaker 1: So the whole point was that I started out, I think, with a pretty good base.  And that was strengthened by a high school teacher named Caroline Lee [ph.] at Willard High School [sic. Frances E. Willard School, Chicago, Illinois].  And for lack of a better characterization, I and two other kids kind of became her pets, because we were relatively bright, and we liked what she was talking about.  And we were mannerable, and so she took a special interest in us.  And in fact, in my third grade picture that I shared with you, a couple of those kids are there.  And she encouraged us to take, to take the entrance exam to the University of Chicago Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois], which meant as we passed from eighth to ninth grade, rather than going to a public high school, we'd be going to this one.  And both this friend of mine and I took the test and passed it.  And she encouraged us to go, and we were fine with it.  And she said, "But you really couldn't go until February, because the September classes are full.  And so, you will start lab school in February."  I said, "Well, I don't know how good they think they are, but I don't think they're that good that I would wait and postpone going to high school for six months."  And so, we had a big debate with Miss Caroline Lee.  So, it was, I mean it was kind of a reflection that as a young person, I was fairly impatient.  I respected elders, but I didn't suspend my own ability to reason when dealing with older people.  And that was, that was one of the first really kind of exchanges with an adult around an action that I would take, in which I disagreed very strongly with what this trusted advisor and teacher was saying.  It didn't rupture the relationship; I just went to DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois].  And my friend went to Hyde Park [High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  And so, the two slots that I think were considered fairly cherished positions in this very prestigious lab school went unfilled.  I don't think I was any the worse for it.  And I don't know about my friend, because a few years later we're taking, as most high school kids did, exams.  Every exam that came up, you took it.  SAT, ACT, Howard, everything.  I mean Howard University [Washington, D.C.] gave out as a land grant--college--two scholarships, full scholarships, per state.  And so I meet my friend, his name is Harvey Hanson [ph.], at this exam.  I said, "Harvey, how you been?"  "Oh, all right."  We embrace and stuff.  But we weren't, we didn't stay close after elementary school.  And he said, "Well, let's take the exam together."  So, we sat down at the table, not too different from one of these tables, and the examiner says, "Okay, begin."  And it looked like it was no more than fifteen seconds, and Harvey turned the page.  I said, "I better hurry up, speed this up."  Well, he turned the second page, and I was just frozen after that.  I couldn't turn a page, waiting for him to turn.  He won one of the two scholarships.  And I didn't intend to go to Howard anyway, so it was just an exam-taking exercise for me.  But in terms of the kind of student that I was, I think that was a reflection of the kind of student I was--
Story_ID: 209834
Speaker 1: I was impressed with the shift from bobby socks and football heroics in 1954, to the emphasis on Sputnik [1].  That was, that had a palatable impact on the high school population at DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Studious kids became popular kids.  And I kind of ended up being a pretty good student, and playing sports.  I wasn't a super star.  I didn't even play first.  I think the best I played was the sixth man on our frosh soph [freshman/sophomore] team that lost in the semi's [semifinals] to Von Steuben [Senior High School; Friedrich Von Steuben Metropolitan Science Center, Chicago, Illinois].  But I was, you know, somebody that would get picked, and I could play and stuff like that.  But I opted not to play varsity, because I wanted to finish school in three and a half years.  I had polio as a kid, and that, I think had a big impact on me as someone growing up.
Speaker 2: How bad was your polio?
Speaker 1: I had bulbar polio, which affected my capacity to swallow and destroyed a portion of the sternocleidomastoid on my left side.  So, it looks like I have a stiff neck when I turn, when I walk and turn like that.  I had a distorted part of the large muscle in the back of my neck.  And it caused an atrophy of my tricep muscle on my left arm, and it weakened a number of facial muscles.  But all in all, I consider the fact that I was very fortunate.  I went back to high school, and again, those were character-shaping events; probably I realize that more today than I did then.  But they very much shaped and molded my character.  And I believed in prayer, you know.  And my getting better was a sign to me that someone was listening to those prayers.
Story_ID: 209835
Speaker 1: All right, so that--when did you contract polio when you were a kid?
Speaker 2: I was, it was the first week of my freshman year [at DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois].  I had a swimming class at 8 a.m.  And 8 a.m. in September, as you well know, in Chicago [Illinois], it's cold.  And I caught a chill coming back from swimming.  It's a forty-minute class, and I guess I was fairly exhausted, and that's directly the cause effect.  And I missed a semester; it was six months I was hospitalized and stayed home.  Then afterwards I went through, I guess it was a year and a half or two year regiment of physical therapy.  But I was able to re-capture, regain the ground that I lost.  And there was some difficulty.  I took Latin, and there's a wonderful teacher in that book, that yearbook, her name is Helen Fortune.  She never married, so her name was Miss Fortune.  And nobody made a big deal out of it, but she looked kind of like a Miss Fortune, if you saw her come waddling down the road.  But she was a lovely person.  And she would insist that I would read in Latin, Ovid and other Latin works.  And because the polio had weakened my facial muscles and destroyed others, I spoke with a mumble.  My voice was changing, so I had a heavy voice (mumbles).  And several of my, you know, friends in class--kids know no mercy.  They would say, "Miss Fortune, we couldn't hear that.  Could you ask [HistoryMaker] Ronald [T. Gault] to read that chapter again?"  And I would want to strangle them if I could.  And she'd say, "Oh, absolutely."  She couldn't see that they were just, they were having a grand time, right?  But again, what happened is I graduated as my class president.  And as such, I gave the keynote speech at graduation.  Much of that was attributed to her insistence that I enunciate properly, because people in the class couldn't understand what I was saying as I read this passage of the Ovid.  Another one of these same little--well, actually a group of--same set of people with different personalities--we would have lunch together for the most part.  And I was having soup.  But anyway, this thing that's ingrained in my mind is we were having soup.  And because I couldn't pucker at that point, the soup would dribble.  And I would take a spoon of soup and (gestures wiping his mouth).  And so, one little kid, a little chubby kid named Jessie Richardson [ph.] said, "Okay, okay, okay, tell me who is this?  First one can guess gets a cookie."
Story_ID: 209836
Speaker 1: In high school [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] now, you became, so you've got this, you got polio in high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: And you struggled with that, you know, but you also, you know, you become class president in your senior year.  When did you physically kind of break through?
Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting, because I'm about six feet now, and I was about the same height when I was in high school.  When I back to school I weighed 122 pounds.  I weigh about 175 now, 180.  And so, there was one occasion that really stands out in my mind.  It's that my cousin and I, we were in the same class.  And we were going to the Friday night DuSable High School social.  It was forty cents to get in, live band, all your friends are there.  There was never a big fight scene or anything like that, because we knew our parents would say, "No, you can't go."  But anyway, we were fourteen years old, and we walk up to the school.  And it was forty cents to get in.  And you go upstairs and you check your coat, and it's free checking.  The people who ran the coat-checking concession were on the football team.  And fourteen year-olds are very much impressed by seventeen and eighteen year-olds.  All they had to do was say "Hi" or smile, and they would have little lap dogs in us, if they had done that.  But instead, the captain of the team, in fact, who lived on my block said to me, he said "Do you have a quarter?"  And I said "No."  He said, "You come to the dance and you don't have a quarter?"  I said, "No."  He said, "Okay, you'll be the last one to get your coat tonight."  I said, "I still don't have a quarter."  And so, he took the ticket and swatted it to me.  And I was intimidated.  And my cousin said, "Jesus Christ, why didn't you give him a quarter?"  I said, "I'm not going to give him no quarter.  He's not supposed to be taking money from kids coming here.  He's supposed to be checking the coats, not holding up people."  Sure enough, that night I was the last one to get my coat.  I mean, they took everybody's ticket except my ticket.  And that made an impression on me.  I said, "If we ever got to where we were running this, it would be very different.  We're not going to have people treated like this, intimidating young kids.  That's crazy."  And I don't know why I felt that way.  But I did, I felt very strongly about that.  And I guess maybe it was the near-death experience of having polio, you know, and knowing that you could not make it.  You know, people were dying of polio at that point.  Nineteen fifty-three [1953] was the year when the [Jonas] Salk vaccine was discovered [sic. 1952], just before the Salk vaccine was discovered.  And that experience, plus coming from that era, you know, it was, if you didn't stand up for yourself, nobody else would stand up for you, and nobody would have respect--if you stood up for yourself and you got beaten down, that's one thing.  But if you didn't stand up at all, that was another thing.  So, that was part of it.  And I think that was--and that didn't come from my mother [Lillian Adams Gault] or my father [Charles Gault].  Well, I guess it kind of came from my father, too.  You know, there were kid fights, and teenage fights, and stuff like that, and he was aware of it.  He'd say, "No, you're not--don't come running back to the house.  There's no refuge here.  It's out there, and you got to deal with this.  I can't deal with it, you've got to deal with it."  So, this other experience was one of these kids, one of the bullies--you go through the lunch line and you'd order your food, and you'd pay the cashier.  And the cashier would put your money or your change on your tray, as you stepped out into the larger cafeteria.  Four or five guys were standing there, and said "Look, you got a quarter?  I want to borrow that quarter.  Or can you give me that dime?"  Well, if they did that for forty minutes, they got quite a little take.  And the drill was if you said no, they'd bump your tray.  So, you would be faced with then buying another lunch.  I mean, because there was no adult there to supervise that part of it.  And so, I told one of these guys, I said, "You may knock this tray over, but I will be all over you with the empty tray.  Now, if you want to knock it over, knock it over."  And those two things kind of stuck out in my mind as a freshman--that we should change if we got to be seniors and juniors running the high school.
Story_ID: 209837
Speaker 1: And as I said earlier, in 1954, with the launch of Sputnik [1] by the Russians, the whole attitude towards being studious--and then being part of something other than just a whole lot of laughs and giggles and chasing footballs--while everybody liked football and basketball, there was another element to it.  And we had to be a little more serious about what we did.
Speaker 2: It's interesting that you should raise that, because a lot of people who grew up in the same period of time, don't mention Sputnik.  Though I remember it was a big deal.
Speaker 1: It was.
Speaker 2: You know, and everybody in the U.S. felt they were behind all of a sudden.  You know, the Russians [sic. Soviet Union]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was, it was--
Speaker 2: --the Russians put this satellite in orbit--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and we're behind.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, and it was really kind of an attitudinal change, in that you just couldn't allow the kind of, you know, dominance by athletes and hijinks, and the silly side of being a young person just dominate everything.  So, I don't think we had any organized efforts, but the word got passed that you don't knock over trays.  And I think we had somebody finally start monitoring people as they came out of the lunchroom.  Another thing was if you wore a nice sweater or a nice shirt, they would say, "I really like that shirt, I really like that sweater."  Sweaters were more of the thing.  I'd say, "Thanks."  They'd say, "Take it off."  You know, for an eighteen year old to tell a fourteen year old that, you know, it's quite an event.  And that went way back to--and I remember those experiences, and very clearly.  It wasn't that we were any do-goody, or this was any faith-based kind of thing we were doing, but I think it was born out of the experience that we had had ourselves--that I had myself--with my cousin coming in that year as a freshman and these guys, if they could have just said, "Hey, look, here's a young guy," we would have been doing anything they would have said for us to do.  You know, we would go get them cokes, and do this and do that.  But it didn't turn out that way, and I think that had a very big impression on me.
Story_ID: 209838
Speaker 1: Now do you think you got some of this from your family?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean there was a--I drove past where we used to live on Forrestville [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].  And I guess at twelve or thirteen years old we would say, "I'll meet you on the four-ways," which sounds like some hot rendezvous spot, right?  Well, the only thing was, it was the corner, you know, and there was four-way traffic there.  (Laughter) You know, so that was our rendezvous point.  We sat on the railing on the four-ways, and would sit in the summer until 9:30 or ten or eleven o'clock at night just talking.  And I guess I got in a fight with one of these kids.  Well, you know, we were all friends.  I got in a fight with, his name was Curtis Slater, I'll never forget it.  He became a cop at one point.  And he was very dark, I mean, before black was beautiful.  And I said, I made some reference to him being black, "Blackie, shut up," or something like that.  And there was a fight, and he and I were battling it out.  We used fists, there wasn't any knives or...  And I, quite frankly was getting the better of him in the fight.  And he had on a jersey that wouldn't tear, so I couldn't tear his shirt.  That was part of fighting--you'd pop somebody or tear their clothes, and you're the winner.  I took the shirt and I threw it in the tree just as he tore my shirt. And as we stepped out, he said, "Get out of the street, there's a car coming."  And we stepped out in the street, and he caught me with one, right in the left eye.  And at this point, I still considered myself ahead in the fight.  And we're in front of my house, and my--you know, folks are saying, "What's going on?"  And my mother [Lillian Adams Gault] and father [Charles Gault]--my father said, "Jesus Christ, what happened to you?  Get back out there."  You know, and I said, "But I won."  "You don't look like you won to me."  (Laughter) So, my mother, she says, "Absolutely not."  So, there was a big tussle whether I was going to go out and finish this, and what not.
Speaker 1: Well, the story of your great-uncle, you know, Tommie [ph.], in Mississippi is a story that's similar, where he's not going to take, you know--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --the usual--
Speaker 2: Treatment.
Speaker 1: --mistreatment, you know.  He's not going to do it.
Speaker 2: And who knows how much that gets engrained--
Speaker 1: And all the western novels.  I don't know--I mean because the western novels always had these scenes where the bad guy's in a gang, and one guy stands up to him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and faces him down.
Speaker 1: 'High Noon,' you know--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: I was wondering, you know, I was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, I think that probably all of those things were contributing factors--
Story_ID: 209839
Speaker 1: And I guess the last thing is, I just didn't always want--I didn't want to be just a part of the crowd, or to laugh at stuff that at the end of the day might be offensive to me.  There was a young guy, Angelo Donegan, that was on the basketball team [at DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois], he was a basketball player.  And he was one of the seniors that were all running for these class offices.  And I was scheduling my speech in the last cluster of people, since we were running for class president.  The vice president followed the treasurer, and the treasurer followed the secretary.  So at one point, this kid, Angelo Donegan, went to college with Tom Brokaw as it turns out, out in South Dakota.  Brokaw played basketball, and he must have been pretty good because this Angelo Donegan was a very good ballplayer.  He was running for treasurer or secretary, one of those two.  And he starts to make his campaign speech, his election speech, and he makes a grammatical error.  And seventeen year old kids--sixteen, seventeen year old kids, can be very silly.  I mean, they just fall all out in the auditorium, and laughing and repeating it over again.  And then finally a teacher, Miss Minor [ph.], said--called us to order, and to settle down.  And so Angelo, poor Angelo, managed to finish his speech.  He obviously didn't win.  But before the election, I then spoke.  And then I looked back, and it wasn't--it would have been a masterful ploy, tactically, to call attention to it, that as a point of principle, we shouldn't treat our own like this.  But that was the point that I made.  "I mean, how can we talk about having an election in which there's respect that we're paying to one another when one of our own makes a simple mistake and this place falls apart with laughter?  I think we all owe him an apology."  And that was, that was sincere.  That wasn't fabricated because it was an opportunity to make a political point.  And so, Angelo stood up, and they all clapped and stuff like that.  But I sincerely felt that way.  And in retrospect, I think that was the most positive thing in the campaign, and I won it by a landslide.  I mean, nobody ever talked about it, but I think that was a major factor.  And I think that was--in terms of your own character--it's that I never just wanted to follow along without thinking about what I was doing, or why I was in this situation, or what were these people laughing at?  And that's a part of it.
Speaker 2: Now, this is, well, you tell an unusual kind of a story.  As class president in high school, most people don't have any issues in high school when they run for president.  It's more of a popularity contest, it seems.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And you're running on principles, and you see things that need to be changed.  You know, it's really interesting.  You know, you really set the tone for what you do next, I guess.
Story_ID: 209840
Speaker 1: Well, and I think that there's a pattern to those, you know, the moments that you're proud of, and the things that you've done.  It was during the '60s [1960s], and the black consciousness movement was very serious, this black consciousness in South Africa, and black awareness here.  We were working for the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] which was--at the time, this agency was headed by a black man, [HistoryMaker] Roger Wilkins who, I guess Roger is about seventy now.  I saw him just a couple of weeks ago.  So, he wasn't that much older than--you know, a lot of people, young people that were working for him.  Very clearly, not many of the older people were working for him.  And he was one of the ranking blacks in the [President Lyndon Baines] Johnson administration, as the assistant attorney general in the justice department.  Yet and still, when you looked at this agency, it was lily white in terms of leadership.  And it was a period of time when blacks were very much aware of having authority and power, and playing key roles in government.  And so, you know, I guess we were in our early thirties, late twenties.  Most people were in their late twenties; I was in my mid to late twenties.  And we talked a lot about these issues, and the revolution and what not.  And so, I said, one day I said, "You know, we need to practice what we preach at home, right."  And so, we got into a big discussion about what that meant.  And I said, "Well, look at this agency.  We have a black guy who's running it, and all of us are field people, right?  I mean, it's almost like the house niggers and the field niggers," which got everybody talking about it.  "So, what should we do about it?  This guy doesn't like criticism."  I said, "Well, the reality is this is the reality."  So they said, "Well, who's going to raise it?"  I said, "I'll raise it, I'll raise it, sure."  So, he and I weren't particularly close at the time.  I worked for someone else, and he knew I worked for them.  So, I got on his calendar, and I said--I pointed out what the statistics were.  And I said, "We're only bringing this to you because we love you, you know.  I'd rather bring it to you in this way, and have us talk about it and let you deal with, than have some kind of action by people who work for you who are black, and embarrass you, and then you start to focus on it."  So he said, "Well, what do you propose?"  I said, "Well, with the number of changes and promotions that are on the schedule that I know of, because I work in Washington [D.C.]..."  And these other people are working in Chicago [Illinois], Detroit [Michigan], and elsewhere.  I said, "Why don't you make, rather than have Larry Hoffman become the general counsel, which is a key position, let him become assistant program head."  He said, "But he's a lawyer."  I said, "So, what, there's a lot of lawyers working here like so-and-so."  We had four or five lawyers.  He said, "Okay, who's going to pass this word on in a way that, you know, it results in anything?  Because these people could have a job action, you know, that could be legitimized and could be prosecuted."  I said, "Well, I know what you're talking about, because we do as much socializing together as we do working together."  I mean, the work was--there was no end to the work.  The dinner would start, or the drinks would start, and the next day would start and, you know, so it was a cycle.  We'd party together, we worked together; we all knew each other.  We weren't cops or anything, but you worked and partied with the people that you worked with.  And so this young guy, Hoffman--I said, "Let's go have a, let's have lunch, let's have a drink or something."  He says, okay.  I said, "You know the general counsel job is up."  He said, "Yeah."  I said, "Are you one of those being considered for it?"  He said, "Yeah."  I said, "I think you should pass it up."  He said, "Why?"  And I said, "Because I think they should put somebody black in the job."  He said, "And, what about me?"  I said, "I've got the job for you." And I told him about this other job.  He said, "Now, when did you get all this authority?"  (Laughter) I said, "Hey, does this make sense to you?"  He said, "Yeah."  I said, "I think I can make it happen."  And so it happened, right?  And so, it got immediately an emboldened caucus, right.  Now, many of the black guys on this that were field representatives were sending these reports that were basically unintelligible, because I had a job where I would read a lot of their reports.  Although I did what they did, I also did stuff that goes with it.  And I mean, it was grammatically incorrect.  The syntax was off, and they didn't get to the point about the issues they were trying to address.  And so I said, "I just want to let you know, again, we've got to practice what we preach.  We're trying to talk about excellence here.  You know, these reports have got to be tightened up, they really do.  And we've got to figure out how we're going to do that.  And you know, the only way to do deal with this, that I know, of is to call names, so we can address issues.  So, if we're going to address issues in your report, you need to work on your grammar.  There's a book by a guy named Rudolf Flesch called '[The Art of] Plain Talk.'  And what he does, he constructs simple declarative sentences to tell a story, and that's what you need to help you with your report.  You don't need these compound, complex, sentences trying to deal with convoluted thoughts.  Because at the end of reading this thing, I don't know what you're talking about."  Some people bristled at it, but most people kind of got with the program.  And I kind of found that in life that's a way of trying to deal with issues.  Sometimes it works, most times it works, and sometimes it doesn't.
Story_ID: 209841
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's go back to high school [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] graduation.  Can you tell us about that?  And had you chosen a school at this point?
Speaker 2: At graduation, I had--there's a woman who's in that book.  Her name is Helen Chesnya [ph.], she was the guidance counselor.  And my grades were pretty good, I guess.  It was all relative.  And I told her I wanted a college that looked like a college, so I could go on to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] for a summer session.  I passed up the Lab School; I didn't go there for the summer session.  There was always some special summer sessions.  And while that was a beautiful campus, to me, I didn't want to go to a college that was an urban university.  I wanted to go a college that looked like a college, someplace with a pastoral setting, where you could sit under trees and read, et cetera, et cetera.  That was one.  Secondly, I wanted it to have--and this is probably first--to have a strong academic reputation and be respected for scholarships.  Because I didn't want to go someplace where people would say, "You went where?  Jesus Christ," right? I mean over the years, I have a good friend who went to Cheyney State [College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania], it's a teachers college.  And he's at the top of his profession in another business, in communications, and making a lot of money--I mean, if that's a measure of anything.  So, it's not always a correlation between where you go and what you accomplish.  I know that much better now than I did then.  But I wanted the school to have some scholastic and academic standing.  And then finally, I wanted to be far enough away from Chicago [Illinois] that--she's in the picture, too--my childhood, my high school sweetheart, a girl named Annie Ruth Dixon [ph.], who was without a mother.  Her aunts were raising her, and a kind of ne'er do well father.  And I could tell from their treatment of me that I would be just the right guy for their niece.  Now, at seventeen or eighteen years old, that was not about to happen in my life.  And although I liked her a lot, and I think she liked me a lot, that just wasn't going to happen.  So, I was mature enough at eighteen to realize--at seventeen to realize--because my birthday is in December and I was graduating at seventeen--to realize that if I stayed in Chicago or stayed within striking distance of Chicago, that I was going to see Annie Ruth every night, or she was going to see me every night on the campus.  And that probably was not the best way to have a college experience, and certainly not an experience in which you would find yourself there at the end of the year.  Because as a senior I had friends who had gone to college the year before, who fell in love with the idea of coming home, and at the end of the year they just stayed home, because they didn't make it.  So, those are the three criteria, and she gave me two places.  One was Lawrence College [Lawrence University] in Appleton, Wisconsin which had a very strong reputation.  It was headed by a former, I think Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] president.  And then Grinnell [College, Grinnell, Iowa]. And I visited both.  And the people at Grinnell were just very friendly, very warm, and I liked them.  There was an incident in Appleton, and I don't know if it was planned; it could have been a very insidious plot.  But I took one of my friends with me to see the two.  And we'd go to the fraternity house, and they'd put us up and introduce us and all that.  And as we were leaving, the train kind of comes to a lurching halt.  This woman gets on the train, white, hair in rollers and a scarf.  Obviously, she had been doing something else, and rushed to make this train.  There's no one else in this afternoon coach going back to Chicago from Appleton, Wisconsin, but she elects to sit across from us.  So, she immediately starts talking, "You guys are here looking at the colleges.  Well, there are no black people here, and there won't be anybody for you to go out with, or to really be friends.  But if you decide to come, I will tell my children to be your friend, and you'll have, you know, you'll have someone that you could talk to.  And you can come to our house and have dinner, and I'm going to try to make it as warm an experience as it possibly can be."  So, she carried on like this for the--I mean, again, was this a sinister, invidious kind of scheme? It's like, Jesus Christ, do you young guys want to go through that?  Or was she just trying to be genuine, and lay out what was the reality at that time on campus?  Well, the short of a long story, I think without that having happened, I would have chosen Grinnell.  But with that happening, Grinnell was the clear winner, and that's how I chose Grinnell.
Story_ID: 209842
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Grinnell [College] is in [Grinnell] Iowa, right?
Speaker 2: In Grinnell, Iowa, three hundred miles directly west of here [Chicago, Illinois], directly west of here.
Speaker 1: Now, what is Grinnell like?  What do they--
Speaker 2: Well, it's in a small town; five thousand, they say is the population.  But you can only get the five thousand, I would argue, if you counted everything with a heartbeat, you know, dogs, hogs, sheep.  Because it's a little small town, it's a college town.  And during that time, it was, you know, again, civil rights was a big issue.  But it wasn't a big issue on that campus, because there were only five blacks.  And there were no blacks in the town.
Speaker 1: Now, this is 1958, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And one of them actually was my cousin, who I didn't know at the time.  Three of them went to Francis [W.] Parker [School, Chicago, Illinois] private school.  One came from St. Louis [Missouri], and one came from Maywood [Illinois].  Out of eight--I guess when I went there it was like 850 students.  When I graduated it was a thousand, and right now it's about fourteen hundred.  I'm on the board of trustees.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so it was a scene, you know, where you had liberal whites trying to do good.  And it sort of eased the blunt of racism, I think, as you would have found it in other academic environments.  And that, that, that liberalism I think kind of undergirded a lot of the well-meaning stuff that was done, in addition to the fact that you only had five people, and this was at best a limited issue to be addressed in any kind of real sense in the college, and virtually non-existent in the town.  Having said that, there were a couple of experiences that resonate.  One--I guess I was a sophomore or a junior, because my cousin was a sophomore.  They were big athletes, and they were like All-World in terms of playing football and basketball and baseball.  And they'd gone to Francis Parker, and they had coaching.  And so, you could see the difference between a student that went to that kind of environment and one who went to DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois], where the football team practiced on the gravel parking lot, because they were too lazy to go to Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois].  They now they've built a football field right by the school.  And these guys, they had trained and were coached and all, and they were good athletes, too.  And so, one had started to date kind of the queen of the sophomore class, and she was a town girl that went to college, went to the college.  And there came an occasion when--the word was the townies objected to that, and they were going to come to get this guy.  And it wasn't a whole-scale, you know, concern, but the people kind of around them were kind of aware of...  But they were big guys who were jocks and what not, so they were prepared to defend themselves.  So, I didn't know the whole story until they left.  And I and a handful of others had become concerned about a restaurant sitting on Highway 6 called The 3 Elms [Restaurant, Grinnell, Iowa], and it wouldn't serve interracial couples.  They would serve you if you were black and you were alone, or if you were a black male or a black female.  But there were only two black females on the campus, and one of them wasn't really somebody that you would want to date.  So, we were concerned--"Oh, this is outrageous that you have to, you know, pick the time that you could go in and be served.  So, let's challenge this."  So, we had two people go in the restaurant and sit, so that they could be witnesses.  And I and this white girl walked around the block, and we were just kind of talking, we were talking generally.  And we said, "We really need the students to take a stand on stuff like this."  If we can go and protest what we're doing in Cuba, we can certainly protest about what's happening in America."  Because we were the delegation that went to Cuba to protest it.
Story_ID: 209843
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were telling us a good story when we ended last time.  From Grinnell [College, Grinnell, Iowa] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were talking about the early '60s [1960s], 1960, 1961.  The sit-in movement had started in the rest of the country, in the Southeast in particular.  And those few blacks at Grinnell, as well as white liberals who were sympathetic to civil rights and racial justice issues, were concerned about some of the things that had gone on and were continuing to happen in the Grinnell environment here in the middle of Iowa.  And one of the things that was particularly disturbing was that this bar, or restaurant [3 Elms Restaurant, Grinnell, Iowa]--it was really a bar and restaurant sitting on Highway 6 in the middle of Iowa.  So, you can imagine what kind of clientele it has.  It had a "selective serve-you" practice.  And for blacks who were the same sex and gender, they would serve you anytime.  For blacks and whites of a different gender, different genders, they would probably not serve you on Saturday and probably not serve you on Friday night, depending on how busy it was.  So, a band of us like-spirited Grinnellians said, "We should really challenge this.  We should offer some documentation to the college as well as the state officials who have laws against this" and we set about to do that.  So, our plan that evening, which was a Friday--a Friday or Saturday--was to seat inside the 3 Elms Restaurant two or three fellow students.  And then, I and a white woman student would enter and ask to be seated, and see what happened.  And our plan was to take this before the college officials, as well as the state officials, if in fact we were not served.  I told you earlier about this athlete being threatened by the town people because he was going out with the queen of the town's high school when she graduated, who is now a college student, and I think was a cheerleader.  And he was Mr. All-World athlete.  So, I'm walking around the block, allowing our potential witnesses to get seated in the restaurant before I entered with this white woman, white student.  And we were having a conversation, and we started talking about this thing that had occurred.  I said, "I heard they were going to enter his room in the middle of the night and drag him out and beat him."  And she said, "Well, no, that's not quite right."  And she says this, just as I'm reaching for the door.  She says, "That's not quite right."  She said, "They were going to drag him out, beat him, and castrate him."  I said, "Castrate him?"  She said, "Yeah, that was the word; they were going to castrate him."  And in that nanosecond, a thousand things flashed through my mind, one of which was that the two people inside were avowed Peaceniks.
Speaker 1: Non-violent.
Speaker 2: And one said to me that if he had seen his mother or sister being raped, he couldn't react in a violent way to stop it.  So, I gulped hard, and said, "I think we need to get a new plan.  Why don't you go in and tell those two guys we're going to do this another way."  And we retreated to campus and talked about it.
Story_ID: 209844
Speaker 1: So, I mean--I laughed about that afterwards.  But some two or three weeks passed, and word of what happened got spread around campus [at Grinnell College, Grinnell, Iowa] pretty well, and we staged a second attempt to do this [integrate 3 Elms Restaurant, Grinnell, Iowa].  But this time, we had I guess a dozen or so fellows waiting just outside the eyeshot of the restaurant and bar.  And they were to respond to our signal, if anything was happening.  So, I run the same routine.  The woman sits down in one of the seats.  One of the patrons--a lot of these guys were farmworkers, whose idea of a good time on a  Friday and Saturday night was to go in town and get in a good fight and bite somebody's ear off; that was a good time for a lot of them.  And others were truck drivers passing through and, you know, a good brawl was a way to let off tension, et cetera.  So at any rate as we go in, and this woman I'm with and I start to find our seats, there's one of these people who--there's a bunch of six or seven guys at one table, and they weren't students.  He says to us, he says to me, "Hey, Rastus, hey Rastus."  And I said, "He probably has a speech impediment, and is trying to say Ronald."  Because I, at that point in my life, didn't know who Rastus was, as a character and a butt of jokes, and that they were blacks.  (Laughter) I come from Chicago [Illinois], from basically a segregated community in Chicago.  And as a young person, I wasn't exposed to all of these very subtle references to slurs, racial slurs.
Speaker 2: That's a minstrel reference--
Speaker 1: Right.  So, Rastus is this old, head-scratching--
Speaker 2: Rufus Rastus, right.
Speaker 1: --you know, shuffling his feet and mumbling his words.  So, I said, "Oh, hey, how you doing, man?"  I said, "I'll be with you in just a little while."  So, then I waved at him, and he was completely befuddled as to "Why would he wave at me? Is his name Rastus?"  I could tell he was, he was totally confused.  I didn't appreciate what he was saying.  So, this kind of became later in life a funny thing.  Anyway, we're served, and the point is made that this guy is going to cease and desist that practice, and we leave.  And as we're leaving, the table of six or eight guys, they get up to leave.  So, it's going to be some kind of--there's going to be a confrontation of some sort, since I'm there with the woman.  And we have two other people in the room, and the place is cramped.  So as we're walking out, down the alley rolls this one lone Grinnell, Iowa police car.  The sheriff knows everybody in town.  And he leans out the window and says to these guys, "Bob, Archie, what y'all doing?  Get going."  He says something to them dismissive.  They say, "Okay, Sheriff."  In the meanwhile, we had already signaled our crew of defenders as it were, and they had started across the street.  And we all kind of had a jubilant walk back to campus, which was about two or three blocks from the campus.  But that, in effect, ended that selective discrimination practice at that little bar restaurant along Highway 6.
Speaker 2: Well, it's an interesting dynamic that, I mean it shows a start and a stop.  It wasn't just like--you know, usually we don't hear the full story of these.  You know, you see, you know, you only hear the triumphant part, but not the strategy part.  So, that's a good story.
Speaker 1: It was an interesting experience, because it did result in this guy changing his practice.  I mean, who knows?  It was not a place where you were going to find a lot of black or interracial couples to begin with, on a Friday or Saturday night.  Because if they were affiliated with the college, usually there was something to do on the college campus, and you would not spend prime time Friday or Saturday at a bar-restaurant on Highway 6.  They just wouldn't do that.
Story_ID: 209845
Speaker 1: Now, anything else from Grinnell [College, Grinnell, Iowa]?  Now, were you a part of any of the civil rights organizations?  Had SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] tried to organize there, or some of the other groups?
Speaker 2: Well, that's interesting.  We had a human rights committee, but there was no organized civil rights activity as such.  I, because I had an interest in it, went to this large sit-in conference in Washington, D.C.  And I've brought a number of clips to show you.  And as a delegate to that sit-in conference, I was basically a reporting function to the college's student council.
Speaker 1: Now, is this--
Speaker 2: But there was no, there was no organized committee dealing with civil rights and racial justice issues.
Speaker 1: The sit-in convention in D.C., was that hosted by SNCC or--
Speaker 2: Well, it was at the All Souls Church [Unitarian, Washington, D.C.], I never will forget that, on 16th Street.  It featured Diane Nash.  Remember her?
Speaker 1: Yeah, she's in Chicago [Illinois] now.
Speaker 2: And [HistoryMaker Reverend James] Bevel.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he is, too.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I don't know what their marital status now is, but that was before the two of them married.  And it may have been SNCC, but I think it was a large umbrella organization.  Somebody had--
Speaker 1: They were SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] at that point.  But they were both, I mean, both groups were doing, staging demonstrations.
Speaker 2: And then the role I played was basically a reporting function, back to the student council.  I worked with one other Grinnell student, and we would go back and report it.  There was no action for them to take, you know, other than sending money to one of the organized efforts.
Story_ID: 209846
Speaker 1: In Chicago [Illinois], I guess if you really had been involved in the civil rights and racial justice issues, which I had not been in high school [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois]--because you know, high school was just prior to that, at least in the North; in Chicago it was.  And there was no organized network that had slopped back over in Chicago.  Some of the Ivy League schools and some of the East Coast schools were participating in this COFO [Council of Federated Organizations].  I don't know if you remember the COFO summer.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In which [Michael] Schwerner, [Andrew] Goodman, and the other one who was killed.
Speaker 2: [James] Chaney.
Speaker 1: Chaney, Chaney.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's '64 [1964], the summer of '64 [1964], right.  COFO was like--
Speaker 1: Confederation of--
Speaker 2: -a confederation of all the groups.
Speaker 1: And so, there was one demonstrator, one demonstration here during the summer before that at Rainbow Beach [Chicago, Illinois].  This was before [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] brought SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].  And I and three or four young guys that I had gone to high school with, we're now in different places going to college for the most part, and we would come together during the summer.  And that was really our first or second summer in college, and the first or second time since graduating high school that we had kind of convened.  And we all expressed dismay and concern about civil rights, and also about our being disconnected from it.  So, "There's a demonstration at Rainbow, let's go to Rainbow Beach."  We knew very little about what the staging area was--how it was being organized, and getting in and getting out.  So, we're all up at Rainbow Beach on this Sunday afternoon, Sunday or Saturday afternoon, in total ignorance of how large this demonstration was and how violent and vitriolic the anti-demonstrators were, and how many of them there were.  There were thousands.  So, we rock up--
Speaker 2: This is like 79th [Street] and the lake [Lake Michigan], right?
Speaker 1: Right, 79th and the lake.
Speaker 2: It's on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], right.
Speaker 1: And you know, but in 1913 [sic. 1919] the race riot in Chicago was kicked off because of a swimming incident in Lake Michigan, down in the thirties [around 29th Street], and they drowned.  At any rate, so that's fresh in my mind.  So, the four of us rock up in our little car and parked it, and start to walk towards the beach.  Well, we could see well ahead of us these blue helmets and riot gear, and whatnot.  But the police are walking away from the beach with the handful of demonstrators that had gone to Rainbow Beach, protecting them with shields and bodies, et cetera, from the mob that was there.  At some point, somebody in the mob says, "Oh, let's get those niggers."  (Laughter) So, we looked around and said, "Well, they're talking about us, they're talking about us."  Because we were walking, and we're still a good block away, right, a good block away, having no idea how we're going to connect with these people--how we're going to get through these vitriolic, anti-demonstrators and enjoy the shelter and protection of the police.  So, we turn on our heels and beat it back to our car as they threw bricks and bottles that were smashing around us.  So, we managed to get away, drive away without having the car smashed and anyone being physically injured.  And that anecdote suggests the level of disconnect that I had with some of the organized civil rights activities.  And--
Speaker 2: But also a desire to be involved.
Speaker 1: And but yeah--you know, while a disconnect, but also a desire to be involved, and looking for a way to connect.
Story_ID: 209847
Speaker 1: And there were incidents during that period at 87th [Street] and Cottage [Grove Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], 84th [Street] and Cottage; it was 84th or 87th.  There is a bowling alley called Skylight Bowling Alley [ph.].  And this one summer, there were a number of friends from Grinnell [College, Grinnell, Iowa] who lived in Chicago [Illinois] wanting to get together.  I said "Well, let's go bowling."  There was one guy from Iowa who was staying with me, and another guy named Ron Jefferson [ph.] who lives on the southwest side and went to someplace like Lane Tech [Albert Grannis Lane Technical High School; Lane Technical College Prep High School, Chicago, Illinois]--a big guy, a football player, smart.  I said, "Let's all rendezvous at the Skyline Bowl [ph.]."  So, as we rolled in there, my friend from Ohio, not Ohio, from Oklahoma, has gone ahead of me, he's white.  And I linger a moment to watch these guys shoot pool.  And by the time I arrive, he's got his shoes on.  So, the manager/owner says "I can't let you bowl here."  I say, "Why?"  He says, "If you bowl here, these guys will tear this place up," meaning the guys who were just...  And so out of a sense of frustration, we stormed out and left, again, without any recourse to action that we could follow in a practical way.  It was the end of summer, and we filed a complaint with the Illinois Commission on Human Rights [Illinois Human Rights Commission] and gave them all the facts, et cetera, et cetera.  But there was little that we knew, at least I knew, that transpired there.  I mean, years later my folks [Lillian Adams Gault and Charles Gault] moved right around the corner from there.  And when I got long gone, the neighborhood had changed dramatically, and there's no question that if there was still a bowling alley there now, whether or not you can bowl there or not.  But I remember I guess half a dozen incidents like that.  Those are two or three--
Story_ID: 209848
Speaker 1: --I guess the fourth one, that is probably the most memorable to me, and probably was hurtful, because these experiences were--because it was not organized on my part to make a point about what I had happened upon innocently, it turned out to be a more personal thing than having solicited the desired response, right?  I'm in Washington, D.C., as a junior from Grinnell [College, Grinnell, Iowa].  And the idea is for us to be involved in a broad range of seminars with elected officials as well as appointed officials on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: This is the American University [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 1: This is the American University of Washington.  So, I'm there and I'd done some work for a congressman in Wisconsin.  But I knew that Bill Dawson [William L. Dawson] had offices in the building, and I'd go by to see him.  We hadn't talked about it, but my mother [Lillian Adams Gault] worked for the Democratic organization.  So, here's somebody I stopped by to see.  And in the course of that, I knew that there was a barbershop just below his office.  And I went and I had to get a haircut.  And when my turn came, I noticed that the barber seemed a little--the two barbers seemed a little agitated.  So, when I stepped forward to sit in the chair, one of the barbers, with a deep southern accent said, "Don't you step foot towards that chair.  I know who you people are, and for the record, I'm not going to cut your hair."  He assumed I was being sent by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] as a test case, when in reality the only thing I wanted to do was get a haircut.  But I played it to the max.  I said, "So, you're telling me you're not going to cut my hair because I'm black?"  He said, "Yeah, I'm telling you that.  That's what I'm telling you."  I said, "Do you realize who has his office just above this shop?"  He said, "Bill Dawson?  You go and ask him where he gets his hair cut.  I'm not cutting your hair."  So, I stormed out again.  It was a personal wound; it wasn't something that, you know, I gathered with my friends outside the door and said, "We got them now.  They're on record saying they're not going to do this."  So, I went to the office of--I'm blocking on this guy's name from Wisconsin.  What's his name?  But one of the guys who worked with him, his name was Art Waskow [Arthur Waskow].  And Art Waskow later developed a reputation as an anti-war peace demonstrator.  And I want to say this guy's name was Meyerhoff [sic. Representative Robert Kastenmeier] from Wisconsin, but I'm not sure what his name was; he was an elected official.  Art Waskow and others in the office jumped on this thing with two feet.  They called the Washington Post, they called the New York Times, they called Time magazine.  They had a story in the newspaper that afternoon, and a quote from me and a quote from the guy saying, "You know, we cut anybody's hair here."  I went back the next day and, you know, there was a dual concern.  You want to get your hair cut to bring down the barriers of discrimination, but at the heart of your concerns you wanted to get your hair cut, but you don't want this guy to sit down and mess your hair up.  But they gave me a decent haircut, and we saw the thing through, and for all intents and purposes a change in practice--not so much as from what I did or said, but largely from the kind of attention that it generated in the media.
Speaker 2: You agitated that attention just sort of incidentally, I guess in that case.  You wouldn't have guessed at that time that [U.S.] Congress would discriminate against--I mean a shop in--
Speaker 1: A commercial establishment within a federal office building discriminating against me was the last thing on my mind that I thought would happen, the last thing I thought would happen.
Speaker 2: What that does, that kind of paints a different image.  You know, when you think about, when you read about that era of time in history, people focus on the South as being the place with problems like that, and not--and we don't think of D.C. as being the South.  We think of it as the seat of our protectorate of the federal government, you know.
Speaker 1: Right, right--
Story_ID: 209849
Speaker 1: Anything else from college [Grinnell College, Grinnell, Iowa]?
Speaker 2: Um.
Speaker 1: Now, oh, what did you major in?
Speaker 2: I think those were the big ones.  Political economics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Politics and economics.
Speaker 1: Were you the only black student in that department?
Speaker 2: No.  There was a guy named Donald [M.] Stewart, he was in it.  And I think there was a guy named Phil Powell [ph.].  Donald Stewart was a junior when I was a freshman, he was two years ahead of me.  And I was a year ahead of this guy, Phil Powell.  And I don't know who else was in it, but there were--during my four years at Grinnell, there were never any more than ten black students enrolled at any one given time.
Speaker 1: In the whole college?
Speaker 2: In the whole college, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how was your social life at Grinnell?  Were there any black women there?
Speaker 2: Well, there were; there were two.  One was a woman named Micky Clark.  I don't know if you know that name, Michele Clark.  She was killed in 1977 in an airline crash at [Chicago] Midway [International] Airport [Chicago, Illinois], which in fact led to the closing of Midway Airport for many years.  And--
Speaker 1: What happened at Midway?
Speaker 2: You know, years passed, and there was always the suggestion that somebody did something that upset someone, and it was the plane in particular.  But it was a commercial flight and several dozen people were killed, and a number of them were prominent people.  She was, she was covering the [1972] Democratic [National] Convention [Miami, Florida] during that period.  She had left Grinnell.  And George Collins, whose wife was [HistoryMaker] Cardiss Collins, who stepped in and filled his seat, he was killed.
Speaker 1: He was the congressman from the West Side [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah, congressman from the West Side.  And then she was one, Micky Clark, was a woman who was absolutely a knockout, beautiful.  She didn't finish Grinnell, she quit.  And there was another woman named Susie Brown, who did finish.  And both of these women were I guess a year--Susie Brown was in my class.  And Micky Clark was a year behind me, but from Chicago [Illinois].  And both of them at one point or another were going with, involved with my cousin.  I mean, not that my being his cousin would have affected my chances with either of them, but he was kind of a big time athlete, and they used to kid him a lot because he was sort of this kind of high guy kind of person.  And the people I went to high school [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] with were very--we wore ascots, and somebody would usually ask you for your ascot.  (Laughter) And they wore ascots a lot at this school.  So, the dating, I dated a white girl from--where was she from?  They moved to Chappaqua, New York, but they lived in Bethesda, Maryland before that.  And I guess it was hot and heavy for a while.  And I only dated really that one girl.  The first year--my high school sweetheart--that was over probably by the time I went home for that summer.  And this girl, she and I dated all through college.  And upon completion of graduate school, we're all in Chicago together.  She was rooming with my best, one of my best friends, who marries the girl she's rooming with.  And we'd all come from Grinnell, and our relationship started to turn a little sour at that point.  So she went back to Bethesda, and I carried on in Chicago and then went to Washington [D.C.], going into the Foreign Service.  And then this friend who had motivated the solicitation for me to join, was in Washington.  And it turns out the old girlfriend comes to Washington.  So, it wasn't quite over, but it wasn't quite on again.  But that was pretty much the social life.
Story_ID: 209850
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were there any professors or teachers or mentors at Grinnell [College, Grinnell, Iowa] that you remember that you can talk about?
Speaker 2: Well, I took Latin, and I particularly liked this guy named McKeever [ph.], because he really--I mean he was kind of nurturing; he provided kind of a nurturing experience.  I took Latin in high school [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] and I qualified out of one year for the two-year language requirement.  And having exempted out based on tests, and the fact that I had taken it in high school, I should have really taken another language, but I didn't, and I stayed with Latin.  And college Latin was infinitely more difficult than high school Latin.  So, I was struggling with Latin, and he was particularly generous with his time and helped me.  Any other professors?  No, not really.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I mean they were, they were all pretty straight ahead and helpful, et cetera.  There was no one that stood out above the crowd in a positive sense, except this one guy.  The head of the department was nice enough, and he tried to be, you know, friendly.  But that was kind of, part of being head of the department I guess.  And the guy who ran the music department was equally nice.  But again, it was nothing that was, where I would go over and have dinner with them, you know, once a month or once a week.  They would make some particular inquiries about how I'm doing, et cetera.  There was, and that was probably a very good balanced way of handling it.  Would that have been desirable?  Probably, to have someone that I was close to.  But I didn't, so it wasn't a big deal.
Speaker 1: Were there any black instructors at Grinnell at all?
Speaker 2: No.  Now, yes, as well as administrators.  But then, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And as a member of the board, that's one of the meddlesome issues that we raised for the administration.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it's hard--we say, okay, give us some people.  It's hard to recruit people to go to the middle of Iowa, to go there and try to further their careers.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And where you have to--in that environment, for the most part, publish or perish--there, it's a very heavy emphasis on teaching.
Story_ID: 209851
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about graduation from--when you graduated from Grinnell [College, Grinnell, Iowa], what was next? What did you--?
Speaker 2: Well, when I graduated from Grinnell, it was--I think I mentioned I flipped a coin on money, and it came up the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  You know, a law degree I thought would be interesting, and I would have some currency.  And the job market, I didn't really want to practice any corporate law.  And after I got into it, then I began to realize that one of the alternatives was being a defense counselor.  And, I mean, defending the scum of the earth in many of these cases--maybe 75 percent of the cases--that wasn't particularly attractive to me.  Now, that's a point I came to later in life.  But right after that, I applied to Michigan and to Washington University in St. Louis [St. Louis, Missouri].  I had a full scholarship at Washington University in St. Louis, and the package would have been complete if the college had given me a dorm resident manager's position, which meant that would have covered room and board in addition to tuition.  But in fact, one of my friends subsequently went there because of the research I had done on it, and then I went on to the University of Michigan.
Story_ID: 209852
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, how'd you find the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]?  That's a Big Ten school, a huge school, compared to Grinnell [College, Grinnell, Iowa], I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that I wanted to do it in that order.  I wanted to go to a small college, and then to a large university.
Speaker 1: And you were looking for what kind of degree?
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to be an executive; I wanted an executive position.  It could have been governmental or it could have been business; and this then was focused on management policy.  Those were probably the early days for me in terms of having a business orientation.  I mean, going into business from a liberal arts college background just didn't hold, you know.  I mean, I just didn't seem too excited.  I couldn't get excited about making widgets and having all the widgets line up, and be able to do that a hundred thousand times the same way and make a profit selling them.  So, I couldn't get that excited about it.  Investment banking wasn't really on the screen at that point for a lot of blacks.  I knew it was a business school as such, and I guess there were some blacks that wanted to be in the school.  But I mean this was the '60s [1960s], and there was turmoil in the streets and change in the air.  And sitting in a business office, you know, running a calculation for a model, or evaluating a company, it just wasn't that exciting.  But things changed over time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, any stories from the University of Michigan?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: You got there in '62 [1962], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got there in '62 [1962], and finished in '63 [1963], '64 [1964].  And no, there were no really earth-shattering stories.  It was, as an experience, I'm just glad that I did it in the order in which I did it.  Because it was a huge campus, and many of my friends were either undergraduate students, or out of college, or never had been to Michigan.  And it's like Ann Arbor [Michigan]--and the people who I had classes with--as a single person--a couple of them were married, and I'd be with them occasionally, but that was not the focus of my social life.  My social life was with these other people that I mentioned--a guy named Charlie Mariani [ph.], who was an undergrad, and another guy who worked for the university, and another guy who worked in one of the dining facilities.  And I mean, that was kind of it.  And it was not focused on the kind of inter-mix of graduate students, but a mix of other students who were graduate students at my same level.  I didn't belong to a fraternity, and that was probably a big factor.  Although the fraternities that were there--the black ones thought that--each of thought that I was a member.  And I didn't try to dissuade them, because they would invite me to all of their functions.  But I didn't have a core group of graduate students, or students with whom I associated with.
Story_ID: 209853
Speaker 1: Now then, were you still involved in--you said you got involved with the voter registration campaign in Chicago [Illinois] in '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: That was after grad school [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was on a special project for the Urban League.  Now, the way the Urban League is set up, they had a "bag" or something, I believe.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's that the national organization gets funded for projects that it feeds into the local affiliates.  And in that year, voter education and voter registration was a big item, as you might imagine, in 1964.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Here's the archrival conservative [Senator] Barry Goldwater going against [President] Lyndon [Baines] Johnson, who has reinvented himself.  And so, it was probably a lot of money out there that they could use, in the guise of doing something experimental and different, to promote citizenship.  But the big beneficiaries were going to be the Democrats.  Voter education and voter registration, who's going to benefit from that but Democrats, largely.  So, I did that for, I believe it was a six-month project, I believe.  And there, I did meet somebody that I thought had a fair influence.  His name was [Edwin C.] "Bill" Berry.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: He was the chairman of the Chicago Urban League [Chicago, Illinois] during that time.
Speaker 1: Bill Berry is legendary now.  He had a television show ['People to People']--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --you know, and he was a very well-known personality, one of the early supporters of Harold Washington for mayor.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, how did Bill Berry affect you?
Speaker 2: Well, he headed the Urban League.  And he took I think a particular interest in the young people around him, I mean through--probably to the big disappointment of his senior staff people, who he treated contemptuously.  I mean like he would--he had very little tolerance for his deputy and for his executive director.  He just treated those guys awfully.  But he was quite deferential and quite sensitive to many of the young people, young men, who worked for him.  And as such, as the head of this one project, I got a lot of face time with him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you all attend the [1964] Democratic National Convention in Atlantic City [New Jersey] that year?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That was like the scene of all the, you know, SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] protests and--
Speaker 2: Right, all the SNCC protests and the Mississippi Freedom [Democratic] Party [MFDP], and all that stuff.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.  Did you all register a lot of black voters here?
Speaker 2: Well, we thought we did.  And we thought--we also taught them how to split their ballots if they were Republican and wanted to vote for somebody and not the whole ticket.  And I think the campaign was fairly effective.  But, you know, in the final stage, in any kind of final analysis, the candidates themselves provided more than ample fireworks and motivation for people to come out and vote.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, Goldwater lost in a landslide, I know in '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But the Vietnam War started around that, you know, was starting to crank up.
Speaker 2: It was starting to crank up a bit.  It hadn't really cranked up, but it was starting to crank up.
Speaker 1: Yeah, which kind of--
Speaker 2: We were playing an advisor role, at least that's what we were telling ourselves.
Story_ID: 209854
Speaker 1: In '64 [1964], '65 [1965], you go to Washington, D.C. and get involved in U.S. Foreign Service?
Speaker 2: The USAID [United States Agency for International Development].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The State Department [sic. U.S. Department of State] had an initiative in which it tried to encourage the recruitment of people of color into the Foreign Service.  The USAID is what is known as Foreign Service Reserve Officers.  And that's the group that I joined when I went to Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what did you--
Speaker 2: What did I do during that period?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Basically, it was going to be working in an administrative job until I got placed overseas.  You know, a junior officer will do anything from administrative work to running the fax machine, I later learned.  And we did not reach a point where we were discussing specific assignments--
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: --other than, you know, learning--having a proficiency in the language, both written and spoken, and being available.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I think before we started you said that you were kind of lured to, you thought you were going to be sent to Francophone, West Africa?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I was--I have a friend who, in fact, he called here earlier today.  That's my friend who was were recruited to go to Bamako, Mali, French-speaking Africa.  And when he was recruited, he told his recruiter--his name was Marion Johnson [ph.]--he had been a colonel in the [U.S.] Army--that I was someone that he should really go after.  This project was ending for the Urban League, I was going to be available.  And this guy took the cue very, very much to heart, and called me and said, "Look, we'd like to recruit you."  And my response was, "If I can have the same package--if I can get French-speaking language training from the Foreign Service Language Institute [sic. Foreign Service Institute], and if I'm placed in an African country in which they speak French and have French ties, that would be fine."  And I named two or three other things that were kind of secondary.  And he said okay, and he signed me up to do just that.  Now there was no written agreement that said that, but I mean I took his word for it, and they knew I was relying on his word.  And at the end of the day, there was no such agreement.  I mean, there was no such opportunity that materialized.
Speaker 1: So, you were assigned to what used to be French Indochina and is now Cambodia, I guess?  Or you said it was--
Speaker 2: Part of it.
Speaker 1: Vientiane [Laos]?
Speaker 2: Well, at the time it was Vientiane, V-I-E-N-T-I-A-N-E.  And the assignment had started to materialize, and I was going to the orientation, which was going to take six weeks for it to happen.  And I started to look for another job.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you never, you never got assigned--you were never assigned to--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Never.  Well, they said that was what the assignment was, but I never left the U.S. to do that, because I just felt that that was not what I agreed to come on board to do.  And this was not going to be a very happy relationship, given that reality.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what assignment did you get?  What did you do?
Speaker 2: Well, I started going to the orientation.  The process was, you're going to Vientiane and you're starting orientation.  You know, and this is what you wear; this is what you carry; this is how you speak; this is how you conduct yourself; this is your responsibility.  So, when I started going through that process, then I would be on the telephone--making telephone calls and doing job interviews, because I was absolutely certain I was not going to go to Vientiane.
Story_ID: 209855
Speaker 1: Now you were taking classes, you said, at the U.S. Foreign Service [Institute] in preparation for--
Speaker 2: Well, no, well, they set up an orientation process.  And as a part of the orientation, you learned about medical procedures.  You had to learn what administrative stuff you had to take to be--what you did if you had dependents, et cetera.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And these orientation sessions are something I would spend a limited amount of time in, because I knew I wasn't going, and that I would be going on job interviews and making telephone calls.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, you had to use the time to your best advantage.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Because I just thought we all had been--I had been misled.
Speaker 1: Now, so this leads us I guess to the Justice Department [sic. U.S. Department of Justice], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  I went to work for the justice department at that time, as I said earlier today.
Speaker 1: So, is this '65 [1965] when you're at the justice department?
Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964], '65 [1965], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, so Ramsey Clark was the attorney general [AG]?
Speaker 2: Ramsey Clark was the attorney general.
Speaker 1: All right.  And [HistoryMaker] Roger Wilkins had a deputy capacity or something?
Speaker 2: No, he had, it was the attorney general.  And then you had an assistant attorney general for civil rights; an assistant attorney general for the Community Relations Service; an assistant attorney general for education; the director of the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]; all reporting up to the AG.  And this guy, Wilkins, as an assistant attorney general, reported directly to Ramsey Clark.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was he the assistant for civil rights?
Speaker 2: He was the assistant for the Community Relations Service, which was an agency created under Title X of the 1964 Civil Rights Act.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now--
Speaker 2: And his duties were principally to mediate and facilitate discussions between civil rights demonstrators, activists, public officials, and public and police officials.  And that was its mandate by law.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, from what I understand, Roger Wilkins had an interesting life and a good career.  But at that time you're saying that his critique down the ranks, of black people down in the ranks, where you were--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --saw where he had an all-white staff--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and planned to hire more.  I mean, he hadn't really thought about that.
Speaker 2: There was no plan that we knew of that would have represented a significant transformation from what was already in place.  And what was in place was unacceptable--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to the rank and file.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was like the mice having a meeting-- who's going to bail the cat--who's going to tell him?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: And I think you were chosen?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 209856
Speaker 1: So, how did you do it?  The way you explained it before, it was really--I mean it seemed very, you know interesting (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, you know, the thing I prided myself on doing that period was that I could be real to myself and to my principles.  I had no material possessions of any note, and there was nothing that I wanted that I would compromise myself to get.  For instance, I had an apartment.  And as a single man, I had a number of other male friends, some of whom were single and some of whom were not single.  Some were engaged and some were not engaged with a female partner, but all of whom, for the most part, were sexually active, as was I.  And without question, my apartment got a regular workout from a whole host of friends--married, single, engaged, unengaged, etc.  And it was almost like the movie, 'The Apartment' with Jack Lemmon; I don't know if you ever saw that movie.  But I was constantly being asked "Well, can I buy you dinner tonight?"  I said, "Well, where?"  He said, "Well, you can go wherever you want to, but I'd like to use your apartment."  (Laughter) And so, you know, I said at one point, "Look, we need to figure out a practical way to do this, because I'm not going to be there to give you the key and then come back to get it.  Because I don't want to know who you're with, and I don't want to ever be in a position where you're faced with being found out for your infidelity and you think that it's...  So, the less I know about it, the better for me.  So, this was the arrangement.  If the green light is on in the apartment, you can come forward.  And the way you come in, is you hit this lock up there at the top and push it at the bottom and turn the thing; you don't need a key."  And the point is, I had so little--I placed so little value on material things at that point in my life--that if they wanted to--whoever it was could come in and do whatever they wanted, and make sure it was clean when they left.  And I was not concerned about being ripped off or having things stolen, because I just didn't put that much value on physical things.  In fact, the only thing that I had that I thought was of particular value to me were two very nice champagne glasses and a nice little car; I owned a Mustang.  And so, I--
Speaker 1: A '65 [1965]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That was a classic year for Mustangs.
Speaker 2: It was.  And so, too bad I didn't know more about maintaining cars, and the importance of proper maintenance.  'Cause when the warranty died, the car was dead.  But that was a learning experience--
Story_ID: 209857
Speaker 1: So at any rate, the whole point was that that kind of captured where I was at that period, in terms of that.  So, approaching [HistoryMaker] Roger [Wilkins] was done without any fear of losing a job, or this guy would be offended and would somehow threaten the career that I had with the federal government, because I didn't plan a career with the federal government.  And this was an adventure that I wanted to have, and certainly there was nothing he was going to say or do that was going to affect my life over a long period of time.  He might say "Get out of here, you're fired" from this job, but hey, if that's the way it was--that's how I approached it.  So when we met, I think we had a very solid conversation along the lines that I described earlier.  I produced the desired results, and he was impressed, and we then started to form a personal relationship.  You know, he was I guess seven or eight years older than I am.  He had married when he was very young and, I guess, you know, that little devil sitting on the left shoulder would whisper to him.  He really hadn't had a life as a young man.  He hadn't sown his wild oats, et cetera.  And so, we developed kind of a rascals' relationship in many ways.  But he saw himself as a writer and stuff, and when the [Congressional Black] Caucus focused on naming his successor, I think it was another kind of--he was gone, so it didn't really matter.  But I think it was a point for us, and a point for all of those watching, that we were serious about what we were doing.  We said to ourselves, this agency, the Community Relations Service, can do good, and it can do well for itself.  But it can't do it if the people who are running the Justice Department [sic. U.S. Department of Justice] think that it is a law enforcement aperture--that the people like us, who work for it, are in place to ensnare activists, or to act as double agents for the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and law enforcement officials.  We need to have someone in place as head of the agency that can do battle at the senior level in the justice department with clients and others, around the integrity of what this agency can do.  And that is to provide insight and direction in these negotiations with civil rights--between civil rights activists and demonstrators, as they negotiate with public officials.
Story_ID: 209858
Speaker 1: So, what shall we do?  Let us focus on how we can name a right-thinking person to succeed [HistoryMaker Roger] Wilkins.  And so we huddled up, and, you know, four or five--three or four of us.  And there was one fellow who was outside of our little core cluster, because he was a media consultant, for the most part, out of San Francisco [California].  But he was a good friend; he came to all our little--you know, the business would slop over to the work, and the work would slop over to the social stuff.  And of these things--we were having a party, having food and drinks and what not, and he was invited.  And we said something about Ben Holman [Benjamin F. Holman].  And he said, "Oh, you guys are thinking about Ben Holman to succeed Roger?"  And I said, "No, we didn't say that, but that's not a bad idea."  He at one point had a media relations in this agency under Wilkins, and he left on pretty good paper with the administration; he didn't do anything crazy.  He knows what the agency is, and he knows clearly who the players are in the Justice Department [sic. U.S. Department of Justice].  The only negative he has was he did this undercover reporter story which offended the Black Muslims.  But they seemed to be okay, because they kind of got retribution when they caught him in New York, right?
Speaker 2: Now, that's an interesting story, and it's probably going to be found somewhere else, but I never heard it before.  Can you tell us that story?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well, he was, the newspaper was the Daily News.  It was the Daily--it was a--it wasn't a tabloid.  It was a tribune type newspaper, right.  And he was a cub reporter, and this had to be in the '60s [1960s], early '60s [1960s].  A lot was being made of the Black Muslims, but there was a mystique associated with the Black Muslims.  Elijah Muhammad lived in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], and seemed to raise a lot of money.  And his people walked around and they were feared.  And what was it all about?  They had a university that was raising their own children and educating them.  So, Holman goes undercover and poses as a recruit, I think.  I think he posed as a recruit.  And he was young enough to do it at the time.  I guess he would have been at that time probably in his late thirties, late to mid, probably late thirties.  And then once he has gathered all this data, he starts to do a series on the farce of the University of Islam [Chicago, Illinois], or whatever the name of the university--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the University of Islam.
Speaker 1: --what a farce it was.  And one day he takes a big story and would open it, and then he would take it to the next level--the part about the apartment, the results that the kids got in school.  But it was an expose of someone who had been inside that could speak authoritatively about attendance, subject matter and the courses, the discipline that they paid to Elijah Muhammad, the kind of blind allegiance that they had to him, et cetera.  So, I mean it was sort of pulling the covers off of the University of Islam.  He got a promotion and moved to New York [New York].  And he was, as I said again, the Muslims caught up him on one of these, on one of his assignments, I guess, and gave him a very good beating.  I think they broke his leg; they broke something.  They gave him a very good beating, but they didn't kill him.  So, we said, okay, so that's the only negative that we could think of.  We could probably come out with something positive for his administration, so let's put his name forward.  Now, the process that we worked, was we knew Ed Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke].  In fact, one of the trio decision makers was a guy who went with one of Ed Brooke's executive assistants, right?  And that's another story; we'll come back to that later.
Story_ID: 209859
Speaker 1: So, to get back to the story with--to kind of complete the loop on the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice], and the esteem that we had begun to--the self-esteem that was very high that we had for ourselves, quite frankly.  Because we thought this next move was the major coup, coup de grace, as it were.  People in government, who would be the Democrats, had sympathetic feelings toward the Democrats working within a Republican environment to say what they thought was a precious resource for people trying to bring about change, et cetera.  We approached Ed Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke] through his executive assistant, and laid out a case for him, that, "You know, we know that you worked very hard for [President Richard Milhous] Nixon.  You did yeomen work for him in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And according to what we've been able to determine, you've never asked for anything from him, and we think that this is something that would be very important for you to ask for.  Ask to name the assistant attorney general for the head of Community Relations [Service]."  He said, "Well, do you have any names?"  So, we said, "Yes, we do."  So, the first bunch of names we gave him, all of those people took money appointments--Sam Jackson [ph.] and several others.  So, the last name we had was Ben Holman [Benjamin F. Holman].  Ben Holman, in less than ten days, is the head of the Community Relations Service for the justice department.  He's very excited.  I see him, and he's very excited.  And I invite him to lunch, and he says, "Oh, I'm so excited."  He says, "Who would have thought of something like this?  I have no idea how this happened."  I said, "Oh, you really don't?"  So, I give him a copy of the letter that we sent to Ed Brooke, in draft, for him to send to the justice department, naming Ben Holman, right.  And, well, I was good in math, because I could see that this guy sitting across the table was getting very uncomfortable with having people within the agency who worked for him. And he didn't have any particular allegiance to us.  I mean, he knew who we were and stuff, but he wasn't one of our close inside people.  You know, he was covering the media and stuff like that, and had a kind of separate little operation from what we were doing.  And we thought we were the down and dirty make it happen group.  He was offering advice and counsel to media people on how they should cover racial issues, how they should cover civil disturbances, et cetera.  But we had enough of a relationship to feel that our analysis was correct, and that the recommendation was a good one.  And so, he said, "Oh, wow."  He said, "Well, I guess I should say thank you very much."  And I said, "Well, I wouldn't spend too much time saying thank you, but you'll do well, I know."  And I ended the lunch and went back to my colleagues.  And I said, "I just had lunch with Ben, and I think we've done all that we can do here.  I am going to say adios.  And I don't have another job at this point, but I think there's one in the offing.  But I would advise you guys to, you know, if you need this job, you're going to have to develop a whole different way of getting done what needs to be done.  You know, it's going to be very different from this point on."  And so, I said goodbye.  And [HistoryMaker] Roger Wilkins had said to me--because now I had--about a two-year period had passed since our first conversation.  And he said if I ever decided to leave that job, I should call him.  And that's one of the first things I did.  So, I called him.  I said, "Look, you told me to call you.  I'm calling you, and I've decided I'm leaving, and I'll be in the job market."  He said, "Well, can you come to New York the next two or three days?"  I said "Yeah."  So, I went and I interviewed with the Ford Foundation, with people he had set up, that he reported to.  And they made me an offer.  The job was exciting enough.  At that point in time, I never really looked at compensation that hard.  It was more, you know, did I like the idea of doing what I was going to do, and was there opportunity in it?  Those two things were satisfied, then it was okay.  I later added compensation to job satisfaction and opportunity.  And then as I became older, there has to be some relevance and relatedness of what the market pays for what I bring, and what I'm being offered.  So, that got added.  And that's the story of moving to the Ford Foundation, and also, the story of how this episode at the justice department kind of came to an end.
Story_ID: 209860
Speaker 1: As an organizing story--I mean, there seems to me there's a lesson in here somewhere, that Ben Holman [Benjamin L. Holman] should have been part of the discussions in the beginning, you know, so you all wouldn't be left with this unknown factor.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, you know, as it turns out, we were ready to take him ahead of some of the other candidates that were on the table, because he knew that the organization would have been changed totally for the worse if it had become an appendage of a law enforcement operation.  He knew that it had to stay separate and apart, and for us that was, quite frankly, the most important thing, you know, whether we saw eye on eye on how the place was organized, or who sat in this job as opposed to that job.  It didn't really matter.
Speaker 1: He was your best option anyway.
Speaker 2: He was the best option.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 209861
Speaker 1: Now, Ford Foundation, what was your job at the Ford Foundation?
Speaker 2: I was a program officer in the National Affairs Division.  And my portfolio was a fairly ethnic one, initially.  But then it focused on national civil rights organizations, and an initiative that Ford launched with a thirty million dollar infusion of capital, called the Community Development Corporation Program.  And that's what I focused on, those areas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, these are dollars for community development projects around the country?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The idea was you would identify key cities.  And within those key cities, there had to be a place with the following criteria:  one, an organization that had leadership and a board, and some demonstrated record of success, and hopefully it was linked to some anchor project.  Here in Chicago [Illinois], for instance, The Woodlawn Organization [TWO] had a close working relationship with the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  So, that linkage was critical in terms of residential development and social services.  That was one of the things that we looked for.  But there had to be some either institutional linkage, whether it was a hospital or a university, or a business that you could build on and could fuse partnerships and working relationships from.  And then they had to have, you know, some capacity to manage the money.  Because if they couldn't manage the money, we all were going to be embarrassed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What are some of the stories from that job?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow, there are a lot of stories.  Over that ten year period, there were a lot of--
Speaker 1: What are the biggest success stories?  And maybe you can tell us some of the biggest failure stories, too.
Speaker 2: I mean, one of the biggest success stories was I persuaded the Ford Foundation to send me to East and West Africa in 1971--that's the year I was married [to HistoryMaker Charlayne Hunter-Gault]--to take a look at how the newly liberated African nations were dealing with their liberation, and the assets from blacks who were there.  And I looked at Kenya, Nigeria, Ethiopia, Ghana, Zambia, and where else--one other country--to look at how those newly liberated governments were dealing with the whole question of assets.  And in one case, in Kenya, I found that one model that was used, was the government would say, "Okay, we're looking at nationalizing your business.  But in order to prevent a flight of skills, we're going to allow you to retain a 5 percent equity stake in your business."
Speaker 1: Are these are for the ex-colonials?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the colonials, too?
Speaker 2: Exactly.  "We're going to take your business and we're going to give you something for it, right, and we think it'll be a fair price.  But in addition to that, we're going to allow you to keep 5 percent.  And as an incentive to you, to not only be there to be helpful, we're going to give you a 3 percent management fee based upon revenue, total revenues generated, if you can get up to that amount.  So, we think you're properly incentivized to stay on."  That as a model worked, this community development corporation model.  For instance, in Chicago there was a chain of supermarkets called the Hillman's Supermarket [Chicago, Illinois] chain--22, 23, 24 supermarkets in the Midwest (unclear).  The guy who owned it, and was the principal family member running it, was a right-thinking guy, I think for the most part, one who did the right thing.  But he saw little benefit in staying in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] at 63rd [Street] and Cottage [Grove Avenue] in the middle of all the hell that was breaking loose during that period.  So, he struck this deal with The Woodlawn Organization, and we put in place the model that I just described.  And for a while it did flourish, it flourished significantly.  And that's a good little story.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: That's a good story.
Speaker 1: I remember they still had Hillman's bakery products in some of the other stores, you know, for years afterwards.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 209862
Speaker 1: And you know what, I guess, and this is kind of a sidebar to that story.  The community [Woodlawn, Chicago, Illinois] wanted to use a number of for-profit businesses to generate revenue to cover their non-profit activity--you know, leaflets educating the community, setting up educational meetings around whatever social issues, or housing issues that they thought were important.  And they wanted to, they wanted to tax, in effect, the supermarket [Hillman's Supermarket, Chicago, Illinois] to help cover some of these costs.  And it's--
Speaker 2: Now, is this TWO [The Woodlawn Organization, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Because TWO-Hillman was one of the operating companies in the for-profit portfolio of the organization.  Well, that went out, because it just wasn't going to work.  I mean, the supermarket business is a very narrow profits business; they have very narrow margins.  And this one, there was a 2 1/2 to 3 percent profit margin.  In other words, you can lose all the profit that you projected if somebody allowed the fruit and vegetables to go unattended and spoil, or if you had some wrong-thinking or wrongdoing people leaving out the back door with meat every night.  It would not take very long for that 3 percent profit margin to disappear.  So, we knew right off the bat that there was no way in which The Woodlawn Organization could tap into the revenue of TWO-Hillman to subsidize the operations of some of the non-profit activity of the community development corporation.  So, I went out and we talked, and we hammered the issue out.  And it was a good news story, and the community organization leaders bought the idea.  They saw very clearly that if they wanted to be treated seriously, they had to start to think differently about how they ran their businesses.  So, and that was a positive story.
Story_ID: 209863
Speaker 1: Now, is there a negative story that you remember [from the Ford Foundation], something that fell through?
Speaker 2: Well, there's negativism that's associated with it.  I'll give you the names, but you probably, obviously it's better not to use the names.  [Reverend] Leon [H.] Sullivan ran one of the big organizations in my portfolio.  And he went through a long list of chief executive officers, and nobody stuck, nobody stuck, nobody stuck.  And so he calls and he says, "[HistoryMaker] Ronald [T. Gault], I think I've got the guy to run this."  So, I go down and meet the guy.  His name was Johnson, Mr. Johnson.  He had a very heavy British accent, black as the ace of spade, and always wore a three-piece black, almost tattered suit.  It was kind of rumpled looking all the time.  And I guess that kind of fit his image, you know, a kind of rumpled and ruffled Brit.  But he was very good, very conscientious, very effective.  He didn't leave problems unresolved, et cetera.  And I guess two or three months later Sullivan called me and said, "Ronald, we've got a problem.  Can you come this way?"  So I go down and I talk to him.  He says, "I was at this meeting, and we were bidding on this security contract with the U.S. Defense Department [sic. U.S. Department of Defense].  And I've been trying for weeks to get Johnson to give me his background papers for the security clearance.  But for one reason or another, he hasn't."  I said, "Well, I kind of figured out what the reason is."  At this meeting of OIC--because he ran an organization called Opportunity Industrial Commission [sic. Opportunities Industrialization Center].  It was a training program, for the most part, for the indigent.  He said, "I'm talking to my state directors."  And one of these guys says, "Oh, is Johnson still working for you?"  He says, "Yeah, why?"  He says, "He's the biggest fraud going."  He said, "What do you mean?"  He said, "Ask to see this Ph.D. he's got, or ask him to see the certificate that he got from [University of] Oxford [Oxford, England] that he's always talking about.  And ask him to see so and so."  He said, "I asked him, and he ain't got that.  I asked him two weeks ago, and he never produced it."  I said, "Well, it sounds like to me--this is your call, it's your organization--you've got a case for termination, which he did.  The guy came to me to make a special pleading, and brought a photo set and copies of this...  And I said, "Well, you know, I have no way of judging the authenticity of these documents.  But if you feel that you've been reliable, the best defense is the truth, right?  Do you understand what I'm saying?"  He said, "Yes," and he dropped it.  And so I mean that's not salacious kind of stuff, but I mean it's--that was a kind of intrigue, and kind of "Let's get this thing right" that was so pervasive in that organization, which I thoroughly enjoyed.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  It's interesting, you went to Africa to learn about, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --how to do something that would benefit the community here.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Many of my colleagues said, "Oh, that sounds like a boondoggle."  I said, "No, it's not; it's for a real trip.  I mean, it can be a boondoggle, but I'm doing this by myself, right?  I'm going to spend six weeks in Africa alone.  Who am I boondoggling with?"  And so, I think it was well worth the effort.
Story_ID: 209864
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, now, you were with Ford Foundation for a number of years.  I guess almost ten years?
Speaker 2: Almost ten, yeah, nine and a half years.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: May 3, 1969 to, I think it was mid-September, the end of September.
Speaker 1: Of '78 [1978], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, of '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, why did you end up leaving the Ford Foundation?
Speaker 2: I thought that life had become so seductive, that for me at that age--it was--at thirty-eight, I didn't want to be forty-eight and still be doing the same thing, or something less significant.  And I had seen over that period of time my colleagues who came in with a great deal of excitement on Monday about getting started on something, and staying late on Friday night, but now coming in later on Monday, and leaving early on Friday.  And the level of their interest in innovation and creativity had waned significantly over time.  I mean, not that they were bad people, but I mean, like, "I got a daughter in college now.  What do you think about x, y, and z school?" as opposed to--"Do you think we can really impact the balance of power in Cleveland [Ohio] with a grant of eight thousand dollars to Cleveland Corp [ph.] that they spend on voter registration and voter education?  Do you think that will work?  Or will they target who they work with?  Are they honest people? Who can vouch for them?"  That conversation, those conversations, were replaced by "You know, I'm looking at buying a second boat, you know."  And at that age, I think I explained to you, I kind of reproached material things.  I guess the dispositive experience was I had a grantee out in California.  And Ford gave away money every Thursday, and I saw the secretary of board.  And I said I had a recommendation that went before the president and the vice-president that I'd like to be out front on the agenda, because I had a plane to catch to go to California to do a meeting and come back.  They said, "Okay, that's fine."  So they arranged for the company limousine to pick me up at 10:05 or 10:10, or whatever it was, and take me to the heliport on 34th Street, where I board a helicopter and flew to JFK [John F. Kennedy International Airport, New York, New York] where the plane was getting ready to take off.  I sat in first class and tempered what I drank and ate, and had a meeting that night, and the same thing coming back the next day.  Now, for somebody thirty-seven, thirty-eight years old, that was very pretty heady, I thought.  And I had seen too many of my colleagues fall into a trap of being unable to just aggregate the respect and deference that people paid to the Ford Foundation and themselves.  You know, if they weren't representing Ford, they wouldn't get the same respect.  (Laughter) So, I just said, "This has been a good run. I like it."  And my timing was incredible, because Frank Thomas [Franklin A. Thomas] succeeded George Bundy [sic. McGeorge Bundy].  And one of the things that he did was to say, "Look, we've got to figure out a way to kind of shake this place up a little.  You know, we've got people who have been here for, you know, fifteen years, twenty years--and not to say they're bad people, but I mean there's a changing world out there, and we have three hundred million dollars to give away to make it a better place to live, you know.  We need to have some capacity to bring in new people, new ideas, new blood--a new perspective on these world problems.  So, let's, we're going to put a contract in place on all our professionals. And the max is going to be two to three years, something like that, some number like that.  Well, you know, think about somebody that's been at a place fifteen or twenty years, and you now say, "We're going to give you a contract for two years, and we're going evaluate where you are at the end of the two years."  He took more heat in the first three years, because of changes that were not fundamental to the operation, than he did in anything that he did.  The fact is I think it was injurious to his reputation and to him.  And there was one long New York Times Magazine Sunday piece written about, "You know, what's going on at Ford?  Why is it taking so long for this transition to be in place?  You can study an issue to death with the Foundation, and never get any results."  So it was against that backdrop that I then look back on the move that I made.  And it couldn't have been at a more propitious moment, although the program that I was involved in, the community development corporation, and these premier civil rights organizations, were still big stuff for Ford.
Speaker 1: Okay, that makes sense, so--
Story_ID: 209865
Speaker 1: So, what did you do?  Where did you go from Ford [Foundation]?
Speaker 2: Well, I had attempted to dissuade a colleague named Haskell [Sears] Ward against taking a job with [Edward] Ed Koch.  Haskell, I met him through his wife [HistoryMaker Leah Ward Sears], who is Jewish, I think she's Jewish, and an academician at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] or someplace [sic].  Koch liked Haskell, thought he was a wondrous Negro, and offered him the job.  And I told him, I said, "Haskell, you've been on the international scene for ten years.  What do you know about domestic issues or, even more importantly, this guy that you're going to work for?"  So, I mean the short of a long story is at the end of like half a dozen debates, he said, "I feel obliged to put something back.  And even if it's not in my best interest, on a hundred points, I think it will be significantly in my best interest, and in the interest of people that I have a regard for and have some concerns for.  So, he joined him, and immediately turned on me as a prospective recruit.  He and another guy who I was closer to in the National Affairs Division, had also been recruited by Koch.  Koch had turned to the Ford Foundation to put together a search committee of people who knew talented people that could do these programs.  And the guy who ran the search committee was the chairman, I mean, he was the vice chairman to whom I reported.  He didn't recruit me, this other fellow was recruited by him.  And the two of them--his name is [Stanley] Stan Brezenoff and Haskell Ward, immediately set about trying to influence me to come.  My wife [HistoryMaker Charlayne Hunter-Gault] was covering the city at that point.  And one of what later became--I became the second one, the senior advisor, and Dan Wolf had only filled it twice.  They set upon her as a part of a full attack to persuade me to come and join the Koch administration.  Now, why was that such a big deal?  It was a big deal because Koch was estranged, had estranged himself from the black elected officials community.  If you recall the facts of that election, Percy Sutton was one of twelve candidates, as was Herman Bedill [sic. Herman Badillo].  Percy gets defeated, he doesn't make the run-off.  I think Herman did.  But Koch beat a quick path to Percy Sutton, and said "Look, pledge your support to me.  Help me win, and the world will be your oyster."  Percy does that, and Koch wins.  And those black elected officials show up and say "Okay, we want this job.  We got a person for this job and that job."  Koch said, "Wait a minute.  I didn't ask that the world be your oyster.  I just said you could, you could name who's going into the positions.  Sure, I would designate that position for a black person, but I'm not saying it's going to be your person.  It's going to be a black person."  And they said, "What mumbo jumbo is this?  You've hoodwinked us.  The relationship has been breached, and we're out of here."  So, I mean, I wasn't crazy.  Koch needed some legitimate way to reach black people, or to demonstrate to black people that he was indeed a man of integrity and righteousness.  So, he sought me out.  And coming from the Ford Foundation, I knew many of the political players who were black, but I didn't have any particular allegiance to them.  I mean, they're friends.  Not that I didn't have any allegiance to them--they were friends, but I didn't owe them anything, and they didn't owe me anything, and they weren't going to take gratuitous shots at me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We could talk and stuff, but that was about it.
Story_ID: 209866
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Ronald T. Gault, R-O-N-A-L-D, middle initial T, last name G-A-U-L-T.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is June 17, 2006.
Speaker 1: And we're here today to complete an interview we started August 22, 2004, correct?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Story_ID: 209867
Speaker 1: When we left off, we had you at, you were just beginning to work for Mayor [Edward] Koch in New York City [New York, New York] in 1978.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, we'll pick up from there.
Speaker 2: Well, as I said, when we last talked--and my memory's not that good that I can remember two years spontaneously.  (Laughter) I looked at the DVD of what we had said, and it was at a point in our earlier conversation where I was describing to you that Ed Koch had won his first mayoral election in the run-off election.  And his success in the run-off election involved him soliciting the support of the black community in New York, which up to that point had pretty much pledged to Percy Sutton, the then borough president, who was quite a political figure in his own right.  At any rate, Percy was one of twelve candidates, I believe that was the number.  And no one had received the required number of votes, and the top candidates had a run-off election.  Percy Sutton was not one of the top candidates, and Ed Koch turned to his constituents, largely the black community, and offered them I guess a deal--not a guess--he offered them a proposition, which they embraced--that is, if they joined him they would certainly have special standing with him as mayor.  They would be given consideration on services, appointments, et cetera.  The relationship between Ed Koch and the black political community was ruptured following his--that is, Ed Koch's election.  He, from their perspective, failed to deliver on the promises that he had made.  He, as you might imagine, disputed that, and they had a breach of that relationship.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were brought in at that juncture to try to repair the damage?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said earlier, I had worked at the Ford Foundation for almost ten years.  And one of the first people that Koch recruited was a colleague, a fellow named Haskell [Sears] Ward, who had been in the international division of the Ford Foundation.  Haskell was a friend.  He knew very little about domestic issues on a broad scale, and certainly virtually nothing about domestic issues in New York City, and certainly not anything about the political scene in New York City.  He solicited my advice and counsel, and I gave it to him freely.  And then he decided in his own inimitable style that he would join Koch.  Once there, he turned to me, as did the mayor--he would not have done that without the mayor's instructions--with a very passionate appeal that I should leave the Ford Foundation and join him in the Koch administration, and that is, work for Ed Koch.  Ed Koch, as I said, had had a breach of the relationship with the black community, and was looking very intensely for someone to represent a bridge to the black community that did not involve the elected political or appointed community.  So, he didn't want someone who was going to be unacceptable to these people.  And clearly because of who I was, and the relationship I had with many of the elected and appointed officials, he thought that I was the ideal person for that; someone who would not be solicitous of them, but who would be respectful of them and they in turn would respect.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 209868
Speaker 1: Okay, so, how did this work?
Speaker 2: Well, I told him [Edward Koch] I wasn't interested in performing a staff job.  I had worked for the Ford Foundation, as I said, for almost ten years, and I was convinced that I was as smart as anyone else in the Ford Foundation.  And we all had a very high opinion of ourselves.  Some was rightfully deserved, others were not.  At any rate, we talked.  I was not interested in a staff job.  I wanted to run something, to see if I was as bright as I thought I was.  He persuaded me to join his administration with a simple position: "Come on my staff as a senior staff person.  Your office will be not as luxurious as the one at the Ford Foundation.  There will be a desk outside of my office.  But anyone who goes into my office or comes into my office," he said, "I will see that you are in a key role.  And much of the power that you'll have will be power that's derivative as a result of your position."  In response to my wanting to run something, he said, "Well, you'll be in a position where you can review everything that's available in the administration--vacancies, positions that are about to vacant for one reason or another, and you and I can sit and make a decision about what the best fit is for you at an operational level.  But for now, join me in the staff job, and we'll go forward."  I did, and that worked out reasonably well, I thought.  He was good to what he said, and within six to eight months I had moved from being a special advisor to one of a number of commissioners.  And my responsibility in his administration was running the Department of Employment, which dealt with training, employment, and entrepreneurial development.  And I did that for the bulk of the time that I was in the administration.
Speaker 1: Well, that sounds like you had, like, broad--you know, a lot of broad powers in the beginning, especially--well, you know, being able to review everything that comes across the--
Speaker 2: Well, as you know, he had a number of assistants.  And I distinguished my position as an advisor from that of the assistants in the following way:  assistants could help him carry out ideas and actions that he wanted to effect.  An advisor, based on the experience and wisdom that that person brought to the position, could offer advice, counsel, and direction, and he quickly embraced the idea.  And that distinguished me, and one other fellow who had owned a newspaper, from the maddening crowd of assistants that he had.  And it gave us access to him that few other people had.  But at the end of the day, it was an advisor's job.  It was, you know, not an operational role.  And I wanted an operational role dealing with people, and budgets, and programs, and action items, and responsibilities, et cetera, because I thought that was a missing part of my professional experience.
Story_ID: 209869
Speaker 1: Now, what do you, when you look back on those days, what are you the most proud of doing?
Speaker 2: What am I most proud of doing working for Ed Koch [Mayor Edward Koch]?  Well, that's a tough one.  I mean I think he and I had a very honest relationship.  He's on record as being opposed to equal employment opportunities, in the most classical sense.  His position was that, look, many of the people who happen to be black or brown, or some other minority, who are benefitting from equal employment opportunity, are much more privileged than some white people.  And for the government or business to give them a break, or some special consideration because of the accident of their race, it's not really fair.  And so, he preferred, and argued quite vehemently for some economic-based test to determine special privilege and opportunity.  I had some problems with that, and we talked about it at length.  I don't think I dissuaded him from his position, and he didn't dissuade me from mine.  And the agreement that we had was that if it became... that, or anything else, became so objectionable to him, that I would say "I can't take this anymore, we're going to have to part company," we would do so as adults and as professionals.  And that was the understanding that we had going in, and I felt strongly about that.  Now in terms of accomplishments, in the administration there were some things that, in the grand scheme of things, the act itself was not that important, but the relationship that grew from it was.  On one occasion, David Rockefeller, the great financial mogul of the western world at that time, had been driving to his office down on the East Side [New York, New York].  And he had an estate in Pocantico Hills [New York, New York].  And I don't know if that's where he was coming from when he had made this observation, but he observed on the Upper East Side [New York, New York], as you pass East Harlem [New York, New York], 3rd Avenue in particular, was just littered with garbage and refuse.  Those were arteries, he argued, that were well-traveled by businesspeople, visitors, et cetera, and that it was really an unsightly scene, and that something should be done about it.  As a concerned New Yorker, he went to an organization called "I Love New York," a non-profit organization that focused on the betterment of society in New York [New York], and he raised with them this issue.  And they came back to him in a couple of days and said, "Mr. Rockefeller," this is his language, not mine, "we can do something about this.  And we've put together a proposal that will take about a million dollars to fund it.  And we can assure you that we will certainly have a cleaner Upper East Side, and 3rd Avenue will be something we can all be proud of."  Well, he smiled I think, kind of a wry smile, and said, "Well, isn't that what you guys are supposed to be doing anyway?  Why would you need me to give you a million dollars to do something that you're organized and prepared to do anyway?"  So, he made kind of a spoof of it. And if he didn't, certainly the reporter who wrote the story that was published in the New York Times on a Saturday morning--the story that I read--did.  I thought about it for a moment, and got on the phone and talked to a colleague who was responsible for the [City of New York] Department of Sanitation.  His name was Norman Steisel.  And I said to him, "Look, Norman, we should really do something about this.  As the commissioner of the department of employment, I have a substantial amount of money to provide jobs and training for young people, and not so young people.  This is during the summertime, and we have a particularly generous pot of money that can be made available to do this kind of project--that is, to clean up and keep in an orderly and sanitary fashion these main arteries on the Upper East Side and in East Harlem.  But what I need you to do is provide the workers who are professionals at this, in the sanitation department, to provide supervision and training.  But it will also represent the kind of insulation that we most certainly will need when the unions raise a hue and a cry about these temporary workers, or casual workers, doing what their fully paid-up union members should be doing."  So, Norman saw the wisdom of my position, and he agreed.  I call Rockefeller the next day, and set up a meeting for that following Monday.  We had a meeting; he embraced the idea.  And poof, within a matter of days or weeks, we had in place a cadre of young people who were doing what he wanted to have done.  And 3rd Avenue was clean and cleared of rubbish, and everyone embraced it.  When Rockefeller got involved, everybody wanted to be involved.  The mayor came to the ribbon-cutting for the occasion.  And everybody else in town who thought they wanted to have this kind of association with Mayor Koch and David Rockefeller, showed up.  And the project was really a success, and has been carried forward I think since then for many, many years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That in itself is, you know, is an experience which I think was a very positive experience that I took great delight in.
Story_ID: 209870
Speaker 1: Okay.  Anything else from the [Mayor Edward] Koch administration?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean there were several incidents that, you know, involved high political intrigue that I managed, I think, to bring some sense of reasonableness to rapprochement between the black community and the Hispanic community on a couple of different occasions that I felt particularly proud of.  And had it not been for that position and the overview that I had, I couldn't have perfected that, and the changes that occurred couldn't have occurred.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, was the black community relatively satisfied with how you were able to help some of their issues?
Speaker 2: I think so.  I think the black community, in terms of what I did, was generally pleased with the outcomes.  Now, when you're dispensing money, as I was, in government contracts, you're not going to please everyone all the time.  But I would say that in the situations in which I dealt, I managed to please the vast majority of the people most of the time.  In the case of the Koch administration, I mean, history will certainly show that there was often a very contentious relationship between the mayor and the black community.  And poor Haskell [Sears] Ward, on at least occasion, was run out of the community when he raised the issue of the closure of the Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York].  I mean Ed Koch as the mayor, had crafted a plan which was going to save the City of New York [New York] a lot of money.  Because it supported the hospital, the public hospital system [New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation (HHC); NYC Health + Hospitals], which meant in effect that a number of hospitals were going to be closed, and services consolidated.  And that quote "waste" closed quote, would be eliminated.  Well, there was a violent reaction to this on just about every occasion that the mayor spoke, during that particular period.  I mean it was highly charged, with intense debates and arguments and chair throwing.  On one occasion, I know Haskell had to leave through a door that he didn't enter.  I mean, the kind of rule of thumb was you go in the front door and you walk out the front door.  But in that case, he didn't go out the front door, he went out another door.  (Laughter) And it was clearly a reflection of the intensity of the argument around the whole hospitals and health system.
Story_ID: 209871
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were with the [Mayor Edward] Koch administration for--
Speaker 2: Six years.
Speaker 1: Six years?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, that's '78 [1978] through--
Speaker 2: Seventy-eight [1978] through '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Eighty-four [1984], okay.  So, what did you do when--well, Mayor Koch's term basically ran out, right?
Speaker 2: No, he served three terms.  I left him in office.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he was still--okay, all right.  So, well, why did you leave?
Speaker 2: Why did I leave?  Well, I didn't go into government to have a career as a, you know, as a civil servant.  I went in because I thought it was a challenge, and it was, and I wanted to have a set of experiences which represented that in my life.  And quite frankly, that's no different than a lot of other people who go into government.  I mean, the government provides a tremendous opportunity to learn and have a broad-base experience for relatively inexperienced young people.  Often our counterparts in the private sector were much older, had much more experience, and were paid a lot better.  And so, it was an opportunity to do that for a period of time, I thought, and then do something else.  And that was clearly my thinking in going in, as well as in leaving.  In fact, I was going to leave before six years, but my decision overlapped with the mayor's run for another term.  And we had a long meeting and discussed it, and it was clear, at least from his perspective.  And he persuaded me pretty much to think the same way--that if I left at that point, it would send the wrong signal.  I mean, it would say to those naysayers, "Ah, [HistoryMaker Ronald T.] Gault, the senior black in the Koch administration can't take it anymore, and he's leaving.  Look at this, he's leaving.  We don't care what he says is his reason, he's leaving because he can't take it anymore.  He's fed up, and he will not be here for another term."  And that wasn't the case.  So, I stayed on through another election, which represented then his second term.  Because after his first term, I was ready to leave.  And he persuaded me to stay, and I stayed two years of his second term.  But he then served, he finished that second term, and was elected to serve a third term.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 209872
Speaker 1: So, where did you go?
Speaker 2: I went to work for the First Boston Corporation [New York, New York] in their public finance division.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My experience up to that date had given me a broad national exposure to the civil society, private business--and probably of greater significance to them--a decision-makers in government.  And they wanted to expand their public finance business.  That was essentially a business which focused on cities, states, and para-state entities raising capital or restructuring capital, and restructuring debt in a way that made it economically practical for the city to be in certain kinds of businesses or to raise certain kind of monies to fund certain kind of capital development projects.  So, they sought me out, which was largely to do that for them.  And that was very fortuitous, because I was ready to leave at that time.  And when First Boston sought me out, a guy named John Karloff [ph.] and a fellow who worked for him named Jonathan Plucsic [ph.], I thought about it for a moment and discussed it with my wife [HistoryMaker Charlayne Hunter-Gault], and agreed to join them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, what did you do at First Boston?  What were you to do with them?
Speaker 2: Well, I went in as a vice-president, meeting with and talking to government officials at all levels about their financing of capital development projects--roads, highways, bridges, tunnels, et cetera.  And I attempted very, very intensely to persuade them to have First Boston do whatever financing they needed to have done.  And then once that was, once you made a case to a client, then you were involved very deeply in how that transaction was structured--who worked on the team, and how the product was delivered to the client.  And I did that for a number of years with First Boston.  I left First Boston, and in fact I made managing director, which is usually a long, lengthy process--three and a half or four years, I think.  And it's usually much longer than that.  And I attribute it to the fact that I was enthusiastic about the job; I knew the people involved, and they knew and trusted me.  I mean coming out of New York [New York], people had a, I mean they tended to look up to New York.  And having spent a decade at the Ford Foundation, I think there were a large number of people out there that felt they owed me something, and the fact that I owed them something.  So, they were at least prepared to give me an opportunity to state the case for using First Boston as opposed to someone else.  And the case that we presented was a pretty convincing case, in most instances.  So, it meant that an administrator or an elected official could do the right thing, and for the right reasons.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, you were there until what year?
Speaker 2: Well, I came into--I think it was about the end of 1984, or the first of 1985.  And I worked for First Boston from that period to 1993, at which point I joined J.P. Morgan [JPMorgan Chase & Co.].
Story_ID: 209873
Speaker 1: J.P. Morgan [JPMorgan Chase & Co.] was trying to build the business in the area in which I worked [public finance].  And I mean it was a really small industry.  And they knew of my reputation and they knew of some of the wins that I had, and they felt that they needed someone with those strengths on their team.  So, with that came a talking, and I said "Look, I'll talk to anybody."  I laid out certain parameters in which the conversation would go forward.  And at the end of four or five months, I think we had talked enough, and they made an offer and I accepted it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, what position did you come into at J.P. Morgan?
Speaker 1: Well, I was the managing director at that point.  And so, they persuaded me to enter J.P. Morgan as a managing director, heading up a group that focused on financings for governmental entities and quasi-governmental entities and some corporations, the kind of bond financing we did--munis [municipal bond], tax exempt instruments.  And I had a team of I guess seven or eight people, maybe even larger than that, but it's been a good little while.  And we had as our responsibility a worldwide set of clients.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So--
Speaker 1: Actually, it was--well, we didn't say that we wouldn't service clients outside of the U.S.  Although we wanted to present a position that we're a global firm, our actual business was basically the domestic business.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  Now, is there a story in the domestic side of it that you want to tell?
Speaker 1: Not really.  I mean it's, you know, it was, you know, it was pretty intensely competitive business at that point.  A number of firms had identified and recruited blacks and other minorities to work in that space.  Because if you recall, many of the voter registration and voter education programs in the past had proved successful, and you had blacks and other monitories holding significant positions in just about every level of government throughout the U.S.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah, there were a lot of black elected officials--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --where there had been none before.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: Especially down South.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: So, did you work a lot down South?
Speaker 1: No, I worked for the most part in your northern areas, or highly populated urban areas.  Atlanta [Georgia] was one of my clients; Florida was one of my clients.  But you know, those were urban clients for the most part.  I mean, that's where the money was.  I mean, the municipalities had a tax base that they could use to collateralize the debt that they borrowed.  And we're talking about major financing--bridges and hospitals, et cetera.  So, they would need to raise a lot of capital, and that was attractive as a business proposition to all the major investment banking firms.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So for instance in the Atlanta, the airport [Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia] or something like that would have been--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Maynard Jackson and the airport were part of the municipal finance history.  You know, and while I was not one of those who had a lead bank position in the airport--I think that happened a year or so before I came over--that was clearly one of the prime pieces of business to be prized and sought after during that period.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 209874
Speaker 1: Your experiences with Ford Foundation--
Speaker 2: Yeah?
Speaker 1: --internationally, did they play a role in J.P. Morgan [JPMorgan Chase & Co.], you know, going international?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  My involvement with the ANC's [African National Congress] leadership in New York City [New York, New York] during that period in the mid-'80s [1980s], from the mid-'80s [1980s] to the mid-'90s [1990s], was I think the most dispositive factor in the decision that J.P. Morgan made to solicit my involvement and promote my appointment to open the office in Johannesburg [South Africa] in 1996.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you, how did you get really involved with ANC?
Speaker 2: Well, my wife had covered South Africa in the mid-'80s [1980s].  And as a result of that, many of the people that we entertained in our home and elsewhere had some kind of affiliation with the ANC.  And those people, then subsequently when the constitution was in place and the apartheid system collapsed, were back in South Africa in very key positions of authority.  And their involvement in those activities in which I saw them, and had experience working with them, convinced me that South Africa was on the right course.  It was the land of opportunity and a land of tremendous need, but it had a team in place that could really cut across the board that was first rate.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I know your wife interviewed--[HistoryMaker] Charlayne Hunter-Gault interviewed Thabo Mbeki.
Speaker 2: Thabo Mbeki, the president.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and [Matamela] Cyril Ramaphosa.
Speaker 2: Right.  He's a key business guy.
Speaker 1: A key businessperson.  Yeah, so, these people are in place, and that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, quite frankly for us--I went to South Africa in 1996, and for the first ten months or so, I commuted.  Every three and a half weeks, I was on a plane coming back to the [United] States.  And my wife came over I guess three or four times during that period.  But it made a very strong case to us for the importance of Africa, and not only in the world, but in terms of the dynamics that would unfold when we had to go East and West, and the destiny of really kind of mankind.
Story_ID: 209875
Speaker 1: You actually picked up your belongings and moved to South Africa in '96 [1996], right?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it wasn't a casual thing, but that's how business works.  I mean, you make a decision and you talk about it, and the action is to follow.  And the action was, all right, we'll get there and start running the office.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How were things disposed there when you got there?  I mean what were the--you'd been there, you know--
Speaker 2: A great sense of optimism and opportunity was enfolding.  There were some level of tension between whites and blacks, not a great deal.  But I mean there was, you know, a clear uncertainty, in the minds of many, over where the black leadership was going to go in the country, or conversely, what the future held for whites who lived in the country.  So, that, I mean that was a period in which there was a lot of debate, and a need to have a lot of that settled, and it happened over time.
Speaker 1: Now, what was your reception there like, in terms of--by the blacks and by the whites.  You know, we often read the in Civil Rights Movement where white folks are worried about outside agitators coming in, and these people are...  You're black, but you're different from the South Africans.
Speaker 2: Right, I'm not South African.
Speaker 1: Yeah.   So, how did they feel about you coming?
Speaker 2: I think I was received well.  And much of it was that, you know, I went for a very clear mission, of opening a bank.  And there was no clutter, no confusion about it on the part of the government or on the part of people that I interacted with on a social basis.  So, that level of clarity I think was very important in terms of how I was received and how I was accepted.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Everybody knew what was happening, so.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 209876
Speaker 1: Now, I read a story about--you were assaulted actually in 2000, well, 2001.
Speaker 2: Two thousand, [2000], yeah.
Speaker 1: Two thousand [2000], by some--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was, you know, my wife [HistoryMaker Charlayne Hunter-Gault] and I were going to have dinner with these young friends, and one of them was celebrating his birthday.  And actually, she and I were both verbally and then physically attacked.  And we had dinner at a restaurant, not too different from a restaurant you'd find in the Village, or someplace in New York City's [New York, New York] Greenwich Village.  And I was paying my portion of the check and, you know, using the toilet as the group of eight of us left.  And so, when I stepped out of the restaurant, there my wife was standing in a state of clear puzzlement, if not alarm, that I saw on her face.  And there's a big crowd of people gathering, and I said, "What's going on?"  So, she grabbed my arm, and she said, "Well, I'll tell you when we get in the car," and whisked me across the street; my car was parked right across the street.  And so, as we were walking across, she told me that one of the policemen sitting behind us at one of the tables had brushed her, had hit her with his car.  At that point we're at the car, and as I opened the door, I turned around and I looked and I said, "Those guys?"  And they were obviously sitting on the edge of their chair poised for whatever they could be poised for.  And when we looked around, they bolted across the street and took a photo of us before we left.  And again, I'm totally unaware of what has happened before my exiting to the restaurant.  But clearly, one of these guys is very agitated and it's not--he wasn't speaking Afrikaners, but the accent was very difficult for me to understand what he was saying.  But I clearly appreciated that he was very agitated.  And as they're standing there ranting and raving, a third person comes across the street--a shorter, stockier, younger fellow in his, I guess, early to mid-twenties who I thought was an undercover policeman, because he kept his hands behind his back.  And being a guy from Chicago [Illinois], and growing up on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] and living in New York [New York], I always, I mean I figured myself as pretty streetwise.  And so I'm watching him because I'm not going to get hit with a club or a billy club that he's brought out from behind his back.  But at any rate, when he stands in front us with these two guys, they're doing all the talking, one is doing all the talking.  He seemed to relax, and when he puts his hands down to his side, I see he doesn't have any weapon or anything, and I take my eyes off of him.  And just as I do, he head butts me.  And I mean I was in a state of, I guess, befuddlement, actually.  Because people from Chicago don't do that.  I mean, even street people are not head butting; you get hit with a fist, right?  And so, I said, "Gee, this guy has just head-butted me."  And blood just shot up every place.  My wife was almost like a fourth person I had to fight off, because she was all over me trying to rush me inside to take care of the blood that was running.  So I found that I was giving her more comfort than I'd spent trying to attack this guy.  And the short of a long story is there was a big brouhaha about it.  There was, the guy fled the scene; the police were less than responsive.  But after it made the newspapers, it did make the news, there was an arrest.  And the guy came in and gave himself up, and he was arrested.  And there was a trial that ensued.  Magistrate Inglebrat [ph.], I'll never forget that name; she was the person sitting in the chair.  And she went on to conduct a trial which I thought was awful.  And at the end of the day, the head butter got acquitted on the assault against me, and there was actually no case against him for what happened to my wife, brushing her with the car.  He had pulled a gun at one point, and the judge dismissed that.  And so, he was acquitted on the criminal charges.  Meanwhile, the two policemen, they were fired.  One got reinstated upon the hearing, and the first--really the one that was the bad guy--he remained fired and struck a deal that he would never apply for a police position again, and they allowed him just to step aside.  And while he was fired--he was arguing against being fired--they allowed him to resign and move on. And that was five years ago.
Speaker 1: Wow, that's--yeah.
Story_ID: 209877
Speaker 1: You look at that [assault] case, I mean it's telling us something about South Africa, I guess, I mean that it's still not--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, look, we have incidents and assaults that happen all over the U.S., right?  The disquieting thing for me was the level of, the skills level of the prosecutor's office.  Because that was, I mean, very low.  I mean, and it was, I think it made one more argument for the need to have some full transformation occur--that you needed black people who were in those positions that could argue forcefully and get the kind of convictions that were needed and called for in many instances.  As for the justice [Magistrate Inglebrat (ph.)], I mean she was, I think, clever enough just to use enough of what we said and what the others said to give her a way out, and yet support this young guy who I thought should have gone to jail.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't know about what--
Speaker 2: I mean the argument was that I, in the heat of this debate, I was agitated and slipped as I leaned forward just as he was stepping forward, and I broke my nose through a mishap.  Well, I just thought that was awful.  I faulted the prosecutor, because the defense counsel for the accused asked one of the expert witnesses, "Well, could he have, was it possible for him to have broken his nose the way that we said it happened?"  And she said, "Well, yeah, I guess so, but I can't imagine that happening."  Well, the prosecutor, I thought, should have been more vigorous in her questioning than she was, but she wasn't.  And that's been six years, and you could spend your whole life fighting a case like that.  And at the end of the day you spend a lot of energy, negative energy, I think, as well as financial resources.  So, following the judgment, I decided to let it go.
Story_ID: 209878
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's talk about the upside of things.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm sure, you know, I mean there's a lot of, probably a lot to discuss about the prospects of development in South Africa.  So, what have been the highlights?
Speaker 2: Well, the highlights is clearly this whole transformation process.  I mean there's a serious intent to bring black South Africans into positions of authority throughout government and throughout business.  In business, the government can't play its direct role as it can in government, but they can really set the tone and the agenda that should be followed.  I see a great deal of optimism associated with that, in terms of the government being able to identify capable and qualified people.  Right now, there's, I think it's a serious issue of capacity that has to be addressed, and no one will doubt that.  I think that the government is setting up, is setting itself up to get a better handle on that.  In terms of what it has done well, they've managed their money very, very, I think cleverly and with a great deal of wisdom.  They have now, I think, recognized that after ten, twelve years they've got to do something about the needs of the poor.  The difficult decisions early on led to them, the government, not doing that.  I mean, there was little focus on many of the things that poor people say they need to have to be comfortable. And you've seen recently civil disturbances at a number of townships expressing dissatisfaction with that.  This is the budget season, and agencies are contracting with outside contractors as well as government unions, the government employee unions.  And they have been at loggerheads, and that really sends probably an inappropriate message, that all of this is fermented by the fact that their contracts are ending.  The sanitation workers, the transportation workers, the pilots--not the pilots--the pilots are not going on strike--but the airline workers, et cetera.  And the fact that all of these sectors have contracts ending more or less in the same time period has generated I think a great deal of concern about the way forward.
Story_ID: 209879
Speaker 1: What does it look like in South Africa now, in terms of development of those townships?  Are black people still basically living out in the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, black people are still living--
Speaker 1: --suburbs of the major cities?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And there's an effort to provide housing options.  But the shantytowns and informal settlements provide housing for a great many South Africans.
Speaker 1: Has there been any, has the government made any move, I guess, to--well, I don't think it has.  But there might be something--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --going on that I don't know of.
Speaker 2: To do what?
Speaker 1: To redistribute resources on some level. I mean the government changed hands, but has there been any redistribution of any--
Speaker 2: Well, land is, well, you know, the redistribution of resources--I mean you can look at black economic empowerment, which is kind of a counterpart of what black capitalism was here in the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s].  And you can look at that empowerment and say, that's a really strong effort to promote redistribution of wealth here, because it's clear that unless certain targeted percentages--and it's like 24.5 percent--of the businesses owned by black South Africans--or I guess you can include Indians and coloureds in that as well--they're going to be unable to do business with the government.  And that's a very strong incentive for many of these businesses, mid-sized and small, basically to move forward more aggressively with the black economic empowerment agenda.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, does the government have a, I guess it--has there been any provision made to deal with the infrastructure of these townships and so forth?  From what I understand, a lot of them didn't have plumbing and, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, there was a lot of talk at one point about having sanitation facilities and water facilities located strategically in some of these existing townships, so the people could plug into the water systems and plug into the electrical systems.  I've heard less talk about that in the last recent weeks.  There may be something going on, and you can imagine housing is going on all over the place.  But you know, it's something you have to kind of watch and see where it goes.
Speaker 1: So, is the prospect for a young South African today who's got something on the ball, and gets an education... he's talking about moving into Durban [South Africa] or Johannesburg [South Africa] or someplace, not staying out in the township and developing the--
Speaker 2: The boondocks.
Speaker 1: --boondocks.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Story_ID: 209880
Speaker 1: What have been the things that you think that you've accomplished in your position as a--?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I clearly can't take credit for all the success of [J.P.] Morgan [JPMorgan Chase & Co.], but I think I've played a role in establishing the [South Africa] office and putting them on the right course, and I think that was important.  I particularly enjoy the relationship that we have with the president [Thabo Mbeki] and the kind of access that represents.  That's also true with other ministers in government.  But when I look at the possibility of having those kind of relationships here, that is not a totally unique experience, because I've had those experiences elsewhere.  But in terms of the signs and the scale and scope of the country, and the political dynamics that's unfolding, I think that's pretty important.
Speaker 1: Yeah, South Africa is a rich country with a lot of--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --a lot of people and a lot of resources.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, when you--what are some of the projects that J.P. Morgan has actually funded?
Speaker 2: Well, as far as business, it's had a major impact on the mining and energy sector.  And you can just, I mean, the company has won a number of awards.  And I would say that among the two largest international banks on the scene, it's probably doing its share of international business.  When I say international business, I mean it's being done by international banks.  Financing of the airports, and raising capital for the city and for the government is only one aspect of what we've done there.  And I think that the rest of the story lies largely in the financings that we've carried forward for businesses and corporations of South Africa.  And they could speak, you know, volumes on that subject.
Story_ID: 209881
Speaker 1: --Do you have a pet project that you want to complete there before you--
Speaker 2: Not really, I don't have any pet projects.  I know that since I've retired from [J.P.] Morgan [JPMorgan Chase & Co.], I'm able to pursue more vigorously two or three business ideas that I have.  And I'm enjoying that, quite frankly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What are your business ideas?
Speaker 2: Well, one is there's a substantial real estate deal that we're waiting to find out if we can have a meeting of the minds around our assessment of what the property is worth, and what the owner's assessment is.  I've also been a part of discussions with a group to establish a mezzanine fund with the finance instrument that's pretty common in the [United] States.  And then thirdly, you know, I'm taking this whole business of getting myself in a position to make a wine, as well.  So, my wife [HistoryMaker Charlayne Hunter-Gault] and I are looking at making a wine for export, while simultaneously I'm looking at planning a broker role in the wine industry for other farms and venues.
Speaker 1: There's a lot of, there's a big wine industry in South Africa.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's all relative.  I mean, in the U.S., 65 percent of the wine that's consumed is American wine, or specifically California wines.  So, that leaves 35 percent for the rest of the world, which is, you know, a negligible number.  The wine industry there is an industry that has been trying to grow and develop over the years, but it's not quite there yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What's the, what country consumes the most South African wine other than South Africa?
Speaker 2: Other than South Africa, England, London [England], they have a lot of wine that they send through, fairly exclusive representation in the U.K. [United Kingdom].
Story_ID: 209882
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, clearly there has to be an uplifting of the societal environment.  I mean the framework has got to change, really.  Because, I mean, there's just too big a gap between the rich and the poor, and it has to be leveled out somewhat.  So, I would love to see something like that happen, and kind of be a part of it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot's been written about that gap, you know, between--we have richer black people than we've ever had before, but we also have the poor--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --with no connection.
Speaker 2: A pool of poor people piling up at the bottom.
Story_ID: 209883
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, what would you--is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I mean I can't--you know, I could do a lot of soul searching.  But in essence, I think I'm pretty much satisfied with the decisions I made in my life.
Story_ID: 209884
Speaker 1: Okay.  And to this point, what would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, that here's a fellow that came out of the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] that did, you know, relatively well, and yet he maintained a relationship with those from whence he came.  And you know, whether that's working for a bank or whether that's working for a government agency, or whether that's working for an international foundation, I think I've tried to be true to basic principles and values that I've established.
Story_ID: 209885
Speaker 1: Can you talk a little bit about your family?  I know you've got a son (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my father [Charles Gault] is dead, he died in 2000 at the age of, let me see, he must have been eighty-two.  My mother [Lillian Adams Gault] is still alive, and she lives in a managed care facility in Chicago [Illinois].  My brother [Dennis Gault] is alive and well in Chicago, he's a fireman.  And my sister-in-law [Sharon Gault], they have, I guess three kids [Brittney Gault, Lauren Gault, and Kevin Gault] now.  We're not a real big family.  My mother is living in a managed care facility, which is very nice.  And yeah, that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your immediate family, you know, you've got--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my immediate family, without question, without question.  We have two kids [Chuma Gault and Suesan Stovall] in California, and they're doing well in their own careers.  In fact, I just visited with them, and they're very decent young people; we're very excited about them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there anything I haven't asked you that you think you need to address before--
Speaker 2: I can't think of, I can't think of it.
Story_ID: 209886
Speaker 1: Our last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker Ronald T. Gault] Ron Gault was, he attempted to make a societal contribution for the betterment of mankind.  He tried to practice what he preached in terms of his own family, and the immediate needs of that family.  And, that he was a person that did what he said he was going to do, and you could rely on his word.  And he was a sincere and dedicated person.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you, sir.
Speaker 2: You're very welcome, you're very welcome.
