Story_ID: 88707
Speaker 1: --Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Observing is Gayle Converse.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: I'm Dr. James R. Gavin III.  That's James, J-A-M-E-S, "R", as in Raphael, G-A-V-I-N.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born November 23rd, 1945 in Mobile, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a physician and I am an administrator and I now serve as President of the Morehouse School of Medicine in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: All right now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is May 8th, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're sitting in my executive conference room here at the Morehouse School of Medicine in Atlanta.
Story_ID: 88708
Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight "People Magazine"-ish type questions that we always ask and they just require a short answer.  The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is fried chicken.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is springtime.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination would be Paris [France].
Speaker 1: Okay, and finally, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I do and that is that "We are a small medical school with outrageous ambition."
Story_ID: 88709
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me ask you about your family history.  How far can you trace your family back?
Speaker 2: Well actually I can trace my family back to the former slave who was considered to be the patriarch of the East Coast Gavin clan and that was a fellow by the name of Seborn.  That's S-E-B-O-R-N, Seborn Gavin, who was actually a slave in a plantation in Macon County, in a little town called Noxubee, Mississippi.  My cousin, who is a--
Speaker 1: Can you spell that town for us?
Speaker 2: N-O-X-U-B-I-E [sic, N-O-X-U-B-E-E], I believe is the way it's spelled.  I have a cousin who is a retired psychiatrist who lives in Williamsburg, Virginia, his name is Dr. James Baker.  And Jim decided when he retired that he was going to do a little work on genealogy and so he looked into the Gavin family tree and he has been diligent in his pursuits and we actually now have an annual reunion.  Every other year, the reunion goes back to Mississippi but in the off years, it's held in different cities around the country.  And so for that reason we can actually go back for some several generations to Seborn's time.  Seborn was called the "Black Mayor of Noxubee" because when he was finally freed, he was one of the people who used to negotiate with the local white people to get things done for the local black community and he would do this in exchange for being able to convince the black people to do things that the white people wanted done.  And so he would always win a trade-off and he was, in fact, credited with negotiating the first brick schoolhouse for black children in that part of the country.  So there's a lot of lore associated with that part of the Gavin genealogy.
Speaker 1: Is Noxubee, Mississippi in Macon County?
Speaker 2: In Macon County.
Speaker 1: In Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now is that a--near the Gulf or is it--
Speaker 2: No, it's up in the Delta.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now are there any stories from the 19th Century that are passed down through your family?  Now, when did your--did Seborn Gavin live?
Speaker 2: Seborn lived in the late 1800s.  He was in the 1860s and in that part of time.
Speaker 1: So during the reconstruction?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was a Reconstruction Era, freed slave.
Speaker 1: Okay, well that was a good story about the schoolhouse but are there any other stories about the slavery period itself or any stories that are passed down, you know throughout--
Speaker 2: There weren't many stories of that time that were passed down with the exception of sort of general descriptions of how--how cagey and how wily Seborn was in terms of his ability to negotiate and come away from the negotiating table with something that could benefit the black community.  He was a strong believer in education so most of the things that he fought for had to do with winning educational opportunities for the local black populace although clearly they were still very much in farming types of activities.
Speaker 1: And he was a great grandfather on your--on which side?
Speaker 2: On my father's side.
Speaker 1: On your father's side.
Story_ID: 88710
Speaker 1: Well, did you know your grandparents at all?
Speaker 2: I knew my grandmother [Maggie Gavin].  My grandfather died very early in my life so I never got a chance to really know him.  My grandmother ran a cafe in Mobile [Alabama], there on Cedar Street, near the intersection of Cedar Street and Texas--Texas Street, down the Bay.  Maggie Gavin was her name.  We called her "Momma Maggie" and she had a lot of fig trees in her yard and one of the things that we both looked forward to and dreaded in the summertime was the annual fig picking trip that we had to take.  We took a big bucket around to Momma Maggie's house and we had to go into those fig trees and pick figs so that my mother [Bessie Smoke Gavin] could--could can them, then she would cook these figs and put them in these mason jars and in the wintertime those things would come out of the pantry and we'd have figs and biscuits and sausage patties as one of the things I remember for breakfast as a--as a kid growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay, were the figs good?
Speaker 2: Oh, the figs were delicious.  Now you had to be careful when you were picking the figs in the summertime not to eat more figs than you put in the bucket and they were pretty savvy about that.  If you came back with a real light load, looking all satisfied (laughter), they knew that you had done more eating figs than you did picking figs and there were dreadful consequences (laughter).
Story_ID: 88711
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell me about your father now.  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father was James Raphael Gavin, Jr. and he was--he was really quite a man.
Speaker 1: Now when was he born and where was he born?
Speaker 2: My father was born in 1919 and he was born in Mississippi and he was born actually in Macon County.  So he had--his family had not moved very far from the original homestead of Seborn Gavin so that part of the Gavin clan didn't come to Mobile [Alabama], they called that moving East.  They didn't come to Mobile until sometime in the early 1900s.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was born about 19--he was born in 1919?
Speaker 2: He was born in 1919.
Speaker 1: So yeah, and you say they--do you think they were in Mobile by 1920?  I mean, well--
Speaker 2: Some--
Speaker 1: Not 1920 but that is too soon, I guess, but--
Speaker 2: Sometime in the--I think they--my father's family, I think, had already gotten to Mobile prior to the Great Depression.  So I think he spent his boyhood years in Mississippi but he remembers being a teenager.  In fact, he graduated from high school in Mobile.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a reason as to why they moved from Mississippi to Mobile?
Speaker 2: I think it was a matter of economics.  I think my father's father wanted to--a better life for their family.  Mobile was a town that had industry.  It was, and still is, the only port city in the State of Alabama and so there was always a big dry docking and shipbuilding operation in Mobile.  And because there was water there, it not only had a bay but there was seven--there are seven rivers that actually converge at Mobile Bay which is at the--it empties into the Gulf of Mexico.  There were big factories, creosote factory, a big paper mill and a number of other factories and there people could find work that was not field work and so it was skilled and semi-skilled work available and many people came to Mobile for that reason.
Story_ID: 88712
Speaker 1: Okay now, Mobile [Alabama], and the Gulf Coast in particular, though still part of the South, had been characterized by some as being a little less stringent in terms of racism in some of the spots because of the cosmopolitan nature of the port and stuff.  Is that--did you find that to be true?
Speaker 2: I would say that it was perhaps more subtle, certainly no less stringent.  When I was growing up in Mobile, for example, there was no ambiguity about the degree of separation.  There were places where we simply were not expected to go, were not tolerated and even as late as when I was a junior in high school, I developed enough courage to go to the main public library because I loved books.  And the branch library that served, as they say it in those days, "Negroes", the closest branch library was about two miles from my house.  The main public library was--was less than a half a mile from my house.  And so I went into the main public library and it took a bit of courage to do that.  And as soon as I was discovered, and that was very quickly, although I had made it to the stacks by then, and it was a glorious feeling standing there in the midst of all of those books.  The librarian in no uncertain terms made it clear that I had better get out of there and I had better get out of there right now or she was calling the police and I was going to find myself in deep trouble.  Well, this was just because I wanted to read.  So, that was not unusual for the kinds of encounters that we experienced in Mobile at that time.  But I would say this, when it came time for Mobile to sort of join the desegregation movement, many of the other cities in the South were racked with turmoil:  Montgomery [Alabama], Birmingham [Alabama], Atlanta [Georgia], Mobile.  And the reason I talk about subtlety, the city managers in Mobile decided that they were going to do this in a way that did not bring a lot of national attention on the city.  It's a big tourist city.  It always has been.  So in conjunction with the Mobile Area Civic Improvement Association, which was sort of a forerunner to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Chapter, run out of my home church, at that time, Big Zion, AME Zion Church [African Methodist Episcopal], we had a very orchestrated desegregation campaign.  We would actually go to various shops downtown, sit at lunch counters, a specified number, at specified times, in specified blends, males and females, under the watchful eye of plainclothes policemen.  And we would sit for a certain period of time and then it would be over and we'd go back and we would report on those activities.  And over a period of time that's how "desegregation", took place in Mobile.  And that's why you didn't hear about sit-ins and demonstrations and that kind of thing.  So it was all very subtly done.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 88713
Speaker 1: Let me get back to your father [James Gavin, Jr.], now.  Now, what was your father like and what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: My father was a very interesting man.  I would say that he is--he was no doubt the smartest man that I've ever known.  My father wanted very badly to go to college but his father just didn't believe that once you finished high school you, as a boy, that you should be thinking first about more education.  He thought that you--you should be trying to find a way to make a living.  And so my father's father, my grandfather, was not terribly supportive of education beyond high school.  So my father went to trade school, learned to be a welder, and for a number of years worked as a welder.  But then he began a process of sort of self-teaching himself a number of other things.  For example, he got involved in carpentry and for the rest of his life always took on projects of one kind or another in carpentry.  He taught himself, not only painting, but what he called, "mixology".  He learned how to blend finishes.  So in a sense he became sort of a self-styled macro chemist.  And, as a result of that, he started working at the shipyard at Alabama Drydock and Shipbuilding Company in the paint department after he left the welding division and gradually worked his way up to become the superintendent of the finishing department.  Interestingly enough, my father and his brother, my Uncle Alex, were the first two black guys to really rise to management level positions at the Alabama Dry Dock and Shipbuilding Company.  And that was a very interesting thing to watch.  He was fighting for union rights, for blacks at the shipyard, and this was a tough thing because he was being threatened.  They were threatening to firebomb our house if he kept up those kinds of activities and it was pretty touch and go at that time.  But he was a very--a very strong guy, a no-nonsense kind of guy.  He was not the kind of guy that you sat down and had a chummy conversation with if you were his son.  You sort of spoke when you were spoken to and very patriarchal but in many ways my father presented a side that I was able to pick up on in the sense of what it meant to be a team player.  My father, for example, cooked, he washed, ironed and actually growing up, I thought that's the way it was in every house.  And so I could only protest so much when my mother made me do all these chores and she would say, you're going to learn how to do everything in this house that a girl can do except have a baby.  I did not take that kindly but I didn't say much either.  And--but I saw my father doing those kinds of things and I think it was a real lesson for me and my brothers because I think we saw, in the one hand, that you could be a strong patriarchal, clearly the "man of the house", a good provider, a person who believed in education, boy, did he ever, but at the same time he was clearly a full partner to my mother [Bessie Smoke Gavin], his wife.
Story_ID: 88714
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell us about your mother.  Can you give us her full name and spell it for us and her date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother, who was born Bessie Lee Smoke, and she was born in Selma, Alabama.  Now my mother was born in 1921.  She was two years younger than my--than my father.  And her parents were all farm folks from Selma.  They moved down to Mobile [Alabama] in the early 1900s and I knew my grandmother and my grandfather on my mother's side.  Papa Smoke, his name was Cleveland Smoke, and my grandmother, Nona Smoke, who was in no uncertain terms a clear-cut bona fide hell-raiser, my grandma, Nona was.  She was in fact the last of my grandparents to pass away.
Speaker 1: Now, can you give us an example of the kind of hell she would raise?
Speaker 2: Well--well, unlike my mother, who could in some ways be termed a hell-raiser, but when my mother raised hell, it was always to protect her family or to fight for some cause.  My grandmother was probably a little bit more of a hell-raiser in the sense that she was a woman who was a bit of a hard drinking, hard swearing woman who didn't take any guff from anybody, man, woman or child and so if you had an issue with my grandmamma, we called her "Momma Nona", and I sure hope that my aunt doesn't see this--this video, but then Momma Nona was in your face and she would have a few words and if things didn't get reconciled very quickly, then she had her hands on something with threats to your person that maybe if we can't settle it with words, maybe we can settle it with frying pans.  And she was just that kind of woman.  She had that kind of volatility and so we didn't mess with Momma Nona.  When she was not in her cups, she was as sweet as sweet can be, but when she was in her cups, we knew, stay clear, that was the way it was.  So I always say that, you know, I can explain any aspect of my personality, you know, the degree to which it may emerge sometimes as--as polished or sophisticated, that was the stuff that was largely focused on my father's side of the family.  The other side, if ever I sort of spill over into rambunctiousness and hell-raising, well I know where that came from too.  So I'm completely comfortable with knowing where all of these elements have come from.
Story_ID: 88715
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us about your mother [Bessie Smoke Gavin], you know.  What was she like and what did she do?
Speaker 2: My mother was a wonderful, missionary spirit.  Certainly a woman who was capable of feistiness but her temperament was one of gentility.  She was a giving and caring woman and my mother was a chef.  She was absolutely spectacular and in fact one of the things that I didn't realize was that I thought everybody ate like we ate at home, you know, the kinds of foods, I mean, crabmeat au gratin and, you know crown--I thought that was the kind of stuff that people, you know, would eat.  And my father [James Gavin, Jr.] loved food.  He was really the gourmand and my mother wanted nothing more than to please my father.  And she was just--she was just a very giving and loving person but very, very intolerant of any degree of slackness or laziness on the part of her children.  So she was a task master when it came to her expectations of us.  Now I say she was a missionary-type of spirit, very giving person.  My mother would disappear from time-to-time during the course of a day and very often we wouldn't know exactly where she was--where she was.  And when--my mother was unfortunately killed in an automobile accident when I was a senior in medical school.  At her funeral, hundreds of people showed up and these were people that we had never seen.  They weren't from our church.  They weren't from any of the organizations that we knew my mother to be affiliated with and we were asking, who are these people?  Well it turns out that my mother would go visit sick people in the hospital and she would get engaged with some of their families and she would, on subsequent occasions, actually go when these people were recuperating, she would actually help them out cleaning their house sometimes, running errands for them, and she did this for years and we didn't know that she had this closet existence as kind of a sort of a free ranging missionary and all of these people showed up on the day of her funeral, bringing stuff to our house and it was at that time that we found out this whole additional side, you know, about our mother.  We never--we just--we never knew.  But she was also a very talented woman.  She was quite an accomplished pianist and except for her later years when she developed arthritis in her fingers, I still remember, fondly, my father sang, my mother played and we had a fairly musical family, I remember with great fondness the nights we would be around the piano, we always had a piano, and she would be playing and all the rest of us would be singing.  That was great stuff.
Story_ID: 88716
Speaker 1: That's something.  Now, is there a story about how your mother [Bessie Smoke Gavin] and father [James Gavin, Jr.] met?
Speaker 2: My mother and father met in high school and I--and beyond that, I really don't know a whole lot more about the story except that my father's family did not approve of him dating my mother because they were not from the same, shall we say, stock.  The Gavin family by that time fancied itself as more upwardly mobile and by that time several of my father's brothers--my father was the oldest child, several of his brothers and sisters had gone to college and had gotten advanced degrees and were more social beings and it was clear that they didn't want my father marrying from somebody that was "beneath" him.  But they never talked too much about those old days.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I want you to--now how many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I have three of each.  All of my sisters are older, all three of my brothers are younger.  I am the middle child.
Story_ID: 88717
Speaker 1: Okay. Now I want you to reflect back on your upbringing and the neighborhood you lived in and give us the sense of some of the sights and sounds and the smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: Ah, growing up in Mobile [Alabama], down the Bay on Lawrence Street, it was a community of homes, so we didn't have apartments, and on my street we didn't have any duplexes, so they were all single-family homes, you knew where everybody lived, you knew all of the different families and everybody knew you.  They knew your mother, they knew your father and you were under constant watch from, Ms. Emma Buck (ph.), from Ms. Beulah May Stevens (ph.), from Ms. Bertie Harris (ph.) and Ms. Clemens (ph.), all of them knew you.  And the street was one where kids played in the street.  We played stick ball, we played touch football, in the street, because there weren't a whole lot of cars that interfered with things.  I remember when sidewalks were put in because for years there weren't any sidewalk--any sidewalks then.  There were very few fences so everybody's front yard, if you will, was pretty accessible.  You always heard the noise of children because there were plenty of children on our blocks.  And you could hear the sounds of children playing and you could hear in the evening times the sounds of children being called home.  There was a fella by the name of Mickey, and I forget Mickey's last name, but we--his mother called him "Mouse".  And every evening when it was time for Mickey to come home, you could hear in the neighborhood, "Mouse, Mouse" and you'd hear from somewhere the response, "coming" and that was Mickey Mouse running home and he'd be tearing down--tearing down the street.  Saturdays were days when all of the men in the neighborhood would converge on somebody's car and it was like a ritual and whether there was anything wrong with the car or not, the men would gather around the car, the hood would be up and they would be fixing it, tinkering with it, making diagnoses, and of course, as boys, we'd try to sort of hang around to pick up little tidbits because we were fascinated with the fact that these men knew about cars.
Story_ID: 88718
Speaker 1: And You could always smell different food cooking.  And there was this fluidity among households.  There were always kids from somebody else's house over at your house.  And there was actually an art form because you would actually try to be at somebody's house around dinnertime if they happen to be cooking something that you particularly liked to eat.  Now, probably the only thing that saved me as much as I love fried chicken was that most people didn't cook fried chicken until Sunday.  So, it didn't matter whose house you were at during the week, you were not likely to get any fried chicken.  And when you did find somebody frying chicken during the week, I tell you, they'd have more children hanging around their house than you could imagine, like a football game (laughter).  And those are the kinds of things that you remember and, of course, in those days you didn't just leave your house and be over at somebody else's house without your momma knowing where you were.  I mean, if you were gone and they didn't know where you were, you could--you were in big trouble when you showed up.  So, it was truly a village and everybody felt responsibility for raising everybody else's children and you could not do something two blocks over.  You thought you could leave Lawrence Street and go over to Warren Street and act a fool and do something before you got home.  Somebody had--had called your momma and told your momma what you had done or had been seen doing and you had to pay the piper.  And so you always had to mind your Ps and Qs because there was that kind of sense of accountability and that kind of sense of responsibility on the part of adults for children and I think we've grown away from that and we miss that.
Story_ID: 88719
Speaker 1: Right, right, it's a different world now, different kind of neighborhoods.  Well, now what about you when you were coming up?  What kind of a little boy were you?  What did you like to do?  What concerned you?
Speaker 2: I guess the word that could probably best describe me was "precocious".  I was--I was precocious.  I was the first boy born to my father [James Gavin, Jr.].  I had three sisters before me.  My father, I told you, was a very patriarchal kind of guy.  He felt like he was destined to bring sons into the world.  My youngest sister, the one born just before me, was named Jamie.  He was so desperate by that time that he didn't think he was going to get a James to name after him.  He named her Jamie.  So when I was born, listen, the script was already written, I was going to be everything that my father had not had a chance to be.  So, when I learned to talk early, and it was clear that I was quick on the uptake, my father started teaching me to read.  He started teaching me my times tables, and I remember sitting, as he would sit in a rocking chair, and I would sit there and he'd have this rhythm going.  Two times two is and I'd have to say, "four".  Four times four is sixteen.  Four times three is twelve.  And if I broke the rhythm, you know he had a little flat ruler and that little flat ruler would come flying, "pop, pay attention boy".  And I'd be a--so by the time I was four years old, my parents put me into kindergarten.  Well, kindergarten in those days was not publicly--it wasn't mandated.  It was--you had to actually pay to go to kindergarten because this was a privately run little kindergarten.  And they sent me to this thing and I went a few times but what the kids were doing was all baby stuff.  I knew how to do all of this stuff already.  I mean, I could read sentences and they were learning letters.  I could do numbers and they were trying to learn how to count.  So, I started going other places like down to the Tennessee ditch and to the railroad yards and down to the shipping channel and I started exploring.  I had just a great time.  I loved to do things like catch tadpoles and dig for crawfish and, you know, go down and explore the driftwood along the shipping lanes.
Speaker 1: Now, you weren't doing that on your own, were you?
Speaker 2: Sure I was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was doing it on my own and I had a great time for as long as it lasted.  But the kindergarten teacher happened to ask my mother [Bessie Lee Smoke], "Why did you take little James out of kindergarten?"  And my mother said, "I haven't taken little James out of kindergarten, he's been leaving here every morning, you know, with my dime".  It was, you know, you had to pay a dime and that dime was your fee for kindergarten and you got lunch with that dime.  Well, a dime was a lot of money and I would take that whole dime and I would go around to Ms. Chaney's (ph.) store or Ms. Margie's store and I would buy a bunch of goodies with that dime.  So I think my mother's anger was twofold.  I think on the one hand because I was lying and not going to kindergarten like I said I was and on the other hand I was eating up that dime and having a great time spending that dime a day.  Well, the jig was up.  I got caught and the punishment was I got put into regular school.  So at age four, they put me in regular school and they kind of fibbed about my age.  They kind of convinced them that I was older than I really was or else they wouldn't have let me stay.  And because I could read and because I could write, I was credible even though I was the smallest thing in the class.  And in fact I would slide down under the desk, get on the floor and crawl out.  I would leave.  And one day I was so bold that I said to my mother, "I'm not going" and she said "You are going or else I'm going to tear your behind up".  And I said, okay, I'll just tell them that I'm four--I'm only four years old.  And that ended the discussion for that day but that didn't last long either 'cause my father got in on it and I went to school and cooperated.
Story_ID: 88720
Speaker 1: But I was always being paraded in front of the class.  I had to read to the class and the teachers would use me as an example of how you're supposed to read and how you're supposed to do your numbers.  And we had, back in those days, what we called, "declaratory contests."  So basically they were a little oratorical contest.  And you could either be in the serious division or the humorous division.  And I started saying poems and I started doing Paul Laurence Dunbar poems and the humorous ones in dialect and I would win a blue ribbon every year and I actually became a little, you know, famous, in the local, you know, community because I was so good at doing those Paul Laurence Dunbar poems.
Speaker 2: Can you remember any of them now?  I mean, any parts--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I can remember, for example--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: I remember "In The Morning", although I never did that one but I did do "Jump Back, Baby, Jump Back" [sic, "A Negro Love Song"].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, "Seeing my lady home last night, jump back, baby, jump back.  Held her hand and sque'z it tight, jump back, baby, jump back.  Heard her sigh a little ole sigh, seen a bird go flittin' by, looked her right in her eye, jump back, baby, jump back."  I did stuff like that and I remember the part that they used to--the kids used to love and said, "Do you love me Honey?  Do you love me true?  Do you love me good as I love you?  And then she answered, of course I do, jump back, baby, jump back" (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, that's great.
Speaker 1: Oh, I had a great time doing that and my mother [Bessie Lee Smoke] would dress me in these little white suits and I'd bring home blue ribbons (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's a wonderful story.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And those were very nurturing days because, of course, they were all segregated schools and you had to have people telling you that you could.  You had to have people telling you that you were good and that you were a winner and it was important to hear because the world wasn't telling you that.  The world was, in fact, telling you anything but that.  And so it put a special responsibility on schools, on teachers and on principals and those were very important elements of my growing up and I think I can say the same thing for people that grew up with me.
Speaker 2: Okay, now you seem like a--like an upbeat kind of person would, you know, take these oratorical contests, I think, as a challenge to get out and do something.  But did you ever feel pressure or anything to perform 'cause you were awful young, you know?
Speaker 1: Well, I think that's one of the--one of the features of precocity that you develop a certain degree of fearlessness and you get rewarded for it because when you are bold and you stand up in front of an audience without your knees shaking and with your voice not cracking or failing, there are adults who admire that kind of audacity and so they give you lots of props.  And so I never had that kind of concern for all of my life as a student growing up in elementary school and what they now call middle school and high school.  I was a thespian.  I was an actor, and if it hadn't been for my father [James Gavin, Jr.] being the kind of father that he was, I would have been able to say when asked the question, what do you want to be when you grow up, I would have been able to say, I want to be an actor.  But in my father's house, as his first boy child, and somebody asked you what you want you want to be when you grow up, you had better not say, I want to be an actor.  You better say something legitimate.  You better know better than that.  And those were the kinds of--now if you talk about pressures, those were the pressures because the expectation of us, when I grew up, was that we would pursue legitimate careers and legitimate careers were defined very narrowly.  You had to be something that had standing in the community.  And you had to be something that had a chance of success in that community.  Not a chance of success by leaving that community.  So it meant you pursued either being a minister, a doctor, a lawyer, a dentist, or teacher or somebody that worked for the government--
Speaker 2: Funeral director.
Speaker 1: --funeral directors, so there were very--there was a very limited universe of possibilities and, of course, I actually chose ministry.  I went off to college to be a Methodist preacher.
Story_ID: 88721
Speaker 1: Now, let me go back to grade school.  What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: I went to W. H. Council [Traditional] School [Mobile, Alabama].  C-O-U-N-C-I-L.  We always used to call it, "Council", Council School.  Ms. Palmer was our principal.
Speaker 1: Okay, and now, so what was that school like?  I mean, did they--were you fully challenged at that school, you know?
Speaker 2: Oh, we were really very, very fully challenged at Council School.  I was in Ms. Buchanan's first grade class and the reason that she used me as kind of her little poster child and remember, I could already read, thanks to my father [James Gavin, Jr.], she thought those kids in that class should be able to read like me.  And so she, I mean, she didn't win me a lot of friends, you know, especially being the smallest kid in the class, you know, I got beat up a lot during those early days because, you know, I was a little smart kid.  But I could always run pretty fast.  So I developed those skills, you know, pretty well too.  But they challenged us and always wanted to make sure that we were pushed and that was as far back as I could remember.  In fact, my sixth grade teacher, Ms. Burton, actually would take us home with her.  She had a couple of kids in my class, and I was one of them, that she would take to her house and she would expose us to things that I think she thought we would not necessarily be exposed to.  For example, she listened to opera and she would take trips in her car across the Bay to botanical gardens and things like that and she would take us.  And, of course, our parents always agreed if the teacher wanted to take you some place like that.  But those were the kinds of things.  They wanted to make sure that if they thought that you had something on the ball and you liked to learn, they really wanted to make sure that you had every possible opportunity.  It was a good experience.  I really enjoyed my elementary school days, except for the punishment.  I mean, those were days when you got beatings if you didn't do right.
Story_ID: 88722
Speaker 1: Now, you didn't get in trouble a lot did you?
Speaker 2: Not a lot because I was pretty slick.  I mean, I knew how to, you know, do it and get away with it, you know.  I mean, you know, if you're going to be a smart kid, you better be smart all the way (laughter) and I pretty much could avoid getting into the trouble that would get me caught.  Although from time to time I did.  I got busted.
Speaker 1: Can you think of anything that you got busted for doing that you could still remember?
Speaker 2: Well, I got busted one time for kissing Eleanor Williams, okay.  Eleanor Williams was--her father was the principal out at Mobile County Training School, so he was a high school principal and her momma was Ms. Nora Williams, who was a teacher right there at W. H. Council [Traditional] School [Mobile, Alabama].  So that meant that Eleanor was, you know, kind of a big shot, you know, but she liked me and I knew she liked me.  And the other thing was that she was young like I was.  So, we ended up, one day, sharing one of these little bench seats.
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: This was fourth grade.  So at that time I would have been, I think it was early in the year, so I was like eight years old, okay.  So, I was--Ms. Scott was the teacher, boy she was mean, Ms. Scott was.  So we were sitting there on this bench and we were coloring something--something--it was like some kind of harvest picture, it was like in the fall.  And Eleanor was so cute.  And I remember looking and everybody was looking down and Ms. Scott was looking down at her desk and I reached over there and I planted some sugar on Eleanor and it shocked her, you know.  She didn't know it was coming.  Maybe I should have warned her or something.  But she said, "Oh", like that, and Ms. Scott looked up just as I was breaking my lip lock and that was--that was not a good thing.  Ms. Scott brought me up front and she first gave me a finger dressing and then I--and then I got, you know, a bit of a whipping and then, not only that, I mean, the indignity was then I had to go out and sit on the fire escape.  I had to sit outside.  I couldn't--I wasn't even fit for cohabitation with the rest of the class for the rest of that morning.  I had to sit on--in isolation.  I felt like I had been exiled to Devil's Island or somewhere and I don't think I ever did, you know, get anything going with Eleanor from that point forward.  So, but those kinds of things--and of course one time I beat up on Tuggy (ph.) Simpson, you know, he was always trying to do stuff and he was always smarting off and called you names and I just got tired of him--not just calling me names, but he was calling other kids names and one day I just sick of Tuggy Simpson and he was a left-hander so I knew that if I was going to go to dukes with him, you know, go to fisticuffs, I had to be careful because he would fight from the wrong side.  And I jumped him and I whipped up on him pretty good and, of course, that didn't go well because I was supposed to be a good boy and there I was fighting like a, as they said, "Like a common criminal, like a common thug".  And, of course, I think they was as disappointed as anything else and because I disappointed them, I think they beat me harder (laughter).  But for the most part I pretty much kept my nose clean.
Story_ID: 88723
Speaker 1: Okay, now, were you involved in any other activities in grade school?  Like were you--did you excel in art or music or anything or--
Speaker 2: Well, mostly oratory and drama, one of the things that I was most interested in.  And then I was a pretty good artist, I could draw.  And those were the things that I was probably most noted for.  It was actually later that I actually got into sports and then got into--into music.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, where'd you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to high school at Central High School on Davis Avenue in Mobile [Alabama].  We were the Mighty Wildcats.  Mr. J. T. Gaines was the principal.  An authoritarian guy, he was Napoleonic, he was about 5'3", he was really short and he would stand up on a foot stool to slap you.  That was the nature of Mr. J. T. Gaines but a real taskmaster and a person who was relentless in his insistence on excellence and it was a wonderful high school.  It was tenth through twelfth grades, okay, so there were only three grade levels.  And there were--
Speaker 1: Did you go to ninth grade at the--
Speaker 2: I went to ninth grade at Dunbar.
Speaker 1: At Dunbar.
Speaker 2: Dunbar.  It was called Dunbar Junior High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Central was a large school.  We had over twelve hundred students at Central.  And it was the sort of premier black high school in the city.  A wonderful staff of teachers and an accomplished program of music, and art and things like vocational training.  I learned how to work on cars by taking automobile mechanics at Central.  We had a business track for people who were interested in going into business could take business as a major in high school.  And it was just really an extraordinary place.  And I was very active in high school and ended up being President of the Student Body my senior year and involved in drama and involved in sports, involved in the Honor Society, the Language Society and the State Student Government Association.  So there were some wonderful memories.
Speaker 1: Now what sports were you involved in?
Speaker 2: I was--actually for a while I played football which did not go well simply because I played--I started out playing what they now call "Pop Warner League Football".  We had a very well-organized program of sort of Pop Warner League Football.
Speaker 1: For grade school kids, right?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, this was actually up through high school level in Mobile.  And I played offensive guard.  You know this was back in the days when you didn't have to weigh, you know, eight hundred pounds to play on the line.  And since we did a lot of traps and a lot of sweeps, we ran from a straight "T" formation back when I played the single wing was a revolutionary formation.  And a lot of pull in plays so if you were quick, you could actually play line even if you were not very heavy.  Well, I was very quick and I would love to pull lead sweeps because I could hit people before they knew something was coming at them.  But my quickness betrayed me because then they wanted to put me in a running back position.  They wanted to put me in a fullback, running from the old straight "T" formation.  Fullback never ran many imaginative plays, you know, mostly up the middle.  The halfbacks would get to run wide and off tackle.  The fullbacks were always right down the gut and I remember when one of the few times that I tried to run a play from the fullback position, was called a "buck thirty" and all it was--was a fullback draw.  The quarterback slapped the ball in your mid-section and you were supposed to do a two or three count and run straight down the middle.  There's supposed to be a hole there.  Well, there wasn't a hole.  It was filled up with them.  It was none of us.  It was just them and that was the last thing I remember.  You know, the next thing I remember was stars and bright colors and the ball going somewhere and my helmet going somewhere and me quitting football.  I just decided, you know what, I'm a scholar and I think this is going to be my calling and so from that point on I only pursued gentlemanly sports.  So my activities in college were tennis and track.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you were pretty fast, though you say?
Speaker 2: Yeah I was pretty quick and it was--I actually--when I was in college, I actually ran the mile but I was quick enough that I actually ran a one hundred yard dash in less than eleven seconds.
Speaker 1: Well, that's pretty quick.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's (unclear).
Story_ID: 88724
Speaker 1: Yeah. Now, is there a--were there any teachers there that served particularly as a mentor to you in high school [Central High School, Mobile, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would say that the teacher that was probably most influential was a fellow named Percy White.  He was actually our English teacher and our drama coach.  And he was one of the younger teachers.  And so he really made sure we got the kind of advice about lessons of life.  And he really cared about what happened to us.  And he would pull us aside and talk to us about what our ambitions might be and what kind of things we might do to make sure we got where we needed to go.  For example, he would say, you know, you need to take more time and concentrate on the way you approach people, okay.  I mean he would talk to you about things like that and you know you wonder where is this coming from?  I mean, people were amazed that he was watching them from a distance, close enough to offer advice.  It had nothing to do with the course work in his English class but he wanted to make sure that you had the full range of skills that would be required to be successful going forward.  And he was very important but there were others who not only were important to me then but actually have stayed involved in my life ever since.  Willy Thomas (ph.), my chemistry teacher, to this day, comes to every major event in my life.  It was that kind of place.
Speaker 1: Hum, that's something.  That's really something.
Story_ID: 88725
Speaker 1: Now, how was your social life in high school [Central High School, Mobile, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Social life was actually pretty good, with one exception.  You know, I was a popular kid.  I was smart and I was talented.  I could dance, you know.  I could do things.  I was sort of the lead actor in the Thespian Society but I was young.  You see, I was too young to drive even when I was a senior and this was terrible and this was sort of one of the--the unexpected disadvantages of having started school when I was four because people thought I was older when I was in high school but I wasn't.  I mean, I couldn't get a driver's permit and so it was really miserable because, you know, here are all of the cool kids were learning to drive and were, you know, getting permission to borrow their parents' cars and there I was, I had no hope, no choice, no possibility and, of course, once the girls found out that, you know, you were younger than they were, well back in those days no, you just didn't do that.  You didn't go with a girl that was taller than you and you didn't go with a girl that was older than you and you were just in trouble.  So I had to keep a lot of stuff hidden.  It was--it put a real damper on things sometimes.  But I had fun.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you graduated in 1960?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-two [1962].
Speaker 1: Sixty-two [1962]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 88726
Speaker 1: And you said when you were on the--when you were thinking about what you were going to do, you thought about becoming a minister?
Speaker 2: Yes, I went off to Livingstone College [Salisbury, North Carolina], determined to be an A.M.E. Zion minister.
Speaker 1: Now was the church a big part of your life?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, as a matter of fact, the church was sort of the center of your social life in Mobile [Alabama] and Big Zion [A.M.E. Church, Mobile, Alabama], of course, was a big church, a very active church and I was involved in Sunday school, vacation bible school, the youth council, things of that nature.  We went on trips to district conferences and to annual conferences and check-up meetings and all those kinds of things and it was, in fact, through the church, at an annual national Sunday School Convention, that I actually won an oratorical contest which resulted in receiving a scholarship and a cash prize my senior year in high school, which was another reason why I ended up going to Livingstone College.
Story_ID: 88727
Speaker 1: I was just getting ready to go off to be a Methodist minister.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I was interested in being a Methodist minister.  Went off to Livingstone College [Salisbury, North Carolina] under the influence of quite a few people.  The minister of my church was a Livingstone College graduate.  My high school biology teacher was a Livingstone graduate.  My high school principal [J. T. Gaines] was a Livingstone graduate and then one of the other influential people in my high school was from Livingstone and, of course, it was the parent educational institution for the A.M.E. Zion Church where I grew up.  So off I went.
Speaker 2: Where was Livingstone?
Speaker 1: Salisbury, North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Salisbury, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and it's also the place where Hood Theological Seminary [Salisbury, North Carolina] is located which is, of course, the place where AME Zion ministers were routinely trained.  So that's what I went off to do at the tender age of 16.
Speaker 2: The A.M.E. Zion Church goes all the way back to James Varick in the--
Speaker 1: That's exactly right.
Speaker 2: Eighteen thirties [1830s].
Speaker 1: That's exactly right.  In fact, Varick Auditorium is the main auditorium on the campus there.
Story_ID: 88728
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So--what--how did you find Livingstone?
Speaker 2: Livingstone College [Salisbury, North Carolina] was probably the defining experience of my--of my life because I went there, as I said, to be a minister but I think I learned that that was not really the thing that was best suited for me.  But it was a place where I really sort of learned how to achieve a level of excellence and fulfillment.  I really did find that I could spread my wings at Livingstone.  I could be anything I wanted to be.  I was the top student, and there was no shame in that, there was no--there was no downside to being, you know, the top student, especially if you could do other things.  So I was the lead actor in the Julia B. Duncan Players.  I joined the fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha].  I was an athlete and all of those things were just wonderful affirmations of the fact that, you know, you could be whatever you want to be and people were always encouraging and they took pride in my accomplishments and I really felt like I grew up and became confident.  And I think that's really a key.  When you come out of a world like I've come out of, a very, you know, sort of stringently segregated, you know, South, where half the people, black folks are telling you, you can, you can, but the bigger world, the majority world, is saying, no, no, you really--you really can't.  To come to a place like Livingstone and be essentially given the freedom to soar.  Okay, show me what you got.  Okay, let it all go and let's see where you land and to be able to really do some wonderful things and accomplish some things there.  And then I met, you know, these wonderful people, including the girl who would eventually, you know, be my wife [Ann Gavin], you know, all of that.  And I didn't meet her until my senior year so that I had the freedom to meet a lot of other people before she ever showed up.  And all of that was good.  So it was a terrific experience.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, what did you end up majoring in?
Speaker 2: I ended up majoring in chemistry and mathematics and had my first research experience at Livingstone College.  I won a grant from the North Carolina Academy of Sciences.  For $300, I won a research grant to study anthocyanin pigments in pansies using paper chromatography.  And I presented my result at a science meeting in Washington, D.C. in 1965.  That was my first bona fide scientific research experience.  So I had wonderful mentors.
Speaker 1: Pigments in pansies?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Pansies come in yellow and--
Speaker 2: Purple and we were trying to test the hypothesis that the variations in soil PH could affect the distribution of pigments in pansies.  It doesn't happen (laughter).  Proved it was not so--so it was a definitive study, definitively negative.  But I learned some things--
Speaker 1: Negative completely.
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: And ran into wonderful role models at Livingstone College and that--and made wonderful life-long friends and that was the kind of experience that I wouldn't trade for anything in the world.
Story_ID: 88729
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, well, you went on to graduate school, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I left Livingstone and came here to Atlanta [Georgia], to Emory [University].  A very different kind of experience.  In 1966, the height of the civil rights struggle, Emory was not a place ready for black students, in general.  It was trying to make a move in that direction but it was--it was an uneasy fit, at best.  As one of the first black students admitted to the Division of Basic Health Sciences, especially for a Ph.D. program, I had some--some pretty testy experiences at Emory, including a professor who did not believe that I wrote a paper that I submitted for a course once because the quality of the writing was too good.  He said this is high quality stuff.  Who wrote this?  And, of course, at that time I was not the man you see before you now.  I was a dashiki wearing, Afro wearing, militant, well not militant, but activist.  I founded the Black Student Alliance at Emory.  I was a co-founder with another person and I was--I was a pretty outspoken guy.  So that was not a good encounter for me.  In fact, I didn't think I was going to make it through Emory.  The good side of it was that there some supportive people there and with that kind of support, it was possible to get through and having the West Side of Atlanta, the AU [Atlanta University] Center, and the church, I was going to an A.M.E. Zion church here in Atlanta, all of those were places that served as a kind of a safe haven--safe haven, sort of a harbor of respite and that allowed me to get through.  Then later, my girlfriend [Ann Gavin], who by then was out of college and came here to work, she moved to Atlanta and it worked out just fine.  I'm happy to say that over the years Emory has changed a lot.  I've really developed a far different relationship with Emory and I actually can look back on those bitter days with a little bit more sanguinity.  Very interesting times though.  Exciting.
Story_ID: 88730
Speaker 1: What were the issues that the black students were concerned about at Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Well, Emory did not have a social network into which black students could fit.  There was no student union.  Social life was entirely wrapped up in fraternities and sororities from which blacks were excluded.  And if you didn't have a car at Emory, you were in big trouble because there was just nothing accessible on the campus.  And, of course, it meant you were simply sort of trapped in an area of social isolation if you didn't have access to a car because there was really no public transportation to speak of.  I was a graduate student so I had a car and so I had some freedom.  But the undergraduate students were totally and completely miserable.  And I became involved with them.  At first I was closer to their age.  I was, you know, I was a young guy, I was 20 when I went to Emory as a graduate student.  And so in an attempt to really try to bring some relief to their frustration, we would meet for social gatherings and it became clear that we needed to have a more organized approach to that kind of bonding and we needed to have a mechanism to confront the administration which some of the things that would come up because not only was I being confronted by professors who didn't think I could write a high quality paper, there were students who were being openly disrespected and there were issues of that sort that needed to be addressed and so we formed the alliance.  Plus, this was during the days of the Congress of Racial Equality [CORE] and the Congress of Afrikan People [CAP] were all here and, you know, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was based here in Atlanta.  It was a very activist kind of time and so it--
Speaker 1: Now, this was 1960--
Speaker 2: That was 1968 when we actually started the--I went there in '66 [1966], we formed the alliance [Black Student Alliance, BSA] in 1968.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I was just--so you got there, I guess around the time that Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Toure] claimed "Black Power".
Speaker 2: In fact, I invited Stokely Carmichael to our campus as a speaker and introduced him.  He was married to Miriam Makeba at that time and I remember introducing him to this packed audience mostly, of course, were white students and I remember during the question and answer period, some angry student stood up and said, "You're always talking about Black Power and economic opportunity, what does that suit you have on, what does that cost?"  And Stokely said, "$300."  He said, "Yeah, that doesn't sound like much deprivation to me".  He said, the student said, "What if I--what if I were to pull a gun right now and just shoot you?"  The two big bodyguards on either side of Stokely--now there I am standing there next to Stokely and the two big bodyguards converged and said, one of them said, "You'd never make it."  And I said, you know what, I'm in over my head right now (laughter).  I was ready to have a little bit of--a little bit of mutan--of this, you know, let's dampen a little bit of the intensity of this Black Power, let's have some black and white peace here.  It was--it was an interesting exchange.  But those were very exciting times.
Speaker 1: High rhetoric involved?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, and plus, you know, the Vietnam War was ramping up, we were protesting that.  Martin Luther King got killed.
Story_ID: 88731
Speaker 1: What was that like?  Now you were in school?  Did you form your organization after [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s death?
Speaker 2: It was actually--we actually formed it before his death and in fact we led a march through--
Speaker 1: Was it called the Black Student--
Speaker 2: Alliance.  The B-S-A.
Speaker 1: It was called that before King was shot?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and we led a march.  That was a very, very difficult time for me, personally, and for all of us, collectively.
Speaker 1: What was the reaction of the white students on campus when King was killed?
Speaker 2: Most of the students were--were horrified, shocked and hurt.  I have to say that there was--there was no public display of what I would have considered inappropriate behavior.  Nobody, you know, went around saying, you know, the celebrating or anything.  The white students were the ones that called for a day of mourning.  The white students were the ones that petitioned to have classes dismissed and things like that.  So I really have to say that they responded appropriately.
Speaker 1: Did the black students--did they--were they--how did they feel?
Speaker 2: It was a very dignified response.  The black students organized a march, led a series of memorial services.  We were just simply hurt.  I was the president of the BSA at that time so I actually led the march and I was also a student marshal in Martin Luther King's funeral, you know, sort of the horse-drawn, the mule-drawn cortege.  Jesse Jackson [HM] was the Chief Marshal, I remember.  It was--it was a time of bitter memories, quite frankly.
Story_ID: 88732
Speaker 1: Okay, now--now you finished your Ph.D. here at Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, finished my Ph.D. in biochemistry in 1970 and then went off, did a fellowship at the NIH in diabetes.
Speaker 1: Now, what's NIH?
Speaker 2: The National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland and those were very exciting years for me scientifically, and professionally, because it sort of launched my--my research career.
Speaker 1: So you were a young PhD in your twenties?
Speaker 2: Yeah, as a matter of fact I finished my--I finished the requirements for my PhD the week before my twenty-fifth birthday and went to the NIH and had a great experience there.  Got married to the first six months during that fellowship period, so lived in Washington [D.C.] through the heady days of the Watergate hearings.  So, in the lab I would listen to Sam Ervin, you know, as he--he headed up those hearings and, of course, I was always a person who despised [President] Richard Nixon.  So these were--those were times when I celebrated that--at his downward spiral.  It was a difficult time.  The Vietnam War was really--was exacting a bitter toll.  Friends who, you know, were there and never came back.  And--
Story_ID: 88733
Speaker 1: But since '68 [1968] too, Atlanta [Georgia] was a home of, what is--home of Rap Brown?
Speaker 2: Yeah, H. Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin]--
Speaker 1: H. Rap Brown.
Speaker 2: --was also here.  I didn't really have many dealings with H. Rap Brown but I knew who he was and what kinds of things he was up to.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was he a student around here?  Or what was he?
Speaker 2: I think there was a time when he was a student here but it was not clear to me what he was doing because he was, you know, he was very active in the movement.  He was traveling a lot and involved in a lot of different things and he was sort of a--in a league a little different from the one that I was in at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 88734
Speaker 1: Okay. So, now you--now what made you decide to pursue an M.D.?
Speaker 2: When I was at the NIH [National Institutes of Health], as a Ph.D., I designed a research protocol that required the use of what's called, "buffy coat."  When you take a--if I took a unit of blood from you and put it in a centrifuge and spun the red cells down, the upper layers would be where all of the white cells would gather.  The research that I was doing required the use of that white cell layer.  Now, normally, they would take that white cell layer off of the blood cells, which they would give to somebody who needed blood, the white cell layer would be taken off and thrown away.  Well, I was using that in my experimental protocol.  Well it turns out that I was really fascinated by the research that I was doing.  I had designed it.  I had come up with the hypothesis but I could not get the white blood cell layer from the blood bank because I was a Ph.D.  And because it was a blood product, you had to have an M.D. to sign a slip of paper to take away something that was getting ready to go into the garbage can.  And I said, this is ridiculous.  I can't do the kinds of research I really want to do because I'm a Ph.D.  And this is what I want to do.  So I knew I wanted to do human disease-related research, particularly in diabetes.  So I decided, well, in order to do this I'm going to have to invest some more time.  And so I went to medical school.  Fortunately I was able to go to Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina] where, because of the nature of the curriculum, I didn't have to do the third year, at all.  I went straight through and was able to finish my M.D. in twenty-seven months.  And so, that's how I ended up with dual degrees.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.  Now, how old were you when you received your M.D.?
Speaker 2: I went to medical school when I was twenty-seven, finished my medical degree when I was thirty.
Speaker 1: You were young, indeed.
Speaker 2: Well, at that time I was actually--now I'd gone from being the youngest in my group to being the oldest in my group because, you know, by that time I'd done a Ph.D. and a fellowship and instead of starting medical school at age twenty-two, I started medical school at age twenty-seven.  So now I was everybody's big brother plus I was already married.  So--
Speaker 1: A different role?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was a very different role for me but one that I enjoy.
Story_ID: 88735
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, you are, from what I understand, recognized as a leading expert in the field of diabetes, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In the--yeah.  Why did you choose to get involved in studying diabetes?  I mean, was there--is there a particular reason why you chose that?
Speaker 2: No, the reason I got involved in diabetes was really--purely research driven.  I became interested in studying insulin as a hormone and the action of insulin on human cells.  So my interest in diabetes started not because of diabetes as a disease or as a public health problem, but as a research question.  It was years later before I found out that diabetes runs in my family.  And I didn't become interested in diabetes as a clinical problem until I was an Assistant Professor of Medicine at Washington University in St. Louis [Missouri].  And that's what started my volunteer work with the American Diabetes Association, which eventually led to my becoming President of the American Diabetes Association and a "leader" in the field of diabetes.
Story_ID: 88736
Speaker 1: Okay, now you worked with the National Institutes of Health, right?  You were at National Institutes (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I was at the NIH, the National Institutes of Health as a Fellow in the early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's before your Ph.D.?  I mean, before your M.D.?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and then you worked for Duke University Hospital from '75 [1975] to '76 [1976]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--when I finished medical school, I finished in December.  I was not going to start my internship in medicine until July.  I had a wife [Ann Gavin] and a child, so between December and July, for six months, I had nothing to do.  So I got a job as an intern at Duke Hospital in pathology.  So I was working as a pathology intern for six months before I started my internship in internal medicine, which is what I really wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and well, so--also you worked for the U.S. Public Health Service, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I was at the NIH, I got a direct commission in the Public Health Service so I was actually able to complete my military obligation working at the National Institutes of Health.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's something a lot of people, rank and file of us, don't understand but an M.D. can complete his military obligation by working for the National Institutes of Health?
Speaker 2: Well, at that time--
Speaker 1: Public Health--
Speaker 2: --at the U.S. Public Health Service, most of the people who did that were M.D.s, I was a Ph.D.  So, I was an unusual commissioned officer and the difference was that as a PhD you got an initial lower rank than the MDs and that didn't sit well, either, and I got that changed in a hurry because they were making more money.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't like that and they knew less about research and I didn't like that.
Speaker 1: I bet.  Okay, so then I guess, the sequence be after you completed your internship at Duke University Hospital, you went on teaching at Washington?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went--I went to Washington University in St. Louis to do internship and residency training, in medicine.  Did a fellowship in endocrinology and then they invited me to stay on the faculty.  And so I ended up staying in St. Louis [Missouri] for about eleven years.  Went there with the intention of staying there only three but St. Louis was a good place for us.  We really loved St. Louis.
Story_ID: 88737
Speaker 1: Okay.  What are the highlights of that stay, I mean, are there any highlights you can share with us?
Speaker 2: Well, in St. Louis [Missouri], we really did become an integral part of the--of the community.  Got involved in a lot of work with social organizations and, like the fraternity, was very active there and things like housing developments.  The Sigma Pi Phi fraternity, the Boule, was very active in social issues and I became involved very heavily there.  We were part of a church community that was extremely active and a very important part of our lives in St. Louis.  Our second child was born in St. Louis.  I think more than anything else, St. Louis was a place where I really was able to--to sort of find my way in the professional world of diabetes.  I established a real career in diabetes.  In my research, while I was in St. Louis, I became a national volunteer.  I became president of the State Diabetes Association and I think that period of time marked for me the time when I came under national attention.  It was there that I was recruited to be a consultant with the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation because of the attention that I had gotten.  And that was a turning point in my life because it was the springboard for lots of other opportunities in the rest of my professional life.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now--what exactly did you do at the Robert Wood Foundation?  With the Johnson Foundation?  Well, what was the--
Speaker 2: The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation is the largest healthcare philanthropy in the country.  Having, at its peak, had assets of something like ten billion dollars.  I started out as a consultant looking at their educational programs, the programs that they were running to help underrepresented minorities get into medical school.  And my first task was to evaluate those programs to see whether they were effective, and this was in the early 1980s and it turns out they weren't, in fact they were terrible.  And as a result, I was made part of an effort to design a program that would be effective and that's when I became involved as a national program director for the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation with what was called, "The Minority Medical Education Program", a very successful program designed to recruit talented underrepresented minority students who had an interest in going on to become physicians and helping to provide them with the requisite kind of additional skills that would increase their chances for a successful application to medical school.  I ran that program for about seven years before turning it over to the AAMC, the Association of American Medical Schools--Colleges, and then I became national director of the second level program, which was the Minority Medical Faculty Development Program.  Now, this program is designed to find clinically trained underrepresented minorities who wanted to be faculty members at medical schools because it turns out that's where the big gap was.  The reason we didn't have more medical students was because we didn't have enough medical faculty.  And that program I am now in my twentieth year with that program.  And it's been highly successful.  And I have also become a Trustee of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.  And that has been one of th most rewarding associations of my life because it has allowed me to do recruitment, it has allowed me to really help develop the careers of young minority scholars, it has allowed me to do mentoring, the kind of things that are real passion for me and to do it on a national scale.
Story_ID: 88738
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in 1986, you went to Oklahoma [University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma] right?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: I went to Oklahoma from St. Louis [Missouri] because it was one of those situations where there was an offer that I couldn't refuse.  I was offered an endowed professorship and a chance to build my own division, and I did.  I went there to establish a diabetes division.  I wasn't interested in being a department chair, I wasn't interested in being the head of a general endocrine division.  I really wanted to build a dedicated diabetes division and Oklahoma provided me a chance to do that with good resources, good support and it was a wonderful experience.  It's just that Oklahoma was a different kind of place.  A little slower pace.  It was like being somewhere else ten or twelve years earlier.  It was not exactly the most cosmopolitan place.
Speaker 1: Were you in Oklahoma City?
Speaker 2: I lived in--just north of Oklahoma City, in Edmond [Oklahoma], but I worked in Oklahoma City.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Tulsa [Oklahoma] was a lot more cosmopolitan.
Story_ID: 88071
Speaker 1: All right.  So you were at the University of Oklahoma [Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma] right up until you came here [Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia], right?
Speaker 2: Actually no, I left the University of Oklahoma and was recruited to the Howard Hughes Medical Institute [Chevy Chase, Maryland] and that's where I went--I went there in 1991 and was at the Howard Hughes Institute for eleven years as one of the senior executives, running a very large portfolio of basic research at different installations around the country and it was an incredible experience because it was the largest medical research philanthropy with assets of something like 12 to 13 billion dollars so it was the first place I'd ever been where resources were not an issue and where you were dealing with the cream of the--the creme de la creme in basic and biomedical research.  I had several Nobel laureates in my portfolio, people that I had responsibility for--for administrative oversight, and it was an extraordinary experience and I learned an awful lot about science, yes, but I also learned a lot about managing people.  And I think much of what I learned in that experience really prepared me to--to make this step to come to the Morehouse School of Medicine as President last year.
Story_ID: 88072
Speaker 1: Now do you have to have a particular philosophy of administration of management to manage scientists and M.D.s and--
Speaker 2: Well I think the key is that you need to know something about science because you need to understand their world.  But I think you have to be absolutely consistent and scrupulously fair in your dealings because if ever it becomes clear that you have one set of rules for one person because they have more scientific esteem than the next person, then your credibility is totally and completely ruined.  And I was very fortunate because I am by nature that way.  I think it comes from having a history of growing up, seeing a lot of unfairness and injustice.  I have an intolerance for that.  And so I've worked very hard to try to bring balance and fairness to my dealings with people and that becomes clear.  People know you by that being your style and it allowed me to really deal with them very effectively.
Story_ID: 88818
Speaker 1: Okay, my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please--I'm sorry, observing also is-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  Jodi Merriday.
Speaker 1: --Jodi Merriday, right, and Gayle Converse.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: I'm Dr. James R. Gavin III.  That's James, J-A-M-E-S, "R" as in Raphael, Gavin, G-A-V-I-N.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: This is August 11th of the year 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're sitting in the executive dining room of the National Center for Primary Care at the Morehouse School of Medicine, in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And this is a continuation of an interview that we started a couple of months ago, right?
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: Right.  And I think we were talking about your tenure as a--you're a Senior Scientific Officer for the Howard Hughes Medical--
Speaker 2: Institute.
Speaker 1: --Institute, right.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 88819
Speaker 1: And what were your duties at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute [Chevy Chase, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: At the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, which for me the headquarters was where I worked, I was a senior administrator responsible for supervision and administrative and budgetary oversight of about ninety of the investigators in the Howard Hughes portfolio.  These investigators were located in about seventy-two different laboratories at about fifteen or sixteen different institutions throughout various parts of the United States.  So I was the person at Howard Hughes responsible for their supervision and overall administration.
Speaker 1: Okay, what-- (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Larry, can you shift your chair to your right?
Speaker 2: The research that was supported was in five areas, or six areas, at that time.  Immunology, cell biology, neurosciences, genetics, structural biology and, that's five, and bioinformatics.  So there were six areas of research supported by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and my investigators actually covered the entire breadth and scope of those areas.  Now within each of those broad areas, there could be people doing a variety of things, so it was a very broad-based research portfolio.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, the--I would assume you had to have a--or have a great breadth of knowledge and experience to be able to supervise a--
Speaker 2: One of the advantages, of course, of being M.D. and Ph.D. trained was that I could be conversant with basic investigators as well as with clinical investigators as well as with people who used epidemiology as a tool in their research and so for me it was a very comfortable experience but very exciting because these were some of the best scientists in the world and engaging in them at that level was absolutely wonderful.  In fact, sometimes I wondered whether or not I really should have been paid for that job but I never said that to my supervisors.
Speaker 1: Now give us an idea of some of the excitement generated by these researchers.
Speaker 2: Well, the kinds of things that were happening in the laboratories that I was responsible for--for example, were the discoveries of new medical syndromes, the syndrome that explained, for example, one of the most common forms of mental retardation in--in boys, Fragile X syndrome, that was actually discovered right in the laboratory of one of my investigators who worked at Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia], Steve Warren [Stephen T. Warren].  I had things going on in laboratories, like in Dallas [Texas], where one of my investigators discovered the, the protein that was responsible for, for sending people into shock under the influence of a bacterial infection.  Another of my investigators discovered one of the new hormones that operates at the genetic level in the cell that opened up the way for a whole new class of medicines to treat diabetes and insulin resistance.  So, these were the kinds of cutting edge things that were going on in these laboratories.  Mostly, they were basic science laboratories but there was, at the end of my tenure at Hughes, we were beginning to get into some of the translation of those discoveries into clinical problems.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you were there for eleven years, right?
Speaker 2: My tenure covered, yes, just about eleven years.
Speaker 1: And that's in Chevy Chase, Maryland, right?
Speaker 2: That's where the headquarters are located--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Chevy Chase, Maryland.
Story_ID: 88820
Speaker 1: And you were also--you have something to do with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute Health Scholars Program too, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute [HHMI]-NIH [National Institutes of Health] Research Scholarship Program actually was a program that recruited and brought to the NIH campus some of the best and brightest medical students who were interested in research from all over the United States.  This was a program that was jointly run by the Howard Hughes [Chevy Chase, Maryland] and the NIH.  The NIH campus [Bethesda, Maryland] was where the complex was where these scholars actually stayed.  They had a building there that was an old convent and in fact it used to be the place where cloistered sect used to be in residence.  And in fact, one of the names of the program was "The Cloister Program".  And these students would come and stay on that campus and work in NIH laboratories for a full year, working with some of the best scientists in the country.  I was the director of that program which meant that I was responsible for leading all of the efforts at recruitment of the students, for advising them, for pulling together the advisory group of NIH scientists who helped me with programmatic design, who helped me recruit and interview and select the students and then I had responsibility for oversight of the activities of those students for the entire year that they were in residence at the NIH.  And at the end of the year, we had a great big scientific symposium where they presented their findings.  And then, obviously, one of the most exciting things for me was that I was responsible for helping those students find residencies and many of them, helping them to find jobs later in their career.  So it was a very satisfying experience for me.
Story_ID: 88821
Speaker 1: Okay. Now in that regard, would you say that things have improved or prospects have improved for black medical students these days or for aspiring doctors?
Speaker 2: I would say that there's been an enormous leap forward in terms of progress for African American students who are interested in medicine.  That program [HHMI-NIH Research Scholars Program], for example, that I ran at Howard Hughes [Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland], was a program that routinely captured some of the best and brightest African American students for that--for that particular program.  Interestingly, programs that recruit medical students who are interested in research careers and in academic careers, have always been more successful in capturing top notch black students than programs that are trying to capture graduate students.  They--the numbers are very different.  We generate a lot more MDs than we do PhDs and so one of the things that we've learned is that if we're interested in finding people who have the capability of building research careers, in addition to clinical careers, we really need to look a little bit more closely at M.D. trained students among African Americans while continuing, as we're doing for example here at the Morehouse School of Medicine [Atlanta, Georgia], trying to identify people to put into Ph.D. tracks because that truly is the research degree.  But that in numbers, that's lagging way behind the M.D. trained young African American scholars.
Story_ID: 88822
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  I know that you've recently, well, because I--since we're talking about, I guess, college on some level and admittance to college, you were concerned about the President [George W. Bush]'s remarks regarding affirmative action of this past year--past [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s birthday, I think.
Speaker 2: Well, at that time, I was--I was very concerned that at a point when the Supreme Court was--actually had the case [Grutter v. Bollinger] on its docket and was going to make a determination on the question, it would have seemed prudent to me to let the--let the process run its course and try for, at least this once, not to politicize it, just leave it out of the political arena because that's what fans the flames of polarization and I thought it was especially on the--on the occasion when it took place right around Martin Luther King's birthday, when the President made what was in the view of many, were comments that were somewhat inappropriate indicating that, in a somewhat disparaging, and I would also say somewhat inaccurate way, what affirmative action was and what it possibly meant to the country.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have--do you have an ideal scenario of how you think affirmative action should work or what should work in its place if not affirmative action or--
Speaker 2: Well, I think that there's been something of a distortion of the whole concept of affirmative action and this is what happens when people decouple a concept from its historical origins.  You know, affirmative action was born, of course, during the days of the [President Lyndon B.] Johnson administration, during the days of the great society, legislation, in an attempt to try to close the gap that existed between the participation of minorities in federal projects, that there was a woeful underrepresentation of minority business people and vendors and contractors and workers in taxpayer-supported endeavors.  So, the effort was attempted to try to close that gap, to take a piece of this business which was generating enormous wealth and influence and commercial well-being in some sectors but completely excluding minorities from that process.  Well, that's when the whole concept of a process that could, could include--would include more people.  It was an intent for inclusiveness, okay, to close the gap, to make up for systematic, purposeful exclusion, okay.  Now the guy who coined the term, "affirmative action" actually chose that rather than a positive action which is, Howard Taylor (ph.) was his name, he had the phrase, "positive action" chosen.  But the alliterative quality of affirmative action sort of won his favor and that's the term he introduced and that's what happened.  So a percentage of federal contracts started going to minority vendors and contractors and thus sprang the concept of trying to overcome the long-standing systematic impact of purposeful exclusion by creating opportunities, okay.  All it ever did was to create opportunities.  It was not ever intended to be an end run around quality, that nobody opened the doorway for inferior contractors and vendors.  That was not the problem.  It was simply opening the door so that you could compete at the table and that's what affirmative action was, that's what affirmative has had as its intent and not a process of finding, recruiting, inviting into the process people who were, or who are, otherwise unqualified to serve.  I think that's been the distortion and that's what makes people nervous because they buy into that distortion and that I think is what we need to try and put some breaks on.
Story_ID: 88823
Speaker 1: Okay, do you--what do you think of the future of affirmative action today, I guess?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that what has happened is that I think the whole notion of affirmative action, as a concept, has been so badly distorted that I think appropriately, it's giving way to what I call a "displacement concept" and that displacement concept is the value of diversity.  In a society like ours where the demographics argue quite clearly that in not too many years, we're not going to have anything called a majority population.  We're going to be such a garden salad of subgroups and ethnicities that what we'll have to learn is an appreciation of the fact that people will look different, sound different, have different expectations for the same set of circumstances because they will have come from very different cultural backgrounds and that's going to be the norm rather than the exception.  So I think the value of diversity, which is reflected now by the--the amicus briefs that you got in the recent Supreme Court ruling on affirmative action, I think those briefs from the military, from the business community, from the academic community, all of those things argue, I think, quite persuasively, that there is a growing recognition in this society for the value of diversity as a commercial concept, as a social construct, as a religious construct, we are moving, I think, in that direction and I believe that once we are now fully caught up or, once we get fully caught up in that, I think the whole notion of affirmative action will probably be less and less emphasized.
Story_ID: 88824
Speaker 1: Okay, now in 2002 you followed the eminent Dr. Louis Sullivan [HM] as President of the Morehouse School of Medicine [Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And tell us about that experience.  That must have really been a--
Speaker 2: The experience of following Louis?
Speaker 1: Yes, or being chosen to, you know, for this position--
Speaker 2: Well, this has been a fascinating process in many ways because coming to the Morehouse School of Medicine was--was nowhere near my radar screen.  The person who was the most adamant champion of getting Jim Gavin at the Morehouse School of Medicine was Lou Sullivan.  Lou was, for whatever reason, convinced that the only person who could really step in here and move the school in the directions that he felt the school really should and would go was me.  I had to be convinced and he was really tenacious in pushing it.  Well, following Lou is, is quite a challenge because he has done some enormous things in bringing this school into being with the vision of Hugh Gloster who was the architect of the dream, coupled with the energy and tenacity of Lou Sullivan who was really the builder who actually put it in motion and actually caused to be this physical plan and the programs here, that's--that's filling some pretty big footprints.  And, of course, Lou casts a very long shadow.  So one has to be first and foremost pretty secure to follow Lou.  But the other thing you have to be is pretty tough because Lou didn't just go away, Lou still has his ideas about how the Morehouse School of Medicine ought to be run.  But I have to say that I know where his heart is and I think that we champion the same outcomes and we champion the same aspirations for the school and in many ways it really is an honor to follow Lou and to be able to build on his legacy and to be able to go and get him sometimes so that I can use his--his vast experience, which I do, maybe not as often as Lou would like sometimes but I have no hesitancy about doing that and consider that to be a tremendous resource at my disposal.
Story_ID: 88825
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is a beautiful facility that we're in right now and I've--I hear it that quite a few black personalities with money have contributed, you know, to the Morehouse School of Medicine [Atlanta, Georgia] and, I mean, what is it--is it, I mean, are you all in the easy street now or?
Speaker 2: Well, no, then nothing could be further from the truth.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, if anything, the Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] has--has enjoyed a much greater degree of largess from the black celebrity community than the Morehouse School of Medicine.  And, in fact, that's one of the problems that we sometimes have.  We are two entirely separate institutions, totally independent of each other with only the Morehouse part of our names in common and, of course, the School of Medicine had its origins in Morehouse College.  But there have been major contributions made, for example, by Bill Cosby, and by Oprah Winfrey and by Denzel Washington, to Morehouse College.  None of those people have contributed to the Morehouse School of Medicine and what we want people to clearly understand is that just because you've given to the Morehouse College, an undergraduate institution, does not mean that in any way, form or fashion, the pressing needs of the Morehouse School of Medicine have been benefited because we need that kind of support.  I mean, we're training physicians and public health workers and scientists and researchers to deal with the problems of the medically underserved and to try to get rid of some of the health disparities, a very different mission from an undergraduate school.  So, we're hoping that more and more celebrities will hear that message and start coming in here with some of those kinds of contributions.
Story_ID: 88826
Speaker 1: Most presidents say the fundraising is the toughest thing they have to do as a president of an institution.  I mean, would you agree with that or--
Speaker 2: I would say that it's probably the second most difficult thing that a president has to do.  The--and the only thing I think that's tougher in a president's job is managing people but I think that that's true of any executive.  I think that whatever the business enterprise is that you might be in, that enterprise and overseeing that enterprise, is going to be the second most difficult thing that you do.  The first and most difficult task is going to be managing people because that's really, at the end of the day, the thing that's most unpredictable, that has the largest possibility for nuance and for volatility.  Other things have their own problems, but I think less so.
Speaker 1: Did--do you have a specific philosophy of management that you use or what do you think of--
Speaker 2: Well, I think if I had to classify my management style, I would say it's a management style that is--is participatory, although not a management style by consensus, I believe that people ought to participate in the process but I think there ought to be no ambiguity about where the decision-making occurs and where that accountability is.  I think that it's a management style that, that delegates and gives responsibility but insists on accountability.  I think you ought to get good people, make it clear to those good people, what the expectations are, empower them to act on your behalf because they ought to know how you would decide under a certain set of circumstances.  And with that degree of empowerment, they ought to be free to go for it, make a decision.  I'm much, much happier with people seeking my forgiveness than I am having people wait around for my permission, that is not the way I prefer to manage.  And the final thing is that I--I think that I'm a manager who, who says that pressure is fine, pressure is to be expected in the day-to-day of what we do, stress is not.  Stress represents a negative reaction to pressure.  Nobody wins with stress.  We all have to learn how to deal with pressure.  And so that's a nuance but I think an important one because I think it establishes the climate, the atmosphere of how people go about doing their work on a day-to-day basis.
Story_ID: 88827
Speaker 1: Now in terms of Morehouse's Medical School's importance, we only have, correct me if I'm wrong, but three black medical schools?
Speaker 2: There are four.
Speaker 1: Four?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and they're not--they're not black, they're historically, we will call them "minority" because, for example, Charles Drew Medical School out in UCLA [University of California], in Los Angeles [California], is probably now predominantly Latino but the other three are Howard University [College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and Morehouse School of Medicine [Atlanta, Georgia] are predominantly black still.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is the--what do you think the biggest challenge facing the black medical schools or the predominantly black medical schools today?
Speaker 2: I think our biggest challenge is the achievement of fiscal stability.  I don't think there's been any diminution of the importance of our missions and they're all schools with missions around the theme of providing health professionals and the work force to really address the needs of people who tend to be underserved and who tend to be more vulnerable and high risk for the worst diseases of our time.  These are the schools that still continue to generate a disproportionate number of physicians and healthcare professionals who serve those populations.  So there's been no diminution of that mission.  And with the shifts that are occurring in our population, that--those aspects of mission are going to become even more important.  The growing awareness of the health disparities that exist in our society brought to light rather poignantly by the Institute of Medicine report on "Unequal Treatment."  These are precisely the kinds of health problems that these institutions are tackling, for us it is a central focus at the Morehouse School of Medicine.  And those aspects of mission continue to be critical.  What is it going to take for us to be able to fulfill those missions and to do it at a level of excellence that we insist upon?  We have to have more fiscal stability.  None of these schools started with any indenture.  We didn't have a legacy, somebody's estate or fortune to begin with.  So we've had to try and bootstrap these institutions into some measure of fiscal stability.  Endowment, for example, is extremely small across these institutions and without that you just don't have risk capital.  You just don't have the ability to do some of those unique and visionary things that you ought be able to do when you are an engine of discovery, like we are here at a school of medicine.  Those, I think, represent some of the most pressing priorities and it's not just money, it really is about having the opportunity to be creative, to be risk taking and to address new needs with some expeditiousness.  Those are the things that are missing when you don't have good fiscal stability.
Story_ID: 88828
Speaker 1: Now do you--all of this is going too far off field, but do you have any ideas about socialized medicine?  I know Hillary Clinton had a bill that she proposed early in President [Bill] Clinton's tenure as president.  What do you think about that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, the whole issue of socialized medicine, and again, this is where like the whole business of affirmative action, terms and concepts sort of get, get beat up on because they get defined in ways that gather a whole lot of baggage.  What people are really talking about with socialized medicine is basically two things really, providing an avenue of access to healthcare and providing a system of payment for it.  I mean, that--that basically it reduces to that where now you're talking about having a form of access that is not tiered.  You don't have some people having a little access and other people having a lot of access and those differences in access being defined by how--who has how much money, okay.  This whole business of socialized medicine seeks to level that so that everybody has a relative equality of access and why, because the source of payment for that access, for those services, is a single source payment, okay.  And that's what--that approach has argued that we would be better off having a single source of payment and a defined pathway to access for everybody and there are many who argue, "let the market do its thing."
Story_ID: 88084
Speaker 1: Dr. Gavin, what are some of the most serious health concerns in the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, in our community, we have the whole notion of health disparities and what that means is that there are some problems that disproportionately affect members of the African American community and they include things like heart disease, hypertension, and strokes, diabetes, HIV/AIDS and certain kinds of cancer and in children, things like, asthma, and then when you think about the condition of obesity which has not yet been defined as a disease, but it is a condition which predisposes people to a whole variety of other kinds of problems.  There is a huge disproportionate effect in our population from obesity and those other conditions.
Speaker 1: Do you think that black people, or people in general, suffer from obesity due to, is it primarily due to natural causes?  Or is it due to just, I mean, just plain overeating?
Speaker 2: Well, it's--well, overeating is a natural cause in the sense that it's a choice that people make.  The calculus is not terribly complicated.  When calories in greatly exceed calories out, the body has only so many choices with what it'll do with those calories and one of the things that we can do well is to store them and we store them principally as fat.  We've had a huge change in our lifestyles in this country.  I mean, one example of, of what has happened with lifestyle that moves us away from looking for genetic causes, we are so enamored with looking for genetic causes.  In the last thirty years, the prevalence of diabetes, Type 2 Diabetes among African Americans, has quadrupled in this country, in the last thirty years.  Now, there's nothing about your genes that will quadruple anything in 30 years.  Our genes, except our blue jeans, I mean our biological genes, haven't changed in any substantive way for more than fifty thousand years.  So, to have that kind of skyrocketing increase in the rate of a major disease, like diabetes, is due to lifestyle choices.  We do less, we eat more, we stress more, all of these are the things which help to drive those kinds of epidemics.
Story_ID: 88085
Speaker 1: Okay, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, the thing that I am most interested in, and I've said this to you earlier is that, you know, I had to make a decision about which piece of this enormous set of problems was I going to be able to have some impact on, and I made a decision that I was really going to focus on trying to do something towards improving the health of the people.  I believe that's critical.  I believe that a healthier people becomes a wealthier people.  I believe that a healthier people becomes a happier people.  I think that you're able to keep families together, to build stronger communities and to do any of a number of things when you are a healthier community, and so that is where I've decided to really cast my lot.  Now at several levels, in a direct way by the degree to which I've been involved with a problem like diabetes, to try to diminish its devastating impact so that people become more aware of how much they can take control of their lives to reduce the impact of a disease like that, and we put that on the map, diabetes in African Americans in trying to turnaround some of those problems.  And the other way in which I have tried to have some influence and hope to build a legacy, is by encouraging and promoting opportunities for the training of young people who will take up a similar position and fight the same fight.  When I look back to see who's going to be there to take up this battle when my sword bearing arm is just too weary to swing the blade any more, I think we owe it to ourselves to make sure that we've done the work so that there will be somebody in the ranks behind us.  We can't just hope that it'll happen.  We can't just wish upon it.  I think while we have the opportunity, we have to create those opportunities for the young people who are following in our wake.  And I've tried to do that and I want that to be part of my legacy, that there will be legions of young professors out there who will be able to say, you know, I appreciate what Dr. Gavin did to provide this chance for me.  That's where I want to be.
Story_ID: 88086
Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, as a guy who cared and as a guy who worked hard, was fair to people and as a guy that people found it fun to be around while you were working yourself half to death.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you sir.
Story_ID: 88087
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right, we're at the Morehouse School of Medicine [Atlanta, Georgia], it's Friday, August 15th, 2003.  This is our third session, follow-up photo session for Dr. [James] Gavin.  The photo on camera at the moment is Dr. Gavin's parents, J. R. [James Raphael] Gavin, II and Bessie [Lee Smoke] Gavin, B-E-S-S-I-E, G-A-V-I-N.  The date on the photo is February, 1967.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  The second shot of Dr. Gavin's parents.  This one from 1973, again, it's J. R. on the right, and Bessie on the left.  The note on this says, "J. R. Gavin sang and served as a Master of Ceremonies."  It doesn't identify what event that was.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  This says Post Doctorate at the National Institutes of Health [NIH].  "J" Gavin and Pierre DeMets, P-I-E-R-R-E, capital D-E-M-E-T-S.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  I want to get a water shot.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Variety.  Watch your shadow there.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Senior Scientific Officer, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland.  No year given.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay, you're going a little too fast. Hold it at least five seconds.  Okay, go ahead.  I know you only need a frame but-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  It's all right, we'll capture it.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  I don't want (unclear) to get mad at me.  Why did he hold on to it, short?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  J. Gavin and sons, Raphael, Lamar and Arthur.  That's R-A-P-H-E-A-L, L-A-M-A-R and A-R-T-H-U-R.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Teaching rounds, University of Oklahoma, would that be?  It says, O-K.  Yeah, Oklahoma City.  Teaching rounds, University of Oklahoma, Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, 1987 to 1991.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  You got the full wide shot on it?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Yeah, I'm trying to give you a little variety, here.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I appreciate it.  No problem.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  This photograph was taken while Dr. Gavin was a grad student at Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia], E-M-O-R-Y.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Hold it, hold it, I want to get a tight shot.  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  This photograph is--was taken at a graduation party for his graduation from medical school [Duke University School of Medicine].  It was taken in Durham, North Carolina.  We don't have a specific date other than the reference to the graduation and the other individuals in the photograph are not identified.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And, of course, that would be Dr. Gavin on the left of the photo.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, is he?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Half the country.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  This was taken in Mobile, Alabama during Mardi Gras and he was--this was when he was the Grand Marshal of the Mardi Gras parade in 1999.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Hang on one second.  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  This is Dr. Gavin's wedding photo taken in 1971.  His wife wrote the captions for us and she does not identify herself.  I apologize, I do not know her name but I'm sure we have it on The HistoryMakers questionnaire.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, Ms. Converse, what is Dr. Gavin's wife's name?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  Ann.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Ann, A-N-N.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  Annie.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Annie, okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  She's a doctor, Mrs. Gavin.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, Mrs. Gavin's name is Ann.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Oh, thank you.  I got to say, did you PR for an agency or something?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  You look familiar too?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  I've been around town for ten years.  Let's talk later.  I'm sure I've seen you somewhere.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  This is, again, Dr. Gavin's parents, J. R. Gavin, II and Bessie Gavin.  Date not noted.  No date on the photograph or the inscription.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  This is Dr. Gavin's grade school photograph from Mobile, Alabama.  Apart from the fact that it's elementary school, we don't have a specific year.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  It's kind of--that's a problem with the photo, not a birth mark on his forehead.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Not a tchotchke on Porter's lens.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay, hang on, I'm going to try something.  Yeah, it's the picture (unclear).  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Here we have another photograph of Dr. Gavin as a grad student at Emory.  No further caption provided.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And another photo of Dr. Gavin during his time as a graduate student at Emory.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Can you get tight shots?  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, another graduation ceremony.  This one from the medical school at Duke University, 1976.  Do you know if that's his wife in that photo?  Observing with us today is Gayle Converse, the Public Relations Officer for Morehouse Medical School.  She's been assisting us and observing at the earlier interview sessions and she's looking right now to see if she can identify the woman standing with Dr. Gavin.  Oh, hang on one second.  Sorry.  Yes, and she confirms that that is his wife in the pink dress next to him on the steps.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Speaking of which, this next photo is a photo of Dr. Gavin and his wife while they were students at Livingstone College in Salisbury, North Carolina.  That's S-A-L-I-S-B-U-R-Y, North Carolina.  They were seniors and this was taken during December of 1965.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  One more close up.  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, we next have a golf photo.  This is clearly a recent photo of Dr. Gavin.  The note with that says as follows.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Hang on, "No explanation necessary", okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Actually, we would have not minded if we had an explanation but we don't, so all you caption editors, this is your moment to be creative, just don't be too creative.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  It looks like St. Andrews in Scotland, doesn't it?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  That's what I was thinking.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  That's my guess.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  The consensus among the group here is that that is a Scottish golf course, possibly St. Andrews, and we have no information identifying the individuals who are in the group there with Dr. Gavin.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  One might say in his travels, he tries to find time for golf.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I see.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Ms. Converse has--has related that when he travels he likes to try to find time to work in a game of golf.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay, next please.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  You'll be shooting this photo here.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  This is from the "Centralian"-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  (Unclear) the front cover?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  No, this is from the "Centralian" yearbook, 1962.  Centralia [sic Central] High School [Mobile, Alabama] and this is his high school picture when he was age 16.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  You did the right one, right?  Right there?  Let me just get a tight shot.  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, we have another photograph coming up from the same yearbook, same year, Centralia High School, 1962.  This is a National Honors Society group photo and-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Upper left, okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  --and, we'll go ahead and shoot it with the flag on there so you can see which one is him and then we'll pull the flag for the-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Can you pull the right side open a little bit more.  I'm getting a shadow on the far right of the picture.  Yeah, that's good.  Hold it.  Okay, we're going for a close up now.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Well, even with a wide shot without the post-it too.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Actually, let me take that other one off of that.  I didn't realize that was sticking on there.  All right.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  (Unclear) it said June on the far back, in the center.  It's as tight as I can get.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, here at the top here, it's still in the 1962 Centralia High School yearbook.  This is the photo of Dr. Gavin that was included with the Thespian Society photograph.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Can you slide that page over slightly?  On the right, Joan, is it the boy between the two women?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Hum-hum.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay, hold it right there.  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.  We have one last yearbook to look at here.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  What state is that, Centralia, Missouri or Illinois or?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  Alabama.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Alabama, okay.  That's funny how many Centralia's there are.  I went to the University of Missouri.  I know Centralia, Missouri very well.  The birth place and home of Scott Joplin, my favorite musician and composer.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  Yes, yes.  I'm sure Dr. Gavin (unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Someday I want to do the (unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right, are you still rolling?  Okay.  We're now looking at the "Livingstonian" yearbook from 1966.  This is Livingstone College in Salisbury, North Carolina.  The first photo is the official photo and Dr. Gavin is this gentleman here.  This is his senior class picture.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay, we should pan back. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, a few more selections from the same yearbook.  We have a photograph coming up of the student cabinet, student government, student cabinet and the person in the--the person in the center of this photograph in the all-white suit is James Gavin.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Hold the frame.  I want to get an exposure.  Hold it right there.  I need a wide shot too.  That's a wide shot.  Okay, I got it.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.  We have a few more photos remaining in this session and they are all from the 1966 "Livingstonian" yearbook.  I have another shot of Dr. Gavin.  This is from the spread that features the Honor students.  This is a portrait but it's a different variation of him from that period.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Upper left-hand corner of that left page?  Oh, down there, okay.  It looks like he's headed for adventure (unclear).  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Got it.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, now we're moving to a photo, a group photo, of the Church School Staff.  This is, again, from the same yearbook and Dr. Gavin is the person in the back row, standing on the right, of the photo.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, we have two photos on this page of the same yearbook, "The Livingstonian".  This photograph here is the group photo of the Literary Society and the Julia B. Duncan Players and you can see from the flag there that the person standing, third from the right, at the top row, is Dr. Gavin, dark suit with a white shirt and a light colored tie.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Do you want to take the arrow off, now?  I'll get a wide shot and a close up.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  The arrow doesn't impinge on the-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  It shouldn't, okay.  I'll do a close up.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  It doesn't, I'm telling you.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  That's fine.  Okay, I got it.  Love the guy with the shades.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, and then the lower left photo here is a photo of James Gavin.  This is the photo recognizing his participation in the Alpha Kappa Mu Honor Society.  Our cameraman will pan over it so you can see the spelling of Alpha Kappa Mu.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Do you want to take the post-it off his head on that one?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  You ain't going to get much extra after that 'cause it's right up to it.  The photo's cropping his head.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  I see, okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, and finally we have an Alpha Phi Alpha photo.  Here in the upper right, again, a shot of James Gavin III, who at this point in time was President of the Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity.  This, again, is from the 1966 "Livingstonian" yearbook, his senior year.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And, last but not least, even though it may be somewhat redundant, we have the group shot of the Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity at the bottom of the page here.  The person kind of squatting down, behind the logo in the center, is James Gavin.
