Story_ID: 91097
Speaker 1: I'm [Larry Crowe] interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Joseph P. Gomer, and that's G-O-M-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay and what does the P stand for?
Speaker 2: Philip.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, and you spell Joseph J-O--
Speaker 2: S-E-P-H.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Philip, I use one L, although going back to my birth certificate, there is two L's, but I've always used one L.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you give us the year of your birth?
Speaker 2: It was 1920, June the 20th.
Speaker 1: And the place of your birth?
Speaker 2: Was Iowa Falls, Iowa.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation at the moment, I am retired.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you're retired from what?
Speaker 2: My last career was with the U.S. [United States] Forest Service in Personnel.
Speaker 1: And you are a Tuskegee Airman?
Speaker 2: Tuskegee Air, Major in the United States Air Force, retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right can you give us today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I gotta be good to remember that.  Would be August the 12th, 19--2002.  Tell ya, I gotta think about it.  That's a tough one.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we get everybody on that.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Where what?
Speaker 1: Where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: At the present time we are conducting an interview at Hillside United Methodist Church in Duluth, Minnesota.
Story_ID: 91098
Speaker 1: Okay before we get into depth, there are five "People" Magazine-ish type questions I am compelled to ask you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food--I love fish.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Especially when it's fresh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this is the country for fresh fish.
Speaker 1: All right, and do, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Color?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I like blue and browns.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: At the moment it is Birch Lake, south of Healey, Minnesota.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring is my favorite time.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Once you've been shot at by real bullets, pop guns don't bother you.
Story_ID: 91099
Speaker 1: Okay, all right let's talk about your beginnings.  Can you give us the names of your parents and spell them for us and the dates of their birth and place of their birth?
Speaker 2: Well we were never much on the dates of birth, but Eula Irving Gomer, Eula Irving prior to her marriage.  E-U-L-A, I-R-V-I-N-G, and she died at the age of ninety-eight on December the 20th, 1978.
Speaker 1: Okay, and she was, okay.  She was born in Nashville?
Speaker 2: Nashville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your, your father?
Speaker 2: My father was--let's see, he died in March of 1938 at the age of fifty-four.  Joseph Philip, that's just the reverse of mine, it's Philip Joseph Gomer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Again, again he used one L.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right and where was he born?
Speaker 2: Cedar Rapids, Iowa.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did, did your parents have a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: No.  My mother was my father's second wife.  His first wife died.  But as to how they met, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How did your--did your mother have a story of how she got to, to Iowa?
Speaker 2: It was never discussed, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did either one of them have stories about their, their parents and their grandparents or ancestors going back into slavery or Reconstruction?
Speaker 2: No, there was very little conversation, unfortunately, about the forbearers.  I know on my father's side I have African American and German.  And on my mother's side it's African American and Indian [Native American], Cherokee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was there a--didn't you have an, an ancestor who was married to W.E.B. Du Bois?
Speaker 2: My father's sister, Nina, was Du Bois' first wife, and they were married for 54 years.
Speaker 1: Right, okay and he, he met her at--
Speaker 2: At Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: University, okay.  There's no other information about your, your family?  I mean did they--that you can share with us?
Speaker 2: Well no because for some reason or other, we just never talked about that sort of thing.  I have some white cousins, but I don't know where they are now.  And at this point, there's only my brother and I from the immediate family left.
Speaker 1: Now when your--did your father go to college?
Speaker 2: No he didn't.  I think he went as far as the eighth grade.  But he did a lot of reading and you would never know that he stopped at the eighth grade.  And it was because of my grandmother, W.E.B. Du Bois offered to put him all the way through school, but she didn't wanna let him go.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was the younger brother.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, but your, your grandmother didn't want him to go to school?
Speaker 2: Well she didn't want to turn him loose, I guess that was it.
Speaker 1: Didn't want him to leave home?
Speaker 2: Home.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did, did he have any other brothers or sisters that went to school, or, or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Just the one.
Speaker 2: Just the one.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Any--did your mother have any stories about her family at all?
Speaker 2: None at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well did you meet your grandparents?
Speaker 2: No, never met my grandparents.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well--
Speaker 2: In fact my grand, my grandmother was eighteen when she married my grandfather at the age of fifty-four.  So they all died off.
Story_ID: 91100
Speaker 1: Then can, can you just kind of reflect back and, and tell us about you know, what it was like growing up in--what part of Iowa did you say?
Speaker 2: Iowa Falls, Iowa, right in the middle.
Speaker 1: It's right in the middle of the state?
Speaker 2: Right in the middle of the state.
Speaker 1: Tell, tell us about some of the sounds, sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Iowa Falls.
Speaker 2: Well we grew up on a block from the Iowa River.  And we learned to swim and fish in Iowa River, and during the Depression, my father [Philip Gomer] told my brother [Charles Gomer] and I that he would clean all the fish we could catch.  So we fished.  And growing up in Iowa Falls, we were assimilated--we never thought of color.  We knew of course that we were black, but people did not differentiate.  It was only when we left the immediate area that we suddenly were stuck with our social system at that time.
Story_ID: 91101
Speaker 1: Okay.  What, what kinds of things, act--activities did you engage in as a little boy?  I mean what do you remember the place looking like and smelling like and--
Speaker 2: Well back at that time my father [Philip Gomer] was a frustrated farmer and at one time we had chickens and a cow and all that sort of thing in our backyard.  And my father would walk the cow up to the edge of town for pasture.  And we, we didn't have a, a car; never had an automobile.  So in a small town of course we walked everywhere.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did, did, did he have any horses or anything?
Speaker 2: No, no, it's just--and of course he was so busy working because actually he had been invited to come to Iowa Falls [Iowa] to take care of the local business places.  So he had keys to all of the major businesses, like the three banks and, and the credit unions and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And of course when I was twelve, he started me out helping him.  So from the age of twelve I was busy.
Speaker 1: So he was a custodian in a lot of these businesses.
Speaker 2: Right.  All the major businesses.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And if they needed a, a bank guard, he'd just slap on his .45 and do that duty and in quiet moments he'd shine shoes.
Speaker 1: Whatever he had to do.
Speaker 2: Right.  But he was highly respected.  And we were all staunch members of the Iowa Falls Methodist Church.
Speaker 1: Okay, did they have like one church, one Methodist church?
Speaker 2: One Methodist church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 91102
Speaker 1: All right, do, do you--and what kind of things did you do for recreation when you were a kid?
Speaker 2: Recreation, it was pickup sandlot, football, baseball, fishing, that sort of thing.  Chasing the ice wagon down the street for a piece of ice.  My brother [Charles Gomer] and I, we would take our wagon and collect--you gotta remember I'm a product of the Depression, we would gather old iron and newspapers and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you would sell them?
Speaker 2: Take them to the junkyard and sell them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there was never really any mention of color in Iowa Falls [Iowa]?
Speaker 2: Occasionally you would hear the N [nigger] word, but very seldom.
Speaker 1: How many other black families lived there?
Speaker 2: Well there were never more than three black families in Iowa Falls, population of 5,000.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well what about the surrounding community?  Were there other black people?
Speaker 2: Well we had friends in Hampton, Iowa, 21--18 miles away.  And there was a black family there.  And there were some families in Mason City [Iowa], which was 50 plus miles away.  And in Des Moines [Iowa], that was where the largest population was, and I had an uncle and an aunt there in Des Moines.  He was an attorney.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  You said you had some white cousins in--were they in--
Speaker 2: They were in the immediate area and I never, I--other than seeing one or two of them, I never had any real contact with them.
Story_ID: 91103
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So what kind of--what did your mother [Eula Gomer] do for a living?
Speaker 2: My mother was a homemaker.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: And of course after my father [Philip Gomer] died, then she helped out with the janitorial services and that.  But my brother [Charles Gomer] and I did most of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did--your father died when you were still sort of young.
Speaker 2: Last year of high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well tell me about school in Iowa Falls [Iowa].  Where, where did you go to grade school and--
Speaker 2: Well of course there was only the single high school and that sort of thing.  But we--I went all the way through fourteen years of schooling, plus kindergarten in Iowa Falls.  And I must have been a pretty good student.  I was always--first it was Carolyn--a girl who was always number one in the class.  And Billy Riley and I, we were kind of battling for second place.  But I was--always did real well. I guess came naturally.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Incidentally, I think that we received an excellent education.  That's just some of our basic education was great.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your father and mother place a lot of importance on education?
Speaker 2: They did.  They never--they didn't talk about it, but yes he did.  And he was always real proud of anything I would bring home.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and what was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: That'd be Iowa Falls High School.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the grade school?
Speaker 2: Grade school, I can't remember any particular name for it.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there just one in town?
Speaker 2: Just one.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I guess it was Iowa Falls Grade School.
Speaker 2: That was it.
Speaker 1: All right, good.
Story_ID: 91104
Speaker 1: So did--are there any particular teachers or role models in town that you looked up to?
Speaker 2: Well I remember distinctly one.  I can't remember her name, but it was in, like in seventh grade and we were studying geometry.  And I came up with a different solution from anyone else, but it was a solution and she made a big point of the fact that I had come up with something like that.  So we were always encouraged to do our best.
Speaker 1: So you don't remember the name of this teacher?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But the teacher made a--okay.  Celebrated your, your ingenuity.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  What were your favorite subjects in school?
Speaker 2: I didn't really have any favorite subjects.  I just took them all and had no problem with any of them.  In fact, when I took the [U.S.] Army test, there were four categories.  I got a perfect grade on all of them, so it really didn't help too much.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you go to the movies or listen to, to the radio or anything?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, we had our Saturday movies, movies you know and popcorn and that, and--
Speaker 1: Okay when you went to the movie, did you have sit in the balcony or anything?
Speaker 2: No, not, not in Iowa Falls [Iowa], no.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, okay, all right.  So you had, you know, it was a different kind of a upbringing from a lot of people during the Depression.
Speaker 2: I was very fortunate in that I grew up in that type of a atmosphere.  Because it all changed of course when I went into the military and I was suddenly segregated.
Story_ID: 91105
Speaker 1: Okay, now what about high school?  Now when you, when you--tell me about the kind of things you were doing in high school.  What, what activities were you attracted to?
Speaker 2: Well in high school [at Iowa Falls High School, Iowa Falls, Iowa] I did try wrestling but I wasn't too successful.  I suffered from mat burns.  And I really didn't have time because I worked.  I helped my dad [Philip Gomer] all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was never really big and heavy enough to play football, so that didn't matter too much.  I tried it, but I wasn't too big a success.
Speaker 1: What about baseball?
Speaker 2: We didn't have any baseball.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had pickup softball games and all, but that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what about academic clubs and--
Speaker 2: We had no academic clubs.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was there--did you have class officers and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Not that I recall, no.  At least I never got involved with it, never thought about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was your, your social life--was it, was it adequate, you know, as a teenager?  You're a teenager in a school where there's only may, maybe--how many other black students was it?
Speaker 2: There were none.  Just my brother [Charles Gomer] and I and later on my neighbor.  And one--they had one son, and that was it.
Speaker 1: So what was your social life like?
Speaker 2: Well we never--never thought too much about a social life.  And it wasn't until I got up to college age that I became a, a threat.  So at that point of course they reacted a little differently to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you, when you--so your--did your grades continue to be good all the way through high school?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and when you got to be a senior, did you receive any special honors or anything?
Speaker 2: Well when I graduated from high school, they--I found out they had a brand new scholastic award.  And it was given to me, I think it was an engineer deal that--Ellsworth, who was one of the prominent citizens had established this award and I got it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: My dad had lots of friends and unbeknownst to me, I--they were all kind of looking out for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you--so what was graduation like then, graduation day?
Speaker 2: Nothing special.  Just got my piece of paper and that was it.
Speaker 1: Well didn't you get this award your senior year?
Speaker 2: Well yes, but I mean I never thought anything about that.  It was--
Speaker 1: Didn't you think it was special?
Speaker 2: I--I realized it was special you know, but none of that was really a big deal.  Even when I, even when I got my wings and after--in the military it was, it was nothing to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nothing to get excited about.  I got more--I have to laugh because when I took the civilian pilot training course in college, they just asked me are you--would you be interested in learning how to fly?  I said sure.  So I never'd been close to an aircraft.  And they took us out and they showed us the aircrafts and old Taylorcraft and the next time I touched that aircraft, I was flying it.  And old Ray Bramer (ph.) the instructor asked me to move his car one day and I said I don't know how to drive.  So I had a pilot's license before I had a driver's license.
Story_ID: 91106
Speaker 1: Tell me--let's backtrack a little bit, back to high school [at Iowa Falls High School, Iowa Falls, Iowa].  When, when you were--graduated from high school, now you received this award, you know, did you, did you suspect--did you have any idea that you were gonna go to college?  Did you think you would go, go to college?
Speaker 2: I think it was kind of taken for granted that I was gonna go to college.  But I wasn't really planning ahead like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so where did you end up going to school, and how did it happen?
Speaker 2: Well I enrolled in Ellsworth College, junior college [now Ellsworth Community College, Iowa Falls, Iowa].  And I notice this thing, you know other--only thing I recall is other students, their parents were helping plan their coursework.  And I had no one to help me, so I ended up taking pre-engineering courses and I found myself taking calculus, chemistry and physics all at the same time.  I carried a full course while I was working.  And that kept me busy.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you involved in--so you were at Ellsworth Junior College?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, and that's in Iowa.
Speaker 2: That's in Iowa Falls, Iowa.
Speaker 1: Okay, the same town.
Speaker 2: Same town.  It had been a four-year college at one time and then it was changed to a--what they now would call a community college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so this is--you graduated from high school in what, 19--
Speaker 2: Thirty-eight [1938].
Speaker 1: Thirty-eight [1983], okay.  And the--so--and you started Ellsworth in '38 [1938].
Speaker 2: Thirty-eight [1938].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Finished that in '40 [1940].
Speaker 1: Forty [1940], okay.  And that's just almost at the beginning of World War II.
Speaker 2: Well yes because I was 1A for a year, year and a half at the time.
Story_ID: 91107
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what, what did you do between graduation from Ellsworth [Junior College now Ellsworth Community College, Iowa Falls, Iowa] and the start of the war [World War II]?
Speaker 2: Well actually I was kind of waiting around to get called up or something.  I end up--I didn't take any more college at that immediate time.  And I--after a year and a half, I enlisted--private in the Army, 17058104.  Because all of my white friends were going in and some of them had already been killed in action by the time I--in other words, as short as we were of manpower, and they had nothing, no place for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what did you--did you, did you have like an idea as to why?
Speaker 2: Well I had applied for Aviation Cadet Corps.  And at the time I enlisted, Fort Leavenworth--after a few days, they came and said well we don't have anything for you right now.  You can stick around here until we find something for you or you can go home, so I went home.  And then I was called up in between--for the Aviation Cadet training and reported September 18th of 1943, no 1942.
Speaker 1: You reported to Tuskegee [Alabama].
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 91108
Speaker 1: Let's back--backtrack a minute [unclear].  You said something about your social life.  You didn't realize that you were, you were black in that environment, what that meant until you, you went to college [Ellsworth Junior College now Ellsworth Community College, Iowa Falls, Iowa].  And what, what happened in college?
Speaker 2: Well like I said, black adult males become a threat at that point.  And I recall the first dance I went to it, where you dressed up you know.  Had a wonderful time.  No, no problem whatsoever.  But the next day the dean called me in and said that he just assume that I didn't attend anymore social events, which was no big problem in that I was so busy working I didn't really have time for that sort of thing.  But some of my classmates [unclear] they wanted me to come, but I didn't, I didn't bother.
Speaker 1: Did you ask him why at the time, or--
Speaker 2: I knew why.  No problem there, I knew why.  But I got my--at that time I got my first taste of real racism.  Old Professor Jones after we had our little talk, he got off--there was one Jewish family in town.  He got off on the Jews and I had never heard anyone talk about anyone like he did.  I said I'm in good shape, those Jews are in bad shape.  But that was my indi--first really introduction to real racism.  And his attack was on the Jews.  And they were some of my best friends.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you figured if he attacked the Jews in your presence, he--did, did you think that he might feel the same way about you?
Speaker 2: No.  We were always good friends, he gave me good grades and everything.  But I think he just kind of fell in line or fell in line with the kind of social system.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There was a lot of anti-Semitic feeling in, in Iowa then?
Speaker 2: I wasn't even aware of it until he voiced his feelings.
Story_ID: 91109
Speaker 1: All right, well back to the Tuskegee Airmen.  You--now we went through that so fast that I--I wanna slow down a little bit and take some time.  Now you, you went to--you applied for cadet school, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you joined the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 2: I'd applied prior to that.  And you had to take--pass a physical.  And they would use any excuse of course to keep you from passing.  One doctor said you have a deviated septum.  So I went back to the old country doctor and he said--put me on the table and he un-deviated that septum and I went home spitting blood and I went back and took the test and passed it.
Speaker 1: He un-deviated your septum.  What in the world is a deviated septum?
Speaker 2: That's a channel up in your nose, you know.  But he straightened it out and fixed me right up.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so what other hurdles did you have to overcome?
Speaker 2: Well that was the only real hurdle, to pass that physical.
Speaker 1: The military school--did they give you a test too?
Speaker 2: No, I had my two years of college and passed the physical and that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you went--when you went in, where did you go?
Speaker 2: Well I went to Tuskegee [Alabama], that was the only facility available for us.  They tried to place it on the east coast, and they didn't want black pilots there.  And they tried it on the west coast, they didn't want black pilots.  So they carved an air, an airfield for us out of that red clay down there in Alabama.  And the railroad station was Cheaha--that was where we actually got off the train, Cheaha, Alabama.  And the stationmaster had a hell of a time trying to find Cheaha so he could write out a ticket for me.
Speaker 1: How, how do they spell Cheaha?
Speaker 2: I think it's C-H-E-H-A-W [sic, C-H-E-H-A], I'm not sure at this point.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was this, this the first time you'd been down south?
Speaker 2: I had been to Nashville [Tennessee] once with my family.  But I was too young to really appreciate the trip.  And--but that was my trip to Tuskegee, that was my introduction.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was it, what was it like for you?
Speaker 2: Well, four of us went to Tuskegee.  We were in the first group to be called up out of the Midwest.  And the conductor ushered us through the dining car and put us in the last two tables and pulled the curtain.  And I got up and pulled the curtain back.  He came back, pulled it back, and after two or three times of that, then we got up and walked out and had our meals back in the, in the car.  But the train people finally came to us and said they'd like to have us come.  They wanted the privilege of serving us.  So we did go back for the rest of the trip.
Story_ID: 58192
Speaker 1: Who, who was in charge of Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee, Alabama] when you were down there-- [U.S.] Army Air Corps?
Speaker 2: At Tuskegee Institute?
Speaker 1: Did you have much contact with--
Speaker 2: Not much.  We had pre-flight training there.  And our lodging was right there on, on the campus.  And the thing that I recall most vividly was they had some--probably the most comfortable mattresses I've ever slept on.  Better than I ever had after that.
Speaker 1: Now what was, what was your impression of some of the guys, the other, the other black cadets who were, you know--did, did you have some--did some stand out or, or--
Speaker 2: Well I, I just accepted them.  Well I was used to accepting any and everybody, but I was--I realized if I'd waited, I was strictly a country boy and pretty green after being around these city kids who had a world of living which I wasn't used to.
Speaker 1: There were people there from all over the place, right?
Speaker 2: All over the country.
Speaker 1: And so, so who were some of the ones that, that you struck up friendships with?
Speaker 2: Well Albert Manning was my old [unclear] I recall, my roommate throughout my training.  And there were others of course, but I mean I didn't was never real close to a whole lot of them.
Speaker 1: Where was Albert from?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Where was Albert from?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure where Albert was from.  I remember when he got married I loaned him money to buy his ring.  And later on he was killed in an aircraft accident after all our service experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well what was the training like and how were you treated?  How--what was your impression of that?
Speaker 2: Well we got the usual hazing and all, which is built into the system.  And our training was good, we had good instructors.  They were white instruct--well we had black instructors in pre-flight.  And that's when I first met Chappie James [Daniel 'Chappie' James, Jr.] who went on to become a four-star general, first black four-star general.  And the other instructors--they must have been pretty good.  In fact, any of us that graduated, we were good, that was no question.  But we had to be awfully lucky.  Because anything, any--the slightest infraction was an excuse to get rid of us.  And they were graduating better white pilots--white pilots who weren't as good as the black pilots that were being washed out.  They couldn't have too many of us.
Speaker 1: So the [U.S.] Army really wasn't--now from what I understand from history, Congress basically and administration ordered the training of black pilots.
Speaker 2: Right, it had to be legislated first.  And then of course the military dragged every--dragged their heels.
Speaker 1: Right, they weren't excited about it.
Speaker 2: Not in the least no.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in sort of a, sort of a hostile environment I guess.
Speaker 2: It was, yeah.  And particularly when [unclear] the redneck district and the local sheriff wasn't--didn't look upon us too kindly.  In fact our military police were not allowed to carry weapons in town.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is on--this harkens back to, you know, the old south.
Speaker 2: The old south, strictly redneck country.  But I had to laugh because the--on a few years back the current mayor is black and married to a white wife.
Speaker 1: In Tuskegee?
Speaker 2: In Tuskegee, yeah.
Speaker 1: Isn't that something?
Story_ID: 58193
Speaker 1: So what, what did your training consist of, what would you have to do?
Speaker 2: Well we had ground school and a flight schedule and like I said, I didn't really pay a whole lot of attention to it, I just went along, had no problems and found myself flying.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact I, I wasn't really impressed with anything until we had to get our transition in a P-40, twenty hours before we could go in the leave.  And that was a lot of aircraft.
Speaker 1: The P-40?
Speaker 2: The P-40.  You have to remember that from that day on, we flew single-seat fighters.  No dual.  You could just read the book, climbed in and flew it.  So you can imagine what that first flight in the P-40 was like.  I don't remember much other than that there was thirteen switches which you counted as you went around the cockpit.  When you could pass a line fuel check and felt comfortable, they turned you loose.
Speaker 1: So you had to be able to find the controls blindfolded.
Speaker 2: Right and be familiar with the cockpit.
Speaker 1: Okay, see this is the kind of information that we need cause we don't know what it's like to be--you know that's the--
Speaker 2: Well you read the book and that was it from then on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I flew all of the single-engine fighters eventually.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All single seats.
Speaker 1: Now what, what was special about the P-40?  What did it look like and what was it like?
Speaker 2: Well they, they were the old war birds, that's all we had at the time.  I think at Pearl Harbor there were some P-36s, but the P-40 was our basic aircraft for some time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but what did it look like?
Speaker 2: Well it had a long nose out there in front.  It was water-cooled, engine, ethylene glycol, but it was a mainline engine and had a three bladed prop.
Speaker 1: Where was it mounted?  Where was the prop mounted?
Speaker 2: On the front of the aircraft?
Speaker 1: On the nose?
Speaker 2: On the nose, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Where you gone put the--where else you gonna put it?
Speaker 1: People are gonna hear this in the, in the future and they don't know.
Speaker 2: No, it was right on the front of the aircraft, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Any--any special color or anything?
Speaker 2: No, they were just old drab--they weren't [unclear], I think they were black, a dark color.  Nothing special about them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was awfully hot down there in Alabama and they would--the crew chief would be out there with the hose and hosing down the air intake to keep the--keep it from overheating until you get moving.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--what do they--they train you to first memorize the controls, and then when did you actually fly?  I mean when did they actually--did they take you up with somebody, or do they--how do they do it?
Speaker 2: On the P-40?
Speaker 1: Any of them.
Speaker 2: Our trainers, old steer men and primary [unclear] vibrators and basic, and the AT-6 and advanced, they were all dual, dual controls.  We, we got instruction before we actually were soloed in them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so by the time you reach the P-40, you could just get in that one and take it up.
Speaker 2: That's just another airplane then, but you didn't just climb in.  You had to familiarize yourself with the aircraft and you got as much as you could from reading the technical orders and reading, you know you had to know your aircraft quite well.  There wasn't anyone else up there to help you.
Story_ID: 58194
Speaker 1: Now I've heard that the Tuskegee Airmen were trained and retrained and, and over trained because there was, there was so much controversy about black pilots in the first place, and because the [U.S.] Army, you know, was trying to delay--
Speaker 2: There, there was--it wasn't just the delaying, actually.  Hadn't really planned ever putting us into combat.  They were dragging their feet.  And yes you might say we were over trained in that there was nothing else to do but train.  And you can lose more people in training than you can in combat, through accidents and that.
Speaker 1: People get bored and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, quite actually [unclear] something like that.  One individual was killed in a crash.  He didn't like the wear his shoulder harness--he just wore his seat harness.  So that when he crashed the aircraft, the stick punched a hole in his forehead.  There were accidents like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a serious accident.
Speaker 2: It was.  Ruined his whole day.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess it--it did--it probably--did it cause you to think about what the harn--the harness was for?
Speaker 2: All I was--I didn't need any convincing.  I always to this day I strap myself into anything that moves.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That makes sense.
Story_ID: 58195
Speaker 1: So when--how was it--how, how long did you wait before you finally--your group was finally sent to combat?
Speaker 2: I think it was '42 [1942] that they finally sent, the 99th and the Action.
Speaker 1: You were with the 99th?
Speaker 2: No, I was with the 301st, and the 99th left ahead of us, before our graduation.  They sent them to North Africa flying P-40L's, they got--they did get new aircraft over there.  And they were attached to a white group.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did that often happen, that the black groups would be attached to a white unit?
Speaker 2: Well that was the only instance.  That's the only--[unclear] never went over by his self.  When the 332nd went over, which was comprised of the 100th, the 302nd and 301st and 302nd squadrons, we were a complete outfit, top to bottom black.  Benjamin O. Davis [Jr.] was the commander.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And later on, the 99th joined with us when they all went to the 15th Air Force flying long range escort.  But the group, but the group initially flew strafing missions and convoy patrol.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which was kind of interesting because just to get up in the air and see a ship stretching for miles, as far as your eye can see and it's really awe inspiring.  And in March of 1944, Mount Vesuvius erupted and I saw my first volcanic action.  And we lived--our Salerno strip was the only one that had lights, so we would fly dawn and dusk commissions and we'd take off over the volcano and see all that red lava flowing down the side and, head out east over the Mediterranean [Sea] the most beautiful sunrise you've ever seen.
Speaker 1: Okay now I think we're getting ahead too, you know but let's, let's go--I mean where, where did--where were you stationed?  You, you were stationed in Italy, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Initially.
Speaker 2: The group landed in Italy, down in the boot.  And then they transported us by truck up to Salerno and (unclear) Naples.
Speaker 1: Okay and by this time the allied troops had, had really taken Italy, taken control of most of Italy by then?
Speaker 2: Probably about half.  They had taken Anzio by that time and--but the German airfields were in south and northern Italy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and you said just, just now your, your job was to fly and protect con--convoys and do strafing missions.
Speaker 2: Right.  And after a couple of months, they were losing heavy bombers to enemy fighters and they needed fighter protection, so they planned for us--to reassign us to the 15th Air Force and the 12th Air Force.  And they gave us the B-47 first.  Some of them of course were used from the white units that were getting the P-51s.  And we flew the P-47s for a couple of months and then we got P-51s.  So most of the old timers flew all the single engine fighters that were sometime or other.  Like I have combat time in P-39s, P-47s and P-51s.
Speaker 1: Now P-51 is--was that the best, the better of the planes that you flew?
Speaker 2: That was the best aircraft for the purpose.  Now the P-47s were ground targets, they could take more punishment than anything because you had that big radial engine out in front of you.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the engine would actually absorb fire.
Speaker 2: Right.  I've seen them come back with cylinders knocked off and running on engine oil, yeah.
Story_ID: 58196
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so when you--what would be a typical day for you?  You know, in terms of running a mission.  What, what would you all do?  What time would you get up and what would you do?
Speaker 2: Well you got up pretty early.  And if you were assigned to fly that day, you go to the mission room and wait for them to pull the curtain to see where the red line was for that day and the closer the red line got to the ceiling, you knew the further you were gonna fly that day.  Then they'd brief us on the mission and the target and we would line up to take off.  And we were the only four-squadron group and we put two, two squadrons on each end.  And one squadron would take off going--I guess it would be east.  They fire a flare.  Squadron from the other end would take off, fire another flare.  The other squadron would take off and it was a mile runway.  Then we'd do our join-up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Then you would--now you were escorting bombers basically.
Speaker 2: Heavy bombers, B-24s, B-17s.
Speaker 1: Okay, and they're making bombing runs into where--into Germany or northern Italy?
Speaker 2: Well, France, Germany, the Balkan countries, Ploesti, you probably heard of Ploesti.  The oil fields.  I looked at the notes I had and according to my notes, I went to Ploesti five times.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: P-L-O-E-S-T-I.
Speaker 1: Okay and you went, you went over there, over there five times?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Flying escort for the bombers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell--can, can, can you remember a, a particular mission, you know, were you know, that you want to relate to us?
Speaker 2: Well I think--well there were a couple.  You have to remember we switched aircrafts so fast, and you can't give the ground crew enough credit for keeping those things flying, if you can imagine switching from--P-40s, P-39s to P-47s and then the P-51s, and under field conditions.  And we had to--every pilot had to check out in the new aircraft.  If I recall correctly, the third time I flew a P-51 for example, I was on a five-hour mission.  We didn't really know the aircraft that well.  And it was unfortunate that we didn't have an opportunity to fly with the white units that had combat time in those aircraft, and they could have given us the benefit of their experience.  Well on one mission, I recall, we got clearance to chase the fighters, German fighters that had gone through.  And Bernie Birman was flying my wing at the time.  I told my flight chief, flight leader [unclear] I had him covered.  Well we dived down on the enemy fighters and I made one mistake.  I shoved the throttle forward.  Well I didn't know how fast that aircraft would go.  I didn't know how to slow the aircraft down, which was a problem.  I could have waved at the German fighters as I passed them.  And I finally--I just had to pull up.  Bernie said the last time he looked, we were doing 650.  Well it was, it was something else that day, well, you know push the throttle forward, put the nose on the [P-]51 down.
Speaker 1: Wow, so you went right past these Germans.
Speaker 2: I went past the German fighters.  I caught them and passed them and didn't even have time to shoot.
Speaker 1: Well I don't know, you couldn't know what their reaction was, but I bet they were surprised.
Speaker 2: They had to be.  So I missed my first opportunity.
Story_ID: 58197
Speaker 1: Is there another story?
Speaker 2: Well I had another experience.  I had the--I had a flight of spares.  We put up seventy-two aircraft a day, eight of them being spares.  I had black flight.  And I had a young wingman, Eugene Brown.  And he was one of those that was so fresh out of high school, you know had taken the test and gotten these wings.  And he--I remember him saying he was tired of seeing these German aircraft and not shooting them down.  Well he was--he had the fighter spirit, you know.  So he was my wingman for the day.  I had a flight of four aircraft.  We had--overcast.  And I flew out on course and ended up on top of the overcast and I didn't see any of our group, but I for lack of any better--I just kept going.  And pretty soon intercept the bombers, the 52nd were the yellow wings, the yellow tails saw my red tail, so they left.  Well that left four of us flying cover for a flight of bombers.  And we--I set up a pattern flying over the bombers and pretty soon we saw these dots out there F--, F--Focke Wulf 190s just setting out there.  Well a lot of times you--
Speaker 1: Those were German.
Speaker 2: German fighters.  If you fly tight cover, they wouldn't come in.  Well finally they decided to come in on the bombers.  And so I took the flight in and broke up the flight and there were aircraft all over for, for a few seconds.  And suddenly I find myself all by myself, where's my wingman?  Well all--not another aircraft in sight.  I couldn't see any bombers, no fighters, nothing.  And I looked down below me and there in the [unclear] was a German fighter, a red tail and a German fighter.  Now I don't know which one of the wingman, they were all over like.  I called mine and he was too busy, later I found out, to answer.  Well I said I'm going to go down on these, these fighters.  Well again, I found out something that only a few years ago I learned that if you had P-51C, which is a razorback, at high speed and got excessive side pressure, you lose the canopy.  Well when I dived down, suddenly I lost my canopy.  And what was even worse was I had my goggles setting up on top of my helmet.  The canopy took my goggles.  So I had no goggles, no, no canopy, just the windscreen in front of me.  And I took evasive action.  I thought I'd been hit.  Well when I got straightened out, found out it was still in one piece, I was all by myself.  So I found my way home, about 500 miles from home and I didn't know whether I'd get jumped by fighters or anything.  But I had wind-burned eyes for a week and they grounded me.  But the--fast forward.  The end of that story--my daughter set up a website for me a few years back.  But prior to that, she was searching for my name on the Internet and she found--it was in a tribute to my, my father by Eugene Brown's son.  So she contacted him, he's out there in California.  And they had lunch and she got--he found that he was still living, got his phone number and I called him.  He lived in Hyattsville, Long Island [New York].  And he told me what had happened after he got, we got separated.  He said I heard you calling, but I was too busy at the time.  He finally saw flying formation with a couple of ME-109s.  He said well I'd better shoot them down before they shoot me down.  He shot down a third ME-109 before he finally got shot down, he had to bail out.  So he spent the rest of the war in a--at a POW [prisoner of war].  But he said well I guess three for one, that's a pretty good return he said.
Story_ID: 58198
Speaker 1: That's quite a story.  So what else?  I mean you know there's some more stories?
Speaker 2: Well not, not really.  You know you get a few moments of panic and hours of boredom.  But we would sit outside to pick up the bombers as they come off the target.  And bombers had to fly straight and level to drop their bombs and sometime you'd see them take a direct hit before they got rid of their load and you'd see a big orange flash and that's all there was to it.  And another occasion I watched a crew bail out of a burning aircraft and they pulled the chutes too soon and the chutes caught fire and--there were a lot of things like that.  I was happy to be flying fighters, not bombers.  But we had a reputation of never--well at first they were a little dubious about our coverage, but after they found out that bombers were under our escort, we never lost any of the fighters, then they started asking for us.  And we got the title of "Red Tail Angels".
Speaker 1: The tails of your planes were painted red.
Speaker 2: Red.  And yeah cause I give credit to B.O. Davis [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.] for our success because he said that your job is to stay with those bombers, not to go off to chase bandits, and that's what we got to do.  He said anybody left those bombers to go chase bandits had to deal with him.
Speaker 1: Was that a common practice in those days for people to do that, to take off after--
Speaker 2: Well, sure that, that's the way you get your name in the paper, you know.  You get off on shooting down the enemy fighters and through the extremes.  Now they, they would leave the bombers and go chase the enemy fighters.  But we were not allowed to do that unless we were cleared to go.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're saying that a pilot that really wanted a lot of publicity and wanted to promote himself, could take off on a risky mission like that and leave the bomber.  And if the bomber was shot down, then and if he actually shot down somebody, that'd be a wash.
Speaker 2: Well I don't know whether they thought of it so much as a wash, but they thought that was the name of the game.  They go chase the enemy fighters, which would have been all right providing you didn't leave the bombers unprotected.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And the German fighters were trying to draw us off so that other fighters could get through to the bombers.
Speaker 1: That makes sense.  It sounds like a strategy that, that if it worked, it would be worth trying.  So but you all never lost a, a bomber.
Speaker 2: Not to enemy fighters.
Story_ID: 58199
Speaker 1: How many missions did you all fly?  The Tuskegee Airmen fly?
Speaker 2: There were any number.  Some of them had over 100, I only had 68 missions.  They grounded me for a while after I crash landed the P-39.
Speaker 1: Well how did that happen?
Speaker 2: Well the--kind of short strip and I caught the prop wash of the aircraft in front of me just as I flared out and so I went off to the side and tore off the gear and the tail, that sort of thing.  It wasn't my aircraft either.  A guy was kind of unhappy.
Speaker 1: When you did something like that, they would ground you.
Speaker 2: Well they did after the accident, you know.  Then they [unclear] you and asked if you wanted to keep on flying, and I said yes.  And I don't know what they would have done if I said no, but I had the option of quitting flying, but I chose to keep flying.
Speaker 1: Now was it customary for people to fly?  I've read that about 50 missions is about it.
Speaker 2: Well bomber crews were set up to fly 35 missions, and they got double credit for difficult targets.  The white fighter pilots flew 50 missions or I've heard 200 hours.  We, we never thought about rotating or missions, and I, I actually asked to be rotated when I had 68.  But that was only after I had lost my three original tent mates plus one replacement and I was in a tent by myself.  And they put a ground officer in with me to keep me company.  And like I said the Russian roulette was kind of getting to me.  You took off, you didn't know whether you were coming back or not.
Speaker 1: Right, that must have been really difficult to lose your--I, I don't even know what to say, you know.  Never been in that situation.
Speaker 2: Well it makes you think, you know.
Speaker 1: Think about what life is really--
Speaker 2: Right. Course you can't dwell on it too much, you just, you're already scheduled to fly and on one occasion after a stand down, you remember I told you we had two squadrons on each end of the runway.  When the aircraft from the other end had to abort and pull up behind and his prop locked the aircraft that he hit.  So that pilot just burned up in the aircraft.  And we're just sitting there just waiting to go and--nothing--once you get--once this gets in motion, you know it's just like clockwork, nothing stops.
Story_ID: 59219
Speaker 1: Did you write to your mother [Eula Gomer] a lot?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah we had our e-mail, V-mail [victory mail] I guess they call it, you know the microfilm type of thing.
Speaker 1: Well describe it, what was it?
Speaker 2: Well I don't know how they--they photographed your letter or what.  Anyway it was reduced in size and I guess to cut down on the paperwork and stuff.  And they'd do [unclear].  But I had one other.
Speaker 1: I heard about it, but I didn't know--so you'd actually get a letter but it's been reduced and copied or something?
Speaker 2: Well I had one other incident when we were flying B-47s in a flight of four of us.  We'd been on a so-called milk run, nothing happened.  We're getting ready to cross the Adriatic [Sea], still had our tanks on and gun switches off and everything.  And I'm flying in this--I'm setting up in the sun.  The guy on, on the, on the side, he's supposed to keep you, to keeping me covered, you know.  He flew like this.  Like this and he's right there.  This guy was supposed to been watching me.  Well all of a sudden, I hear some explosions and I'm looking for some black puffs of smoke and I don't see anything.  And I look out on the left wing and there's a row of one inch holes coming down that wing.  And the adrenalin started flowing.  I knew what was happening then, but got the guns switched on, tank [unclear] my tanks and turned into this second ME-109 so he couldn't shoot.  But if that first guy had been a better shot, I wouldn't be here today.  And they just died on through.
Speaker 1: So he got your partner.
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: He got your partner.
Speaker 2: No, he almost got me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And the flight leader I finally--he, he broke with me but the other guys they just scattered and you know--and at the time again, I--well I didn't realize what was happening and what shape the aircraft was in, still in, but I might have been able to catch him.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah you didn't know what kind of shape.
Speaker 2: What shape it was in.  Well that [B-]47 never flew again.  So I have a matchbox, little matchbox with the 20 millimeter shell fragments that they got out of the airplane.
Speaker 1: Did they, did they--what did--did you, you tell your family about this kind of stuff when you, when you wrote them, or did you write them about what was actually going on or did you kind of--
Speaker 2: No, because they'd probably just censor it anyway you know, so no we just how are you, you know, I love you and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: It was your brother [Charles Gomer] and your mother, basically.  Now you weren't married at this time.
Speaker 2: Well actually, actually I was married that time.  I married a WAC [Women's Army Corps] and we'd, you know we ended up married six years.  But she was back home too.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you married her before the war or after the war?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty three [1943].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in the [U.S.] Army then when you married.
Speaker 2: No, I was in the Army Air Corps.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Army Air Corps.  But you, but you were married while you were in the service.
Speaker 2: In the service, yeah.
Speaker 1: And she was a WAC, okay, all right.  Okay, but she stayed back and she was in the [United] States when you were--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and she got out of the service too.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did you have any children?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 59220
Speaker 1: People you know are being killed up there and you know--
Speaker 2: Out of the 450, we had 66 casualties, either accidents or [unclear] action, and 32 POWs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One of them being my wingman [Eugene Brown] I lost that time.  And, and four of the 66 coming out of my tent.
Speaker 1: That's--how many men in a tent?
Speaker 2: Four to a tent.
Speaker 1: Four, so you lost most everybody in the tent.
Speaker 2: I did lose everybody in the tent.  I was in there by myself.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  Now did the [U.S.] Army attempt to--I mean I know this is war [World War II] and, and I know everything they told about wars.  That everybody just faces up to everything and they don't worry, they don't have any problems.  But did the Army have to, you know, counsel people about that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: We never had any counseling session.  You know I wonder--you just kind of accepted what went on and that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was--how did things wrap up, basically, you know?  How did things wrap up for you over there?
Speaker 2: Well, my nerves were getting a little frayed.  I, I said I actually asked to be rotated when normally you would just sat and didn't think about rotation, you know.  Just--some guys got over 100 missions and so they just kept flying.  So what are you gonna do?  There wasn't anything to come back to.  But I was ready to, to give up my combat at that point.  So they finally released me on--in fact I left the outfit on Christmas day in 1944.
Speaker 1: You just said there wasn't anything to come back to.  I mean in terms of--what did you mean by that?
Speaker 2: Well, what were they gonna do with us after we got back?  I ended up being an instrument instructor, basically.  But all these combat people that are coming back, they could have made instructors out of some of us and that's what happened.  But again we--they were not prepared to deal with us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I mean what was the--what was the general condition of people coming back after, after being in combat?  Would they make a good instructor?
Speaker 2: Oh yes. I mean you have the benefit of all that experience of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 59221
Speaker 1: I, I hadn't--I instructed in basic instruments and all of my students passed their checks.  But you asked about coming back to something.  I was trucked over to Naples [Italy] and we waited to board--what was it--SS America, which was a converted liner.  Could carry thousands of troops, so--and I'm the only person of color in the whole group, I mean hundreds of people and I'm all by myself.  So I had no problems coming--first place I grew up in this type of society, so nothing phased me there.  It came time to board ship, of-officers went first, naturally.  And there was a short, fat, redneck captain standing on the little box he had, little dais.  And he's bored up there, he's checking off names.  At that time we had a great big capital N behind our name in parentheses, you know.
Speaker 2: Negro.
Speaker 1: Right.  And but he didn't need that N after my name.  He just looked at--when it came my turn, he just ordered me to go to the end of the line.  And I'm only a first lieutenant and I wanna go home.  So the second time he ordered me to the end of the line, I picked up my duffle bag and belt pack and walked to the end of the line.  Well I was the last man to board ship.
Speaker 2: So he put the enlisted people in front of you.
Speaker 1: Everybody, I was at the end of the line.  So when I finally--it was dark.  I finally found the, the cabin where the officers were.  Now there were seventeen of us in the cabin built for two.  We were stacked five high and I had the middle bunk.  That's the way we came back.  Seven days from Naples to Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Okay.  How did the, how did the white officers treat you?
Speaker 1: I had no problem.  I got short sheeted one night, but I didn't, I didn't say a word.  I just remade my bunk and--
Story_ID: 59222
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what it was like back--when you got back to the [United] [S]tates?
Speaker 2: Well there were German prisoners, labor force working.  They were living better than we were.  And you know--
Speaker 1: You know I've heard that before.  You're not the first one to say that.  Now describe that for us.  I mean what were they--
Speaker 2: Well a German POW could do anything that his white skin would allow, anything.  It was a labor battalion down in Louisiana and they had the run of the town.  But the black citizens were just the same as ever.  But anyway, I got my ticket and stuff [unclear] went back to Iowa and spent a leave there.  And then they were gonna send me to--well I'm, I'm--there are two, two types of veterans, combat veterans.  There are combat veterans and there are black combat veterans.  Well in my hometown [Iowa Falls, Iowa] I'm a local hero, you know, hometown boy and all.  But they sent me orders for R and R [rest and relaxation] to go to Miami [Florida].  And I had notified the War Department I didn't think Miami was ready for me yet.
Speaker 1: This was for rest and relaxation, right.
Speaker 2: Send me to Miami.  Why would--
Speaker 1: They were sending you to Miami, Florida?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  What in the world would I do in Miami, Florida?  I'd be stuck off in some little ghetto probably.  Anyway they changed it to Santa Monica [California].  And my wife and I got our tickets and we had to change trains in New Orleans [Louisiana].  Now I'm a combat veteran, I'm in uniform and everything.  But they weren't gone let me back on that train in New Orleans.  But not being from that part of the country, I, I cornered a stationmaster after a while and after much haranguing, we--he had the list of all the names were down.  I found my name, so he let me back on the train.  But he wasn't gone let me back on the train [unclear].  But I didn't have any problems after that.  But eventually I had to come back to old segregated Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you had to spend the rest of your tour of duty in--
Speaker 2: Tuskegee [Alabama].
Speaker 1: In Tuskegee.  And what did you do?  Were you an, an instructor there or what?
Speaker 2: I was an instructor for a while, and then I applied for aviation, for aircraft maintenance training.  And so they sent me to Chanute and I was probably the first.  And I had a friend that went later.  And he didn't even know I'd ever been there.  But I was the first to go through there, doing their regular training.  And I had no problems, all white of course.
Speaker 1: And Chanute is where?
Speaker 2: Champaign [County], Illinois.
Speaker 1: Champaign, Illinois.  And I flew their aircraft and did the test line, whatever.  Occasionally white enlisted men would refuse to salute or something like that, but other than that, I had no problems there.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did--what did you do after, after--I mean you were discharged.
Speaker 1: Well I had enough points to get out in 1946 and I elected--I had a friend who had a college degree, I didn't have a degree of course.  And we applied for work at Curtis Wright Aircraft in Columbus, Ohio.  With his college degree, they pay him a dollar and a half an hour, and they pay me a dollar an hour.  When I got to thinking about it, I said no point in that.  So I went back in and I said--I had been enlisted status.  So I, I had a master sergeant rating which they gave me.  And I went back to that.  They were doing that the--for those that wanted to stay in.  And so I stayed there as a Master Sergeant and eventually Korean War and all--I got recalled back to fly and--
Speaker 2: So did you fly during the Korean War too?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, I didn't know that, okay.
Speaker 1: 483rd Troop Carrier Unit.  Flew C-119s, C-47s.
Speaker 2: Those are the transport planes?
Speaker 1: Transport, yeah.
Story_ID: 59223
Speaker 1: And I think when I got there, there were two black officers.  I, I worked for one of the earlier Tuskegee graduates who was a air inspector and I was a technical inspector.  And then when he rotated, they put a redneck from Yazoo, Mississippi in there and when I left there, he said this is the first opportunity I ever had to work with a, a person of color you know.  And he was impressed, you know, [unclear] changing mind.  That was one of our biggest jobs I think, helping integrate when we did have an opportunity.
Speaker 2: Now there, there's a--there, there is a, a--I think there's a, there's a good reason to believe that, that Tuskegee, that the Tuskegee Airmen were very influential in the integration of the armed forces.
Speaker 1: Very, very.
Speaker 2: Can, can you speak to that?
Speaker 1: Well of course we proved that we could do the job if given the opportunity.  And thank God for [President Harry S.] Truman though, Harry signed the integration order in 1948, Executive Order [9981].  And in 1949 we found ourselves being shipped all over the world.
Story_ID: 59224
Speaker 1: But still, still you had to convince some people, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I mean and you had to--I'm flying by the seat of my pants.  I didn't have any mentor, nobody I could ask about how to do--and there were instances like I went to--I was the first black officer sent to Langley, Virginia.  And I'm in the maintenance section, I can overhear the conversation when I walk in.  You know, what we gone do?  Did he qualify?  And yes, well then give them the job.  So I ended up with--in the aircraft maintenance area and [unclear] headquarters.  But we're sitting in a group one day, of course everybody else is white.  And they start telling these ethnic jokes, you know.  I didn't say a word, I just sat there.  I went in later and talked to the supervisor, Colonel [unclear].  I said I'm [unclear] this and I told him what happened.  I said I'm not used to that sort of thing and I don't feel I should have to put up with it.  It never happened again.
Speaker 1: That's good.  I mean it speaks to some change.
Speaker 2: Some change, and I might have had more help on housing.  I couldn't--they didn't have any base housing for me so we found a, a place in Hampton, Virginia.  And it was adequate.  But my wife used the local laundromat for months before they found out she wasn't somebody's maid.  And then she just kept right on using it.
Speaker 1: So there was a segregated [unclear].
Speaker 2: We--we desegregated the Laundromat.  And we utilized all the base facilities.  The nursery potty-trained my oldest daughter, you know.  We got along well.  My wife would go to the club and play bridge with the women, you know, and it was--I mean the colonel told me one day we were sitting on the pool.  He thanked me and all that.  [unclear] I was serving there, you know.  But had one incident, my wife was playing bridge and of course all the help was black.  And the waitress is--she's pouring coffee and looking at my wife and poured coffee in the lady's lap [unclear].  Well my, my wife, she couldn't help it, she broke up and she of course--nobody could understand why she was laughing.  But I hope it wasn't too embarrassing for the lady, but when we--first time we used the pool, there was a glass wall all one side.  And I looked out [unclear] you see there was nothing but white aprons, eyeballs, teeth and eyeballs.  New to, new to Langley.  And the maitre d' of course is a black and so we, we got excellent treatment.  And the local college people of course the--they were happy to have us in their circle because any time they wanted to party, they, they'd get a hold of me, see, and they'd finance the party and bring the group out there, and mix 'em up.
Speaker 1: What group--
Speaker 2: Well, well the faculty from Hampton Institute [Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: The schoolteachers, the mailman or whatever, you know.
Speaker 1: So you became close to all those--I mean to Hampton, the people at Hampton.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So how long were you there at Hampton?
Speaker 2: Well let's see what year was that--'51 [1951].  I think, think I went to Korea from there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to Korea from there.
Speaker 1: Well how long did, did you stay in the service altogether?
Speaker 2: I ended up--I stayed 22 years, 2 months, 14 days.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you got out in the '60s [1960's]?
Speaker 2: I got out in '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964], okay, all right.  And you have--looking back, you had a pretty good career.
Speaker 2: I found it interesting.  I mean it offered a variety of experience and more than--anything I could get outside and--and I spent six and a half years overseas and I liked overseas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you're in Korea until about 19--what?
Speaker 2: I left there in December of '55 [1955].
Speaker 1: Fifty-five [1955], okay.
Speaker 2: Wait a minute.  It had to be--don't remember--December '54 [1954] maybe.  Went over in July '52 [1952].  Yeah, it would be '54 [1954].
Story_ID: 59225
Speaker 1: What, what, what do you think was the single greatest change I guess that you saw, you know, in the time that you were in the service, the time you started.
Speaker 2: Well the social changes--World War II was our last good war and it accelerated some long overdue social changes.  So that I tell our young people now we broke the glass ceiling and opened the doors, broke down the barriers.  We want them to--you can be anything you want to be.  And one of our black astronauts stopped me, it was 1988 in St. Paul [Minnesota] and he thanked me for making it possible for him to be where he was.
Speaker 1: Okay, who was that?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think of the name.  If you call the name, I remember, but I can't remember his name.  He's one of the early black astronauts.
Speaker 1: Bluford?
Speaker 2: Bluford, yeah.
Speaker 1: Guion, Guion Bluford [HM].
Speaker 2: Bluford, yeah.  And Colin Powell [HM] and he, he's talking in Detroit [Michigan] in '91 [1991].  He said--he thanked all of the Tuskegee Airmen and he said you're responsible for me being where I am today.
Story_ID: 59226
Speaker 1: Now the Tuskegee Airmen keep in touch with each other.  They have an organization, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they do, Tuskegee Airmen, Incorporated.  They have a convention every year.  It's in Atlanta [Georgia] right, right now.
Speaker 1: It's going on right now?
Speaker 2: Right now, let's see.  No, last week.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's been supplemented of course by younger people who joined this--the Tuskegee Airmen, Incorporated, and the Organization of Black Airline Pilots co-hosts the union-reunion, so--or conventions.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did, did, did any of the Tuskegee Airmen become air--airline pilots after the war?
Speaker 2: None of them really made it, no.  They, they flew in a couple of outfits, but none of them really did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The doors weren't, weren't really open for that?
Speaker 2: No.  In fact Coleman [unclear] is living in the Twin Cities [Minnesota], he came along after us, but--and he had an opportunity to fly the heavier aircraft and actually be qualified for airline employment.  But he couldn't get in.  But he did run a, a little airline for a private concern.
Story_ID: 59227
Speaker 1: Tell me like what, what did you do then after you, you got out of the service?  What, what, what did you do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well at the time we decided that--well if we could find a house we liked in Duluth [Minnesota], we'd stay in there.  Plus Scholastica College [The College of St. Scholastica, Duluth, Minnesota] had a number one nurse's training and my oldest daughter wanted to be a nurse.  So I bought a house and then I started looking for a job.
Speaker 1: Okay, now why did you settle in Duluth [Minnesota] anyway?
Speaker 2: Well at the time it had an air base.  And we wanted those facilities available to us.  I think it was '80 [1980] or '82 [1982] that air base closed.  But my older daughter graduated and got her degree and went right into nursing and she's still in the health field doing very well.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you got two daughters, right?
Speaker 2: Two daughters.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how, how is the other one doing?
Speaker 2: The younger one went to University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota]--choreography and dance and then she went on to get her master's degree at [unclear] in Valencia, California.
Speaker 1: That sounds, sounds good.
Speaker 2: Right now she just opened a pilate studio.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's exercise.
Speaker 2: Exercise, yeah.
Speaker 1: So how has life been like in Duluth?
Speaker 2: Well quite well for us.  My wife is very active in the community.  She's on the Charter Committee and she was President of League of Women Voters for a few years.
Speaker 1: That's something.  I mean that's a, that's a very important.  So she's very active [unclear], League of Women Voters, yeah.
Speaker 2: And of course we're pillars of the church here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You spend some time speaking in schools and so forth.
Speaker 2: Right and I'm lay minister to--at least I'm--I don't do actively now, I've gotten out of that.  But I certified--I can do a service at any Methodist church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what have you done for a living since you've been in Duluth?
Speaker 2: I worked for the U.S. Forest Service for twenty-one years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And does your work--did your work have anything to do with aircraft at all?
Speaker 2: No, no.  We had our own aircraft, because we have [unclear] planes flying out of [unclear] and I've flown in them, but I stayed mostly in personnel, all of, in fact I did all the time in personnel and I received a Superior Service Award from the [U.S.] Department of Agriculture for my work with women and minorities.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what exactly were you doing with women and minorities [unclear].
Speaker 2: We were trying to--the U.S. Forest Service was a white, male organization at the time I got into it.  And they were anxious to diversify.  And I could, I could have put any qualified black to work that I could find.  I only find the ones that--there weren't too many.  And women and professional--I had--our forest had the only female agent, professional forester because I had contacts with all the schools of forestry and they knew good and well what I was looking for.  If they wanted a minority and women or something, there was no chance for them to be employed.  So I had a reputation throughout the nation for diversity.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I saw earlier a photo of you--with you and the Secretary of Agriculture, you know--so this is--this made national news, right?  This activity, yeah.  So is there anything that, that you'd like to tell us that we, we probably wouldn't think to ask you?
Speaker 2: Well the purpose of course of doing all this public speaking is that we wanted to bring the service of the Tuskegee Airmen to the attention of today's world because they don't know anything about--anything before sit-ins and how, how they got where they are now.  And for our young people, education is the key.  And as I said before, they can be anything that they want to be and we need to get the family behind our young people.
Story_ID: 58209
Speaker 1: Mr. Gomer, how would--what do you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well I think that we--as I said, World War II accelerated these overdue social changes and we're [Tuskegee Airman] proud of the fact that we helped change things and we wanna keep educating our young people and pushing them.  And I'm a little disappointed in, in that there aren't more that are taking advantage of the opportunities that exist today.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did--do you think that your, your, your mother [Eula Gomer] or your brother [Charles Gomer] ever got a sense of what you were really doing over in Europe all that, all that time?  Did they--you think they really ever understood?  Or your wife even.
Speaker 2: Well my wife, she asked, but I, I don't--I, I really don't know.  They never talked much.
Story_ID: 58210
Speaker 1: And you're still involved in a lot of civic activities, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well possibly as someone who was caring and was trying to do as much for--I'm going to say not just our people, for everybody because I never discriminated.  I try to not see color, period.  Do as much as you can for our fellow man.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you sir.
Speaker 2: No, thank you for the opportunity.
Story_ID: 58211
Speaker 1: Well that's a picture of my father [Philip Gomer].  And you can probably tell he was a good dresser, he had his suits tailor made, well he had to do because he was so short.  But he liked good clothes.  And if you can imagine buying 200 dollar suits during the [Great] Depression, course your suits lasted for forever.
Speaker 2: Now what, what year is this do you think?
Speaker 1: I, I have no way--I would say that was back in the '20s [1920s].
Speaker 2: Okay, cause he's a fairly young man there.  Philip Joseph, Philip Joseph Gome--Gomer.
Speaker 1: Now that is a cadet dance back at Tuskegee [Alabama] in our cadet days.  And that's John F. Briggs on the right, right there.  He was in my class.  And the little lady I was dancing with had green eyes, that's all I can remember.
Speaker 2: Now this is you?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And what, what year is this?
Speaker 1: That would have been 1942.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my brother [Charles Gomer], he's in the highchair and I'm standing by the highchair.
Speaker 1: What's your brother's name?
Speaker 2: Charles.
Speaker 1: And you're about, looks like about two and a half maybe.
Speaker 2: I might have been, three and a half, four years old I guess.  Well, maybe not, let's see.  I'm a year older than my brother, a little over a year, so I'd say about, say three.  No, he was--yeah, that's right, okay, right.  There's a better shot of that in that pile.
Speaker 1: You got a big one of this one too?  I think it is.  That's a Duluth [Minnesota] picture.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that gives you some idea of what our Duluth winters used to be like.  I'm standing by the mailbox.  And I remember on one occasion, a couple--we played a lot of bridge in those days--they put their ski and snowshoes on out at the main road, and then snowshoed in up over the snowdrifts to come and play bridge.
Speaker 1: What year was this approximately?
Speaker 2: That would be in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is your father and dog I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a picture of my father and of course that's quite common, the way they pose that, those type of pictures in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so this is Phil and Buster.  Is that the dog, Buster?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And don't ask me what year it was.  I'd say the '20s [1920s] or earlier, even earlier.
Speaker 2: That was a--something from the local newspaper.  Just a--some of the people in the different neighborhoods and they decided to put me on the front page.
Speaker 1: That is a restored P-51C Commemorative Air Force, formerly the Confederate Air Force.  And that's Doug Rosenthal flying and he's a member of the CAF (Commemorative Air Force).  And they have removed the--in the restored aircraft, they didn't replace the gas tank, they put a jump seat in, so they gave me a ride.
Speaker 2: The Commemorative Air Force, and they used to call it the Confederate Air Force?
Speaker 1: Right.  And they renamed it on purpose.
Speaker 2: Okay, good.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're, we're standing on the wing getting ready to climb in.  That was at Dubuque, Iowa.
Speaker 2: Okay, next please.
Speaker 1: That's a restored B-51C.  It's worth one and a half to two million dollars.  Ninety percent of it is brand new, it's just had to rebuild from scratch.
Speaker 2: Wow.  You weren't kidding about a lot of nose.  Okay next.
Speaker 1: Do an S pattern on the ground so they could see what was out in front of you.
Speaker 2: Because the nose, nose is so long?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Several of us Tuskegee Airmen worked with the Dubuque school system and they--not exactly disadvantaged students, but it was alternative learning experience.  And they decided to write the history of the Tuskegee Airmen, so they proceeded research and write a book.  And that's Colonel [Charles] McGee on the far left, he's the one with more missions than any aircraft pilot.  They flew in World War II, Korea and Viet Nam.  And that's Bob Martin [Robert Martin] on the right, he's the other Tuskegee Airman that was there at the time.  He's, he was a resident of Dubuque, so he was a hometown boy.  And he had an interesting experience because he was shot down over Yugoslavia and he spent some time with the partisans before they finally got him back.
Speaker 2: That was me back in 1943 maybe, it was in the '40s [1940s].
Story_ID: 58212
Speaker 1: That's the presentation of my Superior Service Award by John R. Block, Secretary of Agriculture.  That was 1985.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: There you see the old Methodist church that I grew up in, sang in the choir, taught Sunday school and that, that was it.  That's my brother [Charles Gomer] and I are in that picture somewhere.
Speaker 2: Where are you, do you know?
Speaker 1: Well my brother is on the right, right there.  And I'm in the back row, I think about the third from the left.  Back row, third from my left, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's you and this is your brother.
Speaker 1: And you never think of the, of the churches being race, having any race in them.  However, I had a very interesting experience there.  We had a summer camp cottage at Clear Lake, Iowa.  And a group of us, of our young teenagers, went up to clean up the cabin and get it set for the summer.  And when we got all through and this--it was co-education, it was boys and, and girls.  The pastor took me outside, took me around and underneath.  He said now we can set up a, a cot and hang up some black blankets here for you.
Speaker 2: What?  They didn't do that, did they?
Speaker 1: No, no, I didn't give them an opportunity.  Cause I went--when I went home and told my father [Philip Gomer] about it, he said well you better just forget it.  But that was our Methodist pastor, I couldn't even remember his name.  But--and I gave him a fit on the way home.  He had to drive home.  But if you've ever seen somebody driving with his head looking backwards.  It so happened that one of the young ladies got a little tired and so she laid down and put her head in my lap and took a nap.  And he's trying to drive and watch us in the back seat.
Speaker 2: How old were you then?
Speaker 1: I was in my teens.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah he's watching.
Speaker 1: That's my wife and the Chief of the [U.S.] Forest Service.  And I can't recall the name right this minute, but he Chief of the Forest Service at that time.
Speaker 2: United States Forest Service, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And you're being recognized here for something?
Speaker 1: That was following my, Secretary Block's presentation of the Superior Service Award.
Speaker 2: Okay, and this is what year again?
Speaker 1: That would be 1985.
Speaker 2: Next, please.
Speaker 1: That's a group of the [U.S.] Air Force officers that were in--
Speaker 2: Let's take--is this the same?
Speaker 1: That's the same.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's got names on it.  Maybe we should use it instead.  I just noticed it's got names above and below, all the way across.
Speaker 1: We were there for training on the new helicopter maintenance.
Speaker 2: Where and what year?
Speaker 1: That would be 19--let's see.  I think about '51 [1951] I guess, '51 [1951], yeah be '51 [1951].  I was Chief of Recon[naissance] and, and the helicopters and tactical air command.  And I learned to fly the helicopter while I was there.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my mother [Eula Gomer].  She lived to be ninety-eight, died in 1978.  And I was her, I was her first and she was forty when I was born.
Speaker 2: That's the shot that I hated losing, it went through a basement flood.  And I'm standing on the wing of a P-39.  Our squadron photographer, Bobby Spurlock [Robert "Bobby" Spurlock] took that picture and he died, he died before I could contact him to see if I could get the negative for that shot.  He was a professional photographer, Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: Well those were my party days.  I suppose I was about forty-six, forty-seven.
Speaker 1: Okay and where was this taken, do you remember?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure at this point.
Speaker 1: Next.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of the restored P-51C, one of the two flyable ones in the country.  And I have the signatures of the three of us that were there at Dubuque.  We were working with the alternative learning high school.  Robert Martin, myself and Charles McGee.
Speaker 1: There's the three of us with Doug Rosenthal, the pilot.  Myself, Bob Martin and Charles McGee.  And you get a good look at that canopy that I lost, see.  That's, that's what I lost.
Speaker 2: Okay, great.
Speaker 1: There are the three of us sitting down talking to our--the public and signing autographs.  They kept us pretty busy.  Our signatures will be worth a lot of money after we're dead.
