Story_ID: 317634
Speaker 1: This HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview is being conducted with [HistoryMaker] Sandra Marian Ann Grymes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my dear.
Speaker 1: --at her home at 10 Franklin Avenue, Oak Bluffs, on the island of Martha's Vineyard in Massachusetts.  And the date is June 23, 2005.  The interviewer is [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden, and the videographer is Neculai Burghelea.  Madam HistoryMaker, would you give me your full name and would you spell your name for me?
Speaker 2: My--I use the name Sandra Grymes; however, my full name is Sandra Marian Ann Grymes.  And my last name is spelled, G-R-Y-M-E-S.
Speaker 1: And the rest of the first name.
Speaker 2: You want me to spell the whole thing?
Speaker 1: Yes.  All of it.
Speaker 2: Sandra is spelled, S-A-N-D-R-A; Marian is spelled, M-A-R-I-A-N; Ann is spelled, A-N-N.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  And where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.  You have a varied career, but it's focused in a particular area.  But how would you describe your occupation over the course of your career?  What do you do?  What are you career wise?
Speaker 2: That's a very good question, because my career has been quite varied.  I was trained initially as a social worker, as a psychiatric social worker, which is a group of skills that I have used all my life throughout whatever I have done.  Initially, I worked directly with some clients and patients who had varying kinds of mental illness, and then I worked in a managerial area.  So, most of my career has been in non-profit management, primarily focused in healthcare.
Story_ID: 317635
Speaker 1: Before we continue, looking at your family history and your early beginnings, we have a few warm-up questions that we use; People magazine type questions, to give people who look at your HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview a special slant on your personality, or at least a part of your personality.  And so I want to ask you, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: So this is a take on The Actors Studio (laughter).  My favorite food, I guess my favorite food would be oatmeal raisin cookies (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: The fall.  Autumn.
Speaker 1: Why the fall?
Speaker 2: Because it's not too hot, and it's not yet cold.  And it's particularly beautiful here because the weather is perfect on the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] in September and October.
Speaker 1: You have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is red.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Anywhere across either ocean, the Pacific [Ocean] or the Atlantic [Ocean], would be fine.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying that you use from time to time with people or as a philosophical kind of piece that you use?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  Probably something like, don't take it personally, you know.  Much of what goes on in the world really has nothing to do with you.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  Good.
Story_ID: 317636
Speaker 1: The HistoryMakers' interviews start with family background. We're going to explore that, so that as we listen to you and learn about your growing up years and your aspirations and your professional career, we have a context and a background with which to look at all that, and the things that influenced you along, along the way.  So we're going to start with your mother, and I'll ask you to tell me a little bit about her.  Would you give me her name, where she was born and when she was born?
Speaker 2: Her name was Jeanette Hughes [Jeanette Hughes Grymes], her maiden name, that is.  She was born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in 1917.
Speaker 1: Where did she grow up?
Speaker 2: She grew up in Philadelphia.  She spent all of her life there for the most part except when she was retired, then she lived in Florida.
Speaker 1: What do you know about her growing up years, her early childhood, early high school years?  What do you know about her early growing up years?  Had she shared stories with you about her life?
Speaker 2: She grew up in Philadelphia.  She was the older of two children, she had a younger brother.  And she grew up in the family with her mother and for some time with her father, but her father was not with the family throughout her childhood, and her mother raised her; worked hard to raise both the children.  And she shared a house with another family, and who were like part of our extended family.  And she was always someone with a great sense of humor.  She learned to play the piano as a child, and she could play the piano quite well actually.  And she liked to write.  And she was fun.  She was always fun.  And she had a very engaging personality.  She was very social.  She married young.  She eloped with my father [Leon Grymes].  She met my father--her best friend introduced them and they eloped, much to everybody's surprise.  And she had a sense of adventure.
Speaker 1: Who did you say raised her again?
Speaker 2: Her mother.
Speaker 1: Her mother.  So that's your maternal grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what was her name?
Speaker 2: My maternal grandmother's name was Grace Anderson Hughes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born and when?
Speaker 2: She was born in Philadelphia in 1990--I'm sorry.  In 18--I'm sorry, 1900.
Speaker 1: Right, 1900.
Speaker 2: Right.  She was ninety years--almost ninety years old when she died in 1989.
Story_ID: 317637
Speaker 1: Tell me about your mother's [Jeanette Hughes Grymes] early education?  Do you know much about her elementary and high school education?
Speaker 2: She went to--well, she completed high school in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  She went to a high school that was quite a mix of young children, people from all over the world, lots of immigrants when she was educated in the '20s [1920s].  And so, in her high school--I mean her elementary school, I remember we had a picture of her--I'm afraid I don't have it here (laughter)--
Speaker 1: That's all right.
Speaker 2: --of her with her classmates, and they were all dressed up in the outfits from their--the national dress of the various countries they came from, and it was quite an array of young people from, probably at that point, Eastern Europe.  A lot of Eastern Europeans were coming here in the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: What was your mother's occupation or career?
Speaker 2: She worked as a secretary in the public schools for the board of education in Philadelphia.  When she first married, she didn't work.  She took care of us.  And when my father [Leon Grymes] died, then she started working.
Speaker 1: Took care of us?  So you had (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have one sister.
Speaker 1: And her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Marcia Grymes [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm going to come back and ask you more about your sister later when we talk about your growing up years, because you two were fairly close in age.
Story_ID: 317638
Speaker 1: Any stories that you particularly remember your mother [Jeanette Hughes Grymes] telling you about her early life, her growing up?  Any little anecdotes, songs that she may have sung to you about her past?
Speaker 2: Well, she loved to sing and she sang all the time, mostly popular songs.  When we were children she read to us all of the time.  That was very important to her.
Speaker 1: What did she read to you?  Do you remember what she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She read every nursery rhyme; all of 'The Wizard of Oz' stories from cover to cover; all of 'Grimms' Fairy Tales.'  Everything.  And she was quite a reader herself.  So I think that she engendered in me my love of language and reading.
Speaker 1: Do you remember specifically what she liked to read?
Speaker 2: She liked to read--she read all the popular novels, anything that was, you know, the popular, what we would consider the best seller list, she read those; she read a lot of those.  And as I grew up and I was able to read everything, there were books that she didn't think I should read, I was too young to read, and she would hide them. And then I would find them, of course, and I would read them because if she said, "I don't think you should read this."  You know, "You're not old enough to read this," that was, of course, my encouragement to find the book and to read it to try to figure out what was in it that I should not see.  And often I would do that, but I couldn't figure it out.  I mean, it was really above me.  It was when I was older, and then I realized what I wasn't supposed to see; not at the time.
Speaker 1: How long did she work as a secretary at the board of ed [board of education]?  Do you recall?
Speaker 2: She did that at least thirty years, something like that.  She retired from there.
Speaker 1: She did?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did she, in coming home after work, talk with you about the job and what she did there?  Any stories or (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In my family, we all had dinner together at five o'clock, when everybody managed to get home.  And everybody shared whatever went on during the day at that point; my [maternal] grandmother [Grace Anderson Hughes], what she had done; my father [Leon Grymes] and my mother, whatever was happening in their respective jobs.  And my mother would talk a lot about the young people she worked with in the school, because she was a secretary in the office, and she would often encounter young people and their issues and their problems.  And she would talk about that and how she had managed to help some kid or some child who came with something that was a little silly.  And that might be a fun story she shared with us.
Story_ID: 317639
Speaker 1: What more can you tell me about her [Grymes' mother, Jeanette Hughes Grymes] mother, your maternal grandmother, Grace Anderson Hughes?  Anything more you can tell us about her and her background?  She was born in 1900?
Speaker 2: She was born in 1900, and she grew up in a family that struggled a great deal in the beginning of the century.  She was part of the larger family that managed to give us Marian Anderson.  So, she was Marian Anderson's first cousin.  They grew up together in the same house.  And they were always very close throughout their lives.  And that was, of course, an interesting experience for them, because when they were children and teenagers, life was hard.  And both of them had lost their fathers early.  And their grandmother was very stern, let us say.  And so that was hard for them to have this kind of stern grandmother who was around.  Their mothers had to work in order to provide for them, so they weren't always around.  And so their life was not--it was not easy.
Speaker 1: Let's make very clear right up front your relationship to Marian Anderson, to people who are going to listen to your life story.  Just give us that relationship, and then we're going to be talking about Marian Anderson probably in latter parts of our discussion.  But just give us a direct lineage now.
Speaker 2: Marian Anderson's father [John Berkley Anderson] and my grandmother's father were brothers.  So that made them first cousins.  So biologically, she is a cousin of mine.  She is a--she can either be called a first cousin, second removed, or a second cousin, however one wants to look at the lineage.  In our family, however, everybody, every adult family member who interacted with any child was called aunt or uncle, whether it was a blood relative or not.  And so, in our family she was called Aunt Marian by everybody, all the children and all of our friends and everybody that lived on the block (laughter).  So that's the way that, that went.  But she was very close to our family, and we were all very close to her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, you have certainly played an important role in her life, and you continue to do that as you told me earlier.  So we'll come back and talk about your ancestor, your relative, Marian Anderson.
Story_ID: 317640
Speaker 1: Well, let's go to your father.  As we did with your mother [Jeanette Hughes Grymes], would you give me your father's name and when he was born and where he was born?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  My father's name was Leon Grymes.  He was born in Washington, D.C., in 1915.
Speaker 1: What was he like as a person?  How do you remember your father?
Speaker 2: Well, like all little girls, I guess, I remember my father as adoring me.  And he also adored my sister [Marcia Grymes (ph.)], but he was, you know, he was quite adoring of his daughters.  I know that he worked hard.  He always--when he and my mother first married, he worked as an elevator operator at Gimbels [Gimbel Brothers], which was the local department store.  Of course, they hired very few black people, and so he was fortunate to have a job there as the elevator operator.  And then after that he worked on his own.  He always had a side business.  He had a paper, a wallpaper hanging business, and a painting business.  And he was not allowed to go to the [U.S.] Army during the Second World War [World War II, WWII] because he had hypertension, so he worked as a welder in the factory during the war.  And then after that, he and one of his friends developed a beer distributing business.  In Pennsylvania you had to buy beer through distributors.  You couldn't go to your local grocery store in those days.  And so he sold soda and beer, and he had these trucks that ran around the city with "Grymes and Friday Beer Distributors" all over them.  So I felt like a famous kid, since I would see my father's trucks all over the place.  He was very kind.  He taught me how to ride a bicycle.  He and my mother would play chess all the time, because that was one way--he loved to play chess, and so he taught my mother how to play, and she played quite well with him, because that way she could make sure he was at home with her and not out playing chess all day with his friends.  And so they played together.  He played tennis a great deal, too, with one of his--a couple of his friends.  They played tennis on Sunday.  They would take us to the tennis courts.  And he was a good guy.
Speaker 1: Well, born in Washington, D.C., when and why did he move to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or was that the case?  Did he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His family moved.
Speaker 1: His family moved.  Well, how old was he then?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: He was a young boy when his family moved.
Speaker 1: When his family moved?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So he was educated then in the Philadelphia schools?
Speaker 2: He was educated in the Philadelphia schools, as was my mother, as was I.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What did he share with you about his growing up years either in Washington for the short time, but in Philadelphia?  Did he talk about his childhood to you or youth years at all?
Speaker 2: He probably did, but I don't remember that very well.  When he died, I was eleven years old.  I don't remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --much of that.
Speaker 1: Did the beer distributing business continue after his death or did he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It continued.  My mother managed it with the partner for a few years after that.  And then she--I guess that he must have bought her share out of that business, and he had it for a while, and then he moved on to some other business after that.
Speaker 1: Now, when your mother continued the business with his partner, was she still working in the board of education?
Speaker 2: She had just started working.  When my father died, my mother didn't work the first year.  She worked, you know, she helped with the business, and, you know, sort of tried to regroup, get herself together, grieve, et cetera; deal with her grieving children, and then she went to work.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.  Okay.  How many trucks did he have in this business?  Was it a large fleet of trucks, or--?
Speaker 2: He had at least three, I guess.
Speaker 1: Three trucks.  Okay.  Just interested in the scale.  Three is a lot actually.
Speaker 2: He was--well, in those days, yeah.  I mean, he was--it was a small business (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At that time.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: But they had about three trucks.
Story_ID: 317641
Speaker 1: What do you know about his [Grymes' father, Leon Grymes] parentage?  Who was his mother?
Speaker 2: His mother's name was Anna Grymes.  I don't know her maiden name.  His father's name was Louis Grymes.  His father died the year I was born.  So I never knew him at all.  They lived--they at first had lived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for a while.  My mother [Jeanette Hughes Grymes] wasn't very close to them.  And so, after my father died, I saw less and less of them.  And--but his mother, when we would visit, she was very different from my family, in that she was very solicitous of us children.  She didn't allow us to do anything.  She sort of catered to us.  After all, we were her son's children, right?  So she catered to us.  And in my family, my mother was trying to raise us to be independent and self-reliant.  And so, in my grandmother's house, you know, we behaved like we were little princesses.  And in my house, we all had to cooperate and pull our weight (laughter), so it was a very different--different point of view.
Story_ID: 317642
Speaker 1: Can you trace any of your grandparents back to the South?  You had a photograph here, I think of your great-great--
Speaker 2: That's my--a photograph of my great-great-grandfather.  Yes.  My family--my maternal grandparents were all--their roots are in Virginia.  My grandmother's [Grace Anderson Hughes] family, my great-grandmother whom I did know, my maternal grandmother's mother, who lived with us, also, for a while when she was elderly, she was born in King and Queen County, Virginia.  And so she came--her family--she brought her family during the migration from Virginia to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  My great-great-grandfather, Benjamin Anderson was born in Virginia, in King William County, Virginia.  Benjamin Anderson was the--he was my great-great-grandfather; so he was my grandmother and Aunt Marian's [Marian Anderson] grandfather.  And he is the relative about whom we know the most, you know, of that generation.  He was born in 1848.  We know that he was a freed man, that he was born in the Tidewater area of Central Virginia.  We have his marriage license when he was married to Isabella, whose full name is Mary Holmes, but whom we called Isabella.  They were married in 1869 in Virginia, and they had about eight or nine children, about five of whom survived.  And they came after the Civil War to Philadelphia.  So we know that about him.  We also know--and I found this very interesting--we also know that he was a black Jew, that he practiced Judaism and observed the Sabbath and Passover and all those holidays; and he was very close to their congregation; that the other people in the family, the other women in the family, were Baptist; his wife was Baptist--well his wife was an American Indian [Native American], so she was not a Baptist, she was an American Indian, and so she did whatever she did.  The other people in the family were Baptist and various other Christian denominations.  And I thought that that was fascinating because as I was growing up, everybody in the family, everybody would go off to whatever spiritual calling they wanted.  So it was always a good deal of tolerance through the generations in the family for whatever religiosity one wanted to express or not express.
Story_ID: 317643
Speaker 1: Let's move to your sister, since we're doing the family; let's talk about your sister, Marcia [Marcia Grymes (ph.)], is it?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Shortly after--a few years after you were born?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What was your sister like growing up?  How do you remember your sister as a child?
Speaker 2: Well, she was my little sister.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so she was somebody for whom I was very responsible, so I had to always look after her and set and set an example.  You know how that is with the older child.  And so she could be a pest, and I would try to deal with that.  But, my efforts were thwarted because when she was three years old she contracted polio.  And so we all had to deal with that because we were all quarantined, and she was not well.  And so when we would fight, my sister would say--she would pretend as if I was killing her, and then she would punch me, because she had physical therapy and she was strong.  And she would beat me up quite ceremoniously.  And so I do remember that.  She was always fun, and I looked out for her.  Except by the time I got to be a teenager, I really didn't want a little sister dragging behind me all the time.  And so I would try to escape that role.  But my mother [Jeanette Hughes Grymes], being ever vigilant, would not allow it.  So.  She's--my sister has done very well in life.  She's a wonderful woman.  And she worked forever at General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan], retired from there, now lives in Florida, took care of my mother when she was sick and dying.  You know, she's really been a trooper.  She's done a great--she's really been wonderful.
Speaker 1: So she was with General Motors for all of her working life?
Speaker 2: For most of it, the majority.  First, she started out at RCA [Radio Corporation of America; RCA Corporation].
Speaker 1: In Philadelphia, Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2: I think around Camden [New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Camden, New Jersey?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And so she started working there as--she was, like, the executive assistant to the president or the CEO or something.  I don't remember all the details.  And then she decided she wanted to go to Michigan.  She was following some young man who had caught her fancy.  And her boss called General Motors, one of his colleagues over there.  And so she was quickly placed, was very well placed there.  And she stayed there for, I think, thirty years and retired and retired early and did very well.
Speaker 1: That's good.
Speaker 2: She's the one with all the money.  Not me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you visit with her often or does she come to Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: She comes to Martha's Vineyard occasionally.  Yeah.  I go to Florida occasionally.  Florida is not one of my favorite places, though.
Speaker 1: Oh, it's not.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: A lot of Vineyard people love Florida as you know.
Speaker 2: I know.  They adore it, but, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I do, too.
Speaker 2: --it's not one of my favorites.
Speaker 1: I never used to like Florida, but I do now for some reason.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I guess you age into it or something.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 317644
Speaker 1: Staying with family, you have a cousin who is a well-known musician, and you've been working with him for a long period of time, as I understand it, on the estate and the legacy of your aunt, Marian Anderson.  Tell us his name and who he is and your relationship to him.
Speaker 2: His name is James DePreist.  He is a conductor.  He is my cousin, and we sort of grew up together.  He was older than I, but I always looked up to him.  And I always figured if he could do it, I could do it, too.  So we went to the same schools.  Except in high school, he went to the boys high, which was Central High [Central High School] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and I went to the girls high school [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And he went to Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and I went to Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], but we were still in the same place.  And we've been very close throughout our lives.
Speaker 1: And where is he now?  Where does he conduct?  Where is his home?
Speaker 2: He lives in Scottsdale, Arizona.  He is now the conductor emeritus of the Oregon Symphony, which he sort of built from scratch in Portland [Oregon].  He's had numerous conducting positions as principal guest conductor at various orchestras, including Monte Carlo [Monte-Carlo Philharmonic Orchestra] and Quebec [Canada] and the Quebec Symphony [Orchestre Symphonique de Quebec], and the Malmo Symphony [Malmo Symphony Orchestra].  And now in his sort of quasi-retirement years, he is the principal conductor of the Tokyo Metropolitan Symphony [Tokyo Metropolitan Symphony Orchestra] in Tokyo, Japan, in addition to directing, conducting and orchestral studies at Juilliard [The Juilliard School, New York, New York].  So he's had a great time.
Story_ID: 317645
Speaker 1: Tell me about your stepfather, you know, your stepfather's name and who he was and what he did.
Speaker 2: His name was Reuben Brooks [ph.] and he worked for the post office [U.S. Postal Service] all of his professional life.  He was born in Asheville, North Carolina, and lived in D.C. [Washington, D.C.].  His family moved to Washington [D.C.] from North Carolina.  And his marriage to my mother [Jeanette Hughes Grymes] was his second marriage.  And he and my mother were married for about twenty-five years before he died.  He was a Republican, and he married into a family of Democrats.  So he had to learn how to hold his own with all these Democrats.  So whenever there was a family party or event, which there was many, there was either a debate or political discussion as the Democrats would try to pulverize the Republican (laughter).  So he had to hone his debating skills.  He was a lot of fun.  He was a bit of a bon vivant guy.  He loved to travel.  He played golf.  He was an avid golfer.  And he played--when he retired, he'd play golf nearly every day.  And he taught my mother to play, and she would play with him or she would play with women.  And so she was not as avid a golfer as he, because she had other interests in life; but he was an avid golfer.  And so he was an interesting man.  He was very--he was the kind of guy you could really be quite frank with.  He married my mother when I was an adult.
Speaker 1: You just answered the questions I was going to ask you (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes.  When my father [Leon Grymes] died, my mother, being a very beautiful woman, was flooded with suitors.  And so that, of course, made us a little anxious, especially me.  And she sat us down and explained that she would never marry anyone while we were children until we grew up.  After that, we would not have to worry about that, because, she said, she would never subject any man to us, and she would never subject any man--us to any man.  So that was fine.  We all understood that.  So all the suitors would come around, and some of them--they were all very different.  They were all different.  Some were kind and generous.  Some liked children, some held them at, you know, arm's length; some would drive around the block fifty times.  You got a concert to go to, the curtain was falling, you're driving around the block fifty times 'cause they were too cheap to put the car in a parking lot.  You know, some would buy us ice cream; some we could seduce into buying us two scoops, you know.  He was the kind of guy who you could be forthright with.  He was very forthright.  He was--and he was well-read and interesting.
Story_ID: 317646
Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories growing up as a child in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?  How far back can you remember something?
Speaker 2: I guess I can remember being a little girl, I must have been about two and a half, three years old, when we lived in the first house where we moved--we grew up--well, where I was born.  And so I remember that period because my sister [Marcia Grymes (ph.)] was also born in this house.  And we moved soon after that to my [maternal] grandmother's [Grace Anderson Hughes] house.  And I remember we had a dog named Peggy (unclear), who I always remember as disappearing under the house one day and never returning.  But I think the dog died.  And later years when I explained that to my mother [Jeanette Hughes Grymes], she said, "The dog died" (laughter).  But it seems to me the dog disappeared under the house.  So I remember that.  I remember practicing writing.  I was about three, four years old.  I learned to read when I was four.  My mother taught me how to read.  And I remember when I was five, my sister contracted polio.  I was five.  So I remember all the drama around that and, you know, going to the hospital and not being able to go in the hospital, because it was a communicable disease, and having to sit outside.  And my mother would stand at the window of my sister's room and look down on me as I would sit on the bench and keep her eye on me while she visited my sister.  And I remember my mother talking me out of my favorite toy, my elephant, because she had neglected to get a present to take that day, because I took something every day to my sister.  And so they talked me out of--you know, my mother could try to sweet talk you out of anything.  And so she took my elephant, and I never got my elephant back.  So I remember that.  So later in life, since that was one of the things I harbored against all of them, my sister gave me an elephant as a Christmas present, which I still have.
Speaker 1: Good.
Speaker 2: So (laughter) I remember that.  I remember that we would be taken off to family outings and family parties all the time.  I remember as a very young child being part of this--when Marian [Marian Anderson] would come home from wherever she was in the world, she came back to her family; and the whole family, including us, all the little kids, everybody, would go whenever she arrived, to be there when she came.  And that was a pattern throughout our childhood.
Story_ID: 317647
Speaker 1: When were you first aware of your cousin--your Aunt Marian's [Marian Anderson] notoriety, her world, and she was a singer?  When were you first conscious of it?
Speaker 2: Oh, not until I was much, much older.
Speaker 1: How old?
Speaker 2: Probably--I don't know.  Probably twelve, thirteen.  I mean, I knew that she was famous.  But, you know, for me she was just a relative like everybody else.  But I knew that she was special, because she traveled in the world.  And she would call us on the phone from some far off place.  And, you know, you could hear this crackling international operator would be on the phone.  And she would be calling to talk to my [maternal] grandmother [Grace Anderson Hughes], and we'd all get on the phone and say hello to her.  But she would be calling and she would also send us presents, so--or bring presents back.  So I remember that we had--my grandmother had this koala bear from Australia that she bought.  And whenever she brought something or sent something to us, we were allowed to look at it, but we were not allowed to play with it.  So this, you know, doll, this bear was, you know, my grandmother tucked away so we couldn't play with it.  But eventually, you know, when my grandmother wasn't around, we did get to the bear.  And she would send us, you know, dolls from Japan and whatever.  I mean, it was just amazing.  So it was when I was much older, I think, but other people would mention it to me, because I was very--I am to this day, rather circumspect by all of that.  I don't, you know, walk up to you and say, "Hi, I'm Sandy Grymes [HisoryMaker Sandra Marian Ann Grymes].  I'm part of Marian Anderson's family."  You know, some people don't find out about that for years after knowing me unless someone tells them, or they read about it somewhere.
Story_ID: 317648
Speaker 1: Let me go back to your first home before you moved to your [maternal] grandmother's [Grace Anderson Hughes] house.  On what street was your first family home, and which section of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: It was in South Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] where--the whole family all lived in South Philadelphia within blocks of each other, even when we moved to my grandmother's house.
Speaker 1: That was in South Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: That was in South Philly.  So we all grew up in South Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: What street were you on?
Speaker 2: My mother's [Jeanette Hughes Grymes] first house was on Wharton Street, I think about 18th [Street] and Wharton.  She had grown up in a house at 16th [Street] and Wharton.  So she and my father [Leon Grymes] and I lived at 18th and Wharton, and then when they moved to my grandmother's house, my grandmother bought a house, her own house, and so we moved there.
Speaker 1: How do you remember that neighborhood?  What was it like?  Who were the people?  Who were your neighbors?
Speaker 2: At that point in time, there were many, many black people; and there were Italian families and Irish families in the neighborhood.  And most people were poor.  There were, of course, businesses owned by black people, so that, you know, the teacher and the pharmacist and the doctor and the lawyer also lived in the neighborhood.  This is when, you know, we were in these segregated enclaves and everybody lived together, which was very good because, you know, you had all these role models of people who were doing various things in life.  And so you got a sense of what kind of work they did because you saw them and you knew who they were.  And so the neighborhood was quite diverse.  As I grew up, there were areas that--as white people moved out of these neighborhoods and more and more black people moved in, there were--we were like--in some sections, you know, you would be, like, surrounded by the white people; and so, you'd have to--as a kid, you'd have to be careful, because if you wandered off onto the wrong street, you had to fight your way home, girl, boy, it didn't matter, or you had to run.  So I became an excellent runner.  I mean, nobody could catch me.  I was very fast on my feet.  And so if I wandered off, I could always--I knew I could always get home, 'cause nobody was catching me.  So that was, you know, I was in one of those changing neighborhoods.
Story_ID: 317649
Speaker 1: What sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up in South Philly [South Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Well, I grew up on a street in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] that had a garden at the center of it.  This block still exists.  It was in Jonathan Demme's [sic. M. Night Shyamalan] movie, 'The Sixth Sense', and so--it's on St. Albans Place.  And so we could ride our bicycles around this garden.  Our houses faced the garden.  And we gardened in this garden.  Actually, everybody on the street, every family took care of the little plot in front of them.  And we had this lovely Italian family on the corner, recent immigrants.  And the matriarch of that family would grow these beautiful tomatoes and roses and basil in her little plot.  And she truly had a green thumb.  Hers was just--it was just beautiful.  And we grew hydrangeas, because in my family everybody worked hard.  They did not have time to do all of that.  So they had hydrangeas bushes and stuff, but not a lot.  And there was a garden club.  So I remember that.  I also remember the sounds of horses, because in Philadelphia there were horse-drawn wagons and carts.  The ragman would come down the allies selling rags, and he would have a horse-drawn cart.  We would have ice delivered that way.  And the milk, every morning the milkman would come; the milk and the cheese and the eggs and whatever.  So there was that aspect to life, too.  And the other thing I remember, there were some recent immigrants from Eastern Europe in my neighborhood; Jewish people who were coming from Germany and other places.  And so there were folks who spoke another language, had a different accent, had a different life experience.  And so, they were also in the neighborhood, often coming in as shopkeepers.
Speaker 1: Right.  It's interesting how universal the ragman was.  Interviewing, I think, it was Carrie Tankard [HistoryMaker Carrie Camillo Tankard] yesterday, and she remembers the ragman in Newark [New Jersey].  And I grew up in Southeastern Massachusetts, New Bedford [Massachusetts].  And that's one of my memories in terms of sounds.  You heard the singing coming, which you knew he was coming, because, he'd say, (singing) "Rags, rags," (laughter).
Speaker 2: Rags (laughter).  The ragman, the iceman, the man who sharpened your knives (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and scissors--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --would come up the street.
Speaker 1: People don't believe those things happened until when you tell them, you know, particularly the big blocks of ice that used to be delivered my grandmother's house for the ice chest.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And the ice pick.  I have--I used to have an old ice pick.  I don't know whether I still do or not.
Speaker 1: Then we had the claws to pick up the ice and move it.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 317650
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the beginning of your school life, your formal school.  What elementary school did you first attend?  Where was it, the name of the school and what you remember about those early years in school?
Speaker 2: I attended Thaddeus Stevens School of Practice in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  It was at 13th [Street] and Spring Garden [Street].  And I started when I was five.  I went to kindergarten there.  It was a school that was what we would call today, a magnet school.  So it attracted children from all over the city.  And there were scattered throughout the school in various grades other African American children who, of course, were not in the majority.  And many of us left our neighborhoods to go to this school, as did I.  That meant that I had to go to school using the bus and the subway.  And that also meant that I did not go to the local school, which meant that I had to often fight my way in the neighborhood, because the other children thought that I thought I was just too cute because I went to school out of the neighborhood.  So consequently, we had those kinds of tensions to deal with.  It was an excellent school, where we had a pretty decent education, because there were children there who came from more privileged families.  And so by going to school with these people who were a little more privileged, that meant that some of that privilege and some of the things that they're exposed to, we were also able to take advantage of that.  My cousin [James DePreist] also went there.  And several of my friends--several people on this island who I grew up with also went there.  We all followed that same pattern.  And it was a school where I learned how to behave with people of different classes; and also how to be a minority in a social situation and an education situation, which was--and also in a situation where one could be discriminated against without you knowing it necessarily.  So when my mother [Jeanette Hughes Grymes] interrogated us when we came home from school every day, she would ask us what we did, you know.  She would--I mean, she would do this very subtly, but she was trying to figure out what was happening there with her little precious children.  And if there was anything that she felt was the least bit awry, she would just make a visit, stop in, make sure things were going okay.  If there was anything I reported that she thought was something I shouldn't do, she would go and inform the teacher that that was not what she wanted me to do, like, erase the boards.  You know, she--when I came home one day and told her that I had erased the board, she interpreted that as the little black child erasing the people's boards, and she was not having that.  So she told me she did not send me to school to erase the boards.  So she went there and made it very clear that I was not to do those kinds of things, which I never did anymore.  But she was very vigilant, which was a good thing.
Speaker 1: Was your sister [Marcia Grymes (ph.)] there with you?  Same time?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My sister went there.
Speaker 1: At the same school, you both there at the same time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  Yes.  We all went there.  So it was interesting.
Story_ID: 317651
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers in the elementary school [Thaddeus Stevens School of Practice, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that you recall as being particularly influential with you at that time?
Speaker 2: There was--the first-grade teacher was very warm, and she was very nice.  The teachers in this school knew our family relationship, because my cousin had gone before me, Jimmy [James DePreist].
Speaker 1: James.
Speaker 2: And so, they knew the family relationships.  So they were, you know, I mean, they were nice to us.  I don't know how they treated other people, but they were very nice to us.  And so, one teacher in particular, who influenced his interest in music and, you know, his interest in percussion, et cetera.  She also--she was always--I did not have her as my teacher, but her sister or somebody was my teacher, and she was always very kind to us.  And my fourth grade teacher, I think, was the most influential, because in the fourth grade when I was nine years old, she was the teacher who, as part of her, I guess her social studies curriculum or her view of social studies, made sure that all of us learned about each other's families and each other's experience.  And so in my class, we had this Chinese boy, whose father owned a restaurant in Chinatown.  And so, we all went to the father's restaurant, we learned about Chinese food; they taught us how to use chopsticks; they taught us all about the food; they taught us how to eat lychee nuts.  I mean, it was just amazing.  And then another little girl, her father was a rabbi.  So we went to the synagogue.  We had our own little private session with the rabbi.  He explained everything about the synagogue, the temple, the Torah, you know.  They had the cantor sing.  It was--and that I thought was so amazing.  Somebody else's father owned some other kind of business.  You know, we just--so it opened a whole, you know, world to us, so, from a life that our peers led.  And that was very influential.  And I remember doing a project on South America, and doing this papier-mache map of South America, learning all the countries.  So I think that she's the one teacher I do remember.
Speaker 1: What was her name, do you remember?  The fourth grade teacher.
Speaker 2: I think her name was Mrs. Voorhees.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: V-O-O-R-E--I mean, V-O-O-R-H-E-E-S, I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In case by chance one of her great-great-great-grandchildren ever sees this (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.  Who knows?
Speaker 2: But you never know.
Speaker 1: They might.  They might very well.
Story_ID: 317652
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you, going through elementary school [Thaddeus Stevens School of Practice, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: I was a good student.  I was good--so, I liked to read, and I was very polite, of course.  And so, you know, I have all of my report cards.  I was a good kid (laughter).
Speaker 1: Going through elementary school, grades four, five, six; how far--how many grades did it go to?  How many grades (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixth.
Speaker 1: Sixth grade.  Did you have any inkling at that point about what you wanted to be when you grew up, career wise or did you have any ideas at that young age?
Speaker 2: Four, five, six [grades]?  Oh, I think that I wanted to--I didn't have much sense of that, I don't think.  And when I was twelve years old, I knew I wanted to be a writer.  I wanted to live by the sea and I wanted to write books.  So that was what I wanted to be when I was twelve.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Before that, I wasn't sure what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We'll take a look at that again when you get through high school [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], see what you're thinking.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 317653
Speaker 1: You went through--went through grade six at the school.  And then, did you move to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We went--moved to a junior high school for grade seven and eight.
Speaker 1: Now, was that a magnet school-type or was it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was the same kind of school.  All the schools I went to were like that.
Speaker 1: Were they?  Well, tell me about the seventh and eighth school level.  What was the name of that?
Speaker 2: This is--it was called Cooke Junior High [Jay Cooke Junior High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  It was way off in West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], much further away than the school, than the school that I had gone to.  And it was much larger.  And, of course, it was a whole different thing, because we had to move from class to class.  And most people who went from Stevens [Thaddeus Stevens School of Practice, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to Cooke were on the route to go from Stevens to Cooke and then to the boys high [Central High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or the girls high school [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And so that was, you know, the route that we all expected to do, and that's what we all did.  And it was in junior high school that I think I became much more interested in writing, because I started writing more.  I think I wrote for--I did think I did write for some junior high school publication.  And so that was when I became more interested in that.
Speaker 1: What stimulated your interest in writing?  Do you recall?
Speaker 2: Well, I think--I mean, I had always liked to read.  And I would, you know, write little poems and stuff.  And my mother [Jeanette Hughes Grymes] liked to write, you know, and she would do some of that.  So I think that was probably it.  I was always a great observer and very curious, so I think that's part of it.
Speaker 1: What stands out, if anything, in your junior or middle school grades?  Any special memories of those two years?  Were you involved in any extracurricular activities at the middle school grades?
Speaker 2: I'm sure I was.  I was--I joined some clubs, a chess club; I was in a chess club, I think, and--'cause I had learned to play chess at home.  And so I was in a chess club.  And I don't really remember much else.  You know, I was trying--too busy trying to figure out this business of being an adolescent.  You know, just trying to cope.  And then my father [Leon Grymes] had just died, and so it was, you know, just--that was a hard--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --that was a hard time for me.
Story_ID: 317654
Speaker 1: Well, let's move from there to high school.  The name of your high school, and where was that located?  It was a girls high [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you told me.
Speaker 2: It was a girls high.
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a few blocks away from where my elementary school [Thaddeus Stevens School of Practice, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was, about four blocks east of where my elementary school was.  And I went there from the ninth to the twelfth grade.  And that was all girls.  And that was a much different environment, because it was a school that had lots of smart children in it.  And so, the first day at the school in my English class, the teacher gave us an assignment.  And when we got our grades back, we had all failed.  And, of course, we all cried and carried on.  We were most dramatic.  And she explained to us how, you know, now that we are all on the same level here, we shall proceed (laughter).  And that was that.
Speaker 1: So what was the subject?
Speaker 2: English.
Speaker 1: Oh, English.  Okay.
Speaker 2: English, you know.  Everybody thought they understood all of that.  But I think she probably gave us the test (unclear) indirect pronouns or something that she knew would trip us up (laughter), or some words that we had never seen before.  But she made sure that everybody failed, which I thought was an interesting way to approach one's education.  But that got our attention, and we all settled down and started to understand that in this environment we had to work hard, which is what we did.  I had great friendships there, friends who've lasted all my life.  And there I played basketball, and I played field hockey, and continued my own personal interest in writing and reading and (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you write for a school newspaper or journal or anything?  Did you have a high school publication that you contributed to?
Speaker 2: I contributed to some high school publication on occasion, but not much.  I did some of that.
Speaker 1: Did you have any part time jobs during the school year or the months or you, during the summer, did you work?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I had started working when I was in college, but not before that.
Speaker 1: Well, how did you spend your summers through high school?  What did you do?
Speaker 2: I spent my summers in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] at home with my family.  And we would vacation in Atlantic City [New Jersey].  We would go there for a couple weeks, and we--a couple weeks.  But for the most part, I was home playing with the other kids on the block, reading books.  I remember I got a good book out of the library that was 1,000 pages, which I read over the whole summer, which was a great challenge, but a book I loved.  And so, we did not have the tradition of, you know, like, going off and spending the summer in Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] like these very lucky children do.  So I was at home with my family.
Story_ID: 317655
Speaker 1: You said you went to camp.  Summer camp, was that during high school [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or junior high years or earlier?
Speaker 2: That was during junior high [Jay Cooke Junior High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Where was the camp?
Speaker 2: It was in Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Overnight?
Speaker 2: Camp Oak Hill [Nottingham, Pennsylvania].  Yes, overnight.  Went for a week or two weeks to camp. I went to camp one or two summers.
Speaker 1: Your sister [Marcia Grymes (ph.)] accompany you?
Speaker 2: We both went to camp together.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers--this is going back to high school--any teachers in high school particularly influential in your high school years that helped you make some decisions about things or whatever?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Not really.  I think the people who were influential in my life were not the teachers.  There were people in the family and outside the family.  There were no teachers who were really--you know, they were all right, but they, you know, they were kind of--they were a bunch of eccentric women who had varying degrees of interests in young girls and their education.  Some of them had had, you know, unhappy lives themselves.  What I remember the most about high school and the teachers is, the English teacher retired and she was an excellent, excellent teacher.  And the day she retired, there was an assembly, you know, where all the students were going to wish her well, you know, make a fuss over her.  She said, "In my next life, I hope to be born rich, dumb, and blond."
Speaker 1: And blind?
Speaker 2: Blond.
Speaker 1: Oh, blond (laughter).
Speaker 2: So.  At which point, we all gasped.  But, you know, here was somebody who thought she obviously missed out.  And so, I gathered that, you know, these were many women who were single and who had spent their lives taking care of themselves in a society where being left behind was not, you know, what it is today; doesn't have as many options.
Speaker 1: Did you feel that you got a good education there?  Were you satisfied and challenged?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I did get a good education there.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: At that point, had you--in your graduation from high school, did you have some ideas about what you wanted to be professionally (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be a psychologist.
Speaker 1: You did at that point?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How had you arrived at that in high school?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be a psychologist because one of my family's closest friends, he was like an uncle to me, he was a psychologist.  And he was a mentor to me.  When my father [Leon Grymes] died, he was one of the people who sort of was there and was a guide.  And his wife and my mother [Jeanette Hughes Grymes] had grown up together in the same house.  And so, he was very much a part of my family.
Speaker 1: His name?
Speaker 2: His name is Robert Gloving [ph.].  And he's still alive actually at ninety-five.  And so, he talked to me a lot about the kind of work that he did and the books that he read.  And, you know, he would tell me and he would share his stories about his patients and things like that.  And so, he thought that I was--would be well suited for that.  And so, I wanted to do what he did.  And he was a generous, perceptive person.  And so, that was my aspiration.  And that's what I went to college intending to do.
Story_ID: 317656
Speaker 1: Before we move on to your college life, in staying with your family life and school life, were there any special--or what did you consider to be the special holidays or traditions that you celebrated with your family at home?  Mother [Jeanette Hughes Grymes], father [Leon Grymes], grandparents, your sister [Marcia Grymes (ph.)]; what were the special times of years that you remember?
Speaker 2: We celebrated everybody's birthday.  So that was sporadic throughout the year.  We celebrated Christmas, Thanksgiving; Valentine's Day, there were presents.  We got flowers for Valentine's Day.  Even as an adult, my mother would send me flowers on Valentine's Day.  Easter Sunday.  So we celebrated all those holidays.  We got new clothes; we had dinner.  My mother and [maternal] grandmother [Grace Anderson Hughes] would have huge family dinners for Thanksgiving or Christmas.  Everybody would come to our house or we would go there--to theirs.  My great-grandmother lived with us for a while when she was, I guess, in her eighties.  She died in her nineties.  So she lived with us for a while, and she always said the grace.  And she could say the grace for fifteen minutes, while everybody stood and listened to her go on and on and on.  And so I remember that.  That was always a moment when were supposed to keep ourselves together, but we would all giggle underneath, you know.  So that was fun.  But, you know, family--my family would have family parties all the time.  There was always a party.  And everybody would come and all the children would be included.  And it was always a lot of--it was fun--
Story_ID: 317657
Speaker 1: Now, was your Aunt Marian, cousin Marian [Marian Anderson] around for these events?  Would she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was usually traveling, but when she came home, there was always a party.
Speaker 1: When she came home?
Speaker 2: When she came home, everybody would go to her house, and we would all be there, you know, the day after she arrived and the day she was due.  Everybody would get dressed.  We were, like, we would be summoned "She's coming."  Phone rings, "She'll be here at X time."  Everybody, get themselves together.  We were taught, you know, told to behave ourselves, of course.  And we would go off and be part of all of that.
Speaker 1: Where did she live?
Speaker 2: She lived in South Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], not too far away from us, on Martin Street?
Speaker 1: Martin Street?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did she live alone?
Speaker 2: She had a--there were two houses together.  She owned one, and her sister owned the one next door.  And, essentially, all of her sisters and her mother [Annie Delilah Rucker Anderson] lived in this house.  And she--that's where she resided when she came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: I see.  But she married eventually.  Right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: She was married?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Who did she marry?
Speaker 2: She married Orpheus Fisher [Orpheus H. Fisher].  She married him in 1943, when she was forty-six years old; someone she'd known since she was a teenager.
Story_ID: 317658
Speaker 1: --Tell me about your family and church, your religious life.  Did you and your sister [Marcia Grymes (ph.)] and parents [Jeanette Hughes Grymes and Leon Grymes] attend church regularly or what church were you affiliated with?  What way was that a part of your life growing up?
Speaker 2: In my family, everybody attended different churches.  My mother went to an Episcopal Church, St. Simon [St. Simon Episcopal Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And that's where we were sent when we were children.  And we went there until I was about nine, ten years old.  Or maybe I was about eleven or something.  I don't remember, somewhere in there.  And I told my mother that it was just too boring, and I just couldn't--didn't feel like sitting through that anymore.  'Cause after a while we stopped going, we would take walks instead of going to church, because it was--we did the same thing all the time.  And my [maternal] grandmother [Grace Anderson Hughes] went to the Catholic Church around the corner.  And every once in a while she would take us there or when they had all the special blessings in the Catholic Church, the day that the priest would bless your throat, she would be sure she took us so we would ward off our winter colds.  So we would do that with her.  And sometimes the priest would come and visit, you know, and sit around and talk.  And he and my grandmother would get into some political conversation.  And so, that could be really lively.  He was--the Catholic priests were, you know, quite down to earth at that point in time, at least as I remember it.  My father went to an A.M.E. Church [African Methodist Episcopal].  My uncle, who also lived in our house, my mother's brother [George Hughes], he went to, I think, a Baptist church.  Everybody did their thing.  My mother went to church sporadically.  Her feeling was that one did not have to go to church every Sunday to be a decent human being, and that it was important to be a decent being, but that was not necessarily the way one became one.  So, she was not very strict about that.  And she was never strict about that.  We all, of course, went to church for any special events or ceremonies that required that.  And so we grew up to be, I think, quite tolerant of people and their differences around that issue.
Story_ID: 317659
Speaker 1: When you graduated from Girls High [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], what did you do that summer between--right after high school graduation, and did you go right on to college [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] the next year?
Speaker 2: I went right on to college in September (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you do in the summer?  Do you recall?
Speaker 2: I tried to find a job, which, of course, was an adventure.  I tried to--I went to several places to find a job, and they would look at me and they would see the school I went to and they would say, "Well, why don't you come back in the fall, because if you're going to college, then we don't want to hire you, because we're looking for people to stay."  So, it was very hard, and nobody would hire me.  Now, partly because I was just a little child, I understand.  But also, they knew that the children who went to those schools usually were going off to college in the fall and would quit.  So I didn't have a job then.  When I went to college during the summer of my--after my freshman and sophomore years, I did have jobs.  And even while I was in college, I had a job, a Saturday afternoon job.  And in the summer I had jobs.  My--the man [Robert Gloving (ph.)] I was close to was who was like the uncle to me, he got me jobs on the playground.  So I worked as an arts and crafts counselor on the city playgrounds [in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] every summer.  So that was an interesting experience.  One summer I did get a job working in the welfare department.  I acted as if I was not returning to college so I could get a job.  And I worked in the welfare department where I had to go visit families.  And that was fascinating to go off and visit these people.  And I remember visiting a woman who was deaf, blind, and she could speak a bit.  And so, in order to communicate with her, I had to write out the letters of the words on her hand.  And as we were doing that, she started talking to me about the black people who were moving into her neighborhood and complaining about that, which I found totally amusing, because she had no idea who I was (laughter).
Speaker 1: She didn't ask?
Speaker 2: She didn't ask.  No.  So that was a job I had.  And then during the school year, I decided I wanted to learn how to play--I think my first year in college I decided I wanted to learn how to play the guitar.  So I was taking guitar lessons.  So I needed to earn money to do that.  So I got a job with a friend of mine who I'd gone to high school with, who was also in the same college.  And we worked at this factory as stock clerks on Saturdays.  We made something like three dollars an hour.  And we worked, you know, putting these cheap goods in these bins and restocking them.  Women who worked in these small neighborhood stores would come and buy, you know, like, lots of blouses and lots of shirts and stuff that they would sell in their neighborhoods.  So I had a job like that.  So those were my very exciting summer jobs.
Story_ID: 317660
Speaker 1: Where did you go to college?
Speaker 2: I went to Temple University in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: And you started there what year--right after high school [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Right after high school.
Speaker 1: Fifty-six [1956] (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about Temple University and what was that experience like.  What did you study there?
Speaker 2: I studied sociology, and I majored in English.  Not in English, I majored in sociology.  I wasn't sure what I wanted to do with all of that, because I started out as a psychology major, but I didn't do well in biology.  So I could not continue that, because I had to make a good grade in biology to be a psychology major.
Speaker 1: You did?
Speaker 2: In that school.  And so I changed to sociology.  And--and that was fine, because it afforded me an opportunity to do the same kind of work in a way, because I went to social work school.   And so I could still do therapy, psychotherapy, which is what I was interested in, by doing it that way.  College was not as hard as high school.  It didn't have the same kind of rigor that the high school had had.  So it was easier in a way.  The instruction was much more interesting, because their professors, as you know, being a professor, the professors are much more diverse in a university.  And since you're meeting all different kinds of people all the time, it made it much more interesting.  I remember having English professors who would just enchant us by reading poetry or reciting Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] and all of that.  And that was sort of an extension of my high school, because in high school we had to memorize plays.  We had line tests, line and scene tests in high school.  And so we had to memorize, you know, 'Macbeth' [William Shakespeare]; and I had to memorize every soliloquy ever written by Mr. Shakespeare.  And so, high school--I mean, high school was rigorous in that way, and college was not hard in that sense.  And what was hard for me, I think, was the social piece of it.  You know, moving from being an eighteen year old to being a grown-up, sort of; you know, that kind of passage which is confusing at best.  And I had come out of a very sheltered family.  And so, here I am and just kind of trying to figure all of that out, which did take me some years way beyond graduation to figure out how one is an adult in the world.  So college was--it was--I can't describe it as a seminal experience for me.  It was not nearly as fascinating as graduate school [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania], the undergraduate life.  You know, I did my work, I lived at home.  If I had been on a college campus, that would have been different.  We had an active social life amongst the friends that I had there.  And, you know, it was--but it was still pretty much tied to the family life.
Story_ID: 317661
Speaker 1: At Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], while you were there, 1956 to '60 [1960] roughly I think, had any of the black studies courses or Africana or African American courses being offered at that point yet at Temple?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?  Not during that time?
Speaker 2: The closest that I ever got to any of that was in my sociology class.  I did this class that was about--I don't know what it was called, but it focused on Africa.  And the man who taught it was an African scholar, and he had studied the Achwabo tribe, and so, had been to Benin and Ife [Nigeria].  And so he introduced a great deal of African history in that class.  But, no--the history of African Americans, I learned very little of that in my education in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]; in the public schools or in my college.
Speaker 1: Right.  Well, I think at that point (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That I got from my family.
Speaker 1: Right.  I think at Temple, that came probably after you graduated.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Temple, I think, was one of the leaders to really start the African American studies programs, and there was some protests there as I remember.
Speaker 2: I think a lot of that happened, you know, well into the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 1: Right.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: After '68 [1968] when people really got into it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well, I was just wondering whether Temple had kind of been out there in front, but I don't think so.
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 317662
Speaker 1: In addition to your studies at Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], were there any other what we call extracurricular activities at the university or in the city that you participated in?  Were you involved in any other kinds of activities beyond your studies at the college or just in the city [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] itself?
Speaker 2: I was in various clubs, and I was still interested in--I was interested mostly in art and music, and I would be involved in things related to that.  I used to play the guitar in a local coffee shop.  And so, I was interested in folk music and learning that, and so I would hang out with people who were doing that.  And so, I was also interested in art.  So I was always going to the museum with friends who were involved in that and being involved in activities and programs at the art museum.  And so, I did those kinds of things.
Story_ID: 317663
Speaker 1: Do you recall whether your high--I'm sorry, during your college [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] years, did you have times with your Aunt Marian [Marian Anderson] at all?  Any, you know, special times with her that you recall?  Well, you're older now, you're in college.
Speaker 2: I was older, I was in college.  When she came home, I could spend more time with her and talk to her and, you know, she would be more interested in me and what I was doing.  When I went to college, she gave me a typewriter.  You know, she asked--called and asked what I wanted, and I told my [maternal] grandmother [Grace Anderson Hughes] "I want a typewriter."  So the typewriter arrived.  So that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's a computer now.
Speaker 2: Yes.  It's a computer now.  Right.  Absolutely.  I kept that typewriter forever.  So, it's--yes.  I got to know her a little more--
Speaker 1: Do you recall--
Speaker 2: --and I went to her house, and we went to--you know, I came to Danbury [Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Do you have any memories of what you two used to talk about at that point?
Speaker 2: In college, I think I would--she asked me what was going on in school, and I would tell her what I as studying, and I'd ask her about her trips.  I think that as I became older and she was older, we had more conversation about things.  I mean, after I had graduated from college and graduate school [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania], I remember I wanted to come--I'd been to California to live for a little while, and I wanted to come back to New York [New York].  And I called her and I was--and I stayed in her apartment in New York, and, you know, as a transition to that.  And when I lived in California, she was doing her farewell tour, and so she came to visit me in California with me and my roommates.  And we all entertained her, and she did the dishes, which she always did, which was great (laughter).  And we all sat around and have those talks, you know; girl talk afternoon, which was fun.  And she took me to dinner at some famous man's Chinese restaurant in San Francisco [California].  We had a twelve-course meal.  I'd never had anything quite sumptuous like that in any Chinese restaurant I had ever been to.  I was just totally amazed.  And so that was a lot of fun.  So as I grew up and became, you know, more of an adult, I had more of a relationship with her.
Speaker 1: Good.  I know, and you just mentioned, that she had a home in Danbury, Connecticut.  When did she move to Danbury or was that a retreat place for her?
Speaker 2: She had a home there, which she built in the 1940s.  That was a retreat for her, yes.  I mean, she didn't begin to live there day in and day out until she retired; 'til well after her retirement.  She had an apartment in New York and a house in Danbury, and then the family house, of course, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Philadelphia.
Speaker 2: So for the most part--well, after she retired, she had the apartment in New York, which eventually she gave up then.  I along with another family friend--I mean, I got the job of helping her move and pack her up and--
Speaker 1: To Danbury?
Speaker 2: Um-hm--which was fun.
Speaker 1: Is that a country house, or--?
Speaker 2: Country house in Danbury.
Story_ID: 317664
Speaker 1: Well, you graduated from Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] with your B.A. degree in sociology.  And what was the next educational venture?
Speaker 2: Then I went to Bryn Mawr [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] right away to study social work.  Bryn Mawr had a very small social work school, so it's very different from Temple, which was a huge university.  And I was in a class with about thirty-eight people studying social work for two years.  And this was, I think, a much more interesting academic experience for me, because it was entirely new, I was learning this discipline.  At the end of it, I knew I could work and earn some money, because my undergraduate degree was not going to enable that.  So I did that with my eyes on the prize, so to speak.  And so, I worked in a family service agency in Delaware County [Pennsylvania], outside of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And that was my first exposure to working with poor white people, which was amazing to me, because I had never been exposed to poor white people in the same way that this allowed.  These were really poor people who lived in very meager circumstances and who had lots of problems, and so--lots of family problems.  And my job, of course, was to help sort through some of that.  And my impression of that--and it's my impression--was I had never in my life seen such cruelty, you know, in the family life; so different from what my experience had been.  And I was very young.  Trust me.  I was very young, very naive.  And I remember seeing this family that came for marriage counseling, and this man looked at me and he said, "How can you help me?  You are so young.  What do you know about this?"  And he was--I mean, I gave him the stock answer, but he was so right (laughter).  So, I had a lot to learn.  It was--the social work school was--and that was the one educational experience that stretched me in a way that no educational experience had.  And, you know, emotionally, academically, I had to understand myself.  I had to conquer myself, you know.  I couldn't have my foolishness get in the way of other people's problems, you now.  It was just--it was amazing.
Speaker 1: Now, where was Bryn Mawr?  It's near Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], is that?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  In Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Did you travel back and forth or did you live in--?
Speaker 2: No.  I traveled back and forth.  I drove there.
Speaker 1: You did?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  As you left--thinking about leaving Bryn Mawr, what did you have your sights set on?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be a psychiatric social worker.  I wanted to work with children, which is what I did.  That was my second year of training.  I worked in a psychiatric hospital that focused on children.  And that was excellent.  I worked here, and my first year they offered me a job, I stayed there for the first year.  And I was going to continue doing that, but I had this friend in California who wrote that her roommate was getting married and would I come out.  And so, she offered me this opportunity to go live in California.  So I went.  And I left my family, and I went there.
Story_ID: 317665
Speaker 1: So when you finished your degree for--in social work [from Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania], what was the next move?  Where did you go?
Speaker 2: When I finished the degree, I stayed for one year in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] working at the child study center, where I had trained.  And that was a great experience, because it helped me consolidate what I had learned.  And then a friend of mine invited me to come out to Berkeley [California] and live with her and her other roommate, because one of her roommates was getting married and they needed a third person to pay the bill, pay the rent.  And I'd always wanted to go to California.  I had wanted to go to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], but we could not afford for me to go 3,000 miles away to school.  So my mother [Jeanette Hughes Grymes] quickly told me that that would not be possible.  So when the chance came to go to California, I took it.  And I gave up the apartment that I had in Philadelphia, said good-bye to all my boyfriends, and went to California with no job.  Those were the days when I had my little Bryn Mawr degree, I could get a job anywhere.  That was a good thing.  And so I managed to get a job at an adoption agency, which was very interesting, because, you know, I learned that everybody gives up their children for adoption.  You know, you could be married, single, old, young, whatever.  And, there--then, of course, there--on the other side of that, there're people who want children and who want them desperately.  And so I worked at that for a year.  And then I went to work for the Urban League, the Bay Area Urban League.  And that was my first experience working with a predominantly black institution.  And so, that was good to have that in the beginning of my career to get some sense of what that was like.  And I was fortunate working there in that one of the local school principals liked me.  And he wanted me to come work with his students, so--and try to, you know, kind of be inspirational to these young people, who mostly stayed in that community and did not have much aspiration beyond that.  And so I had this special program that I was doing for these young people.  So that was a lot of fun.  Plus, being at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] during those days, the heyday of the free speech movement, and so, Berkeley was jumping.  Berkeley was amazing.  And there were tons of protests.  And, you know, we were all out there doing our thing.  And the social life was fabulous.  There were so many young people from all over the country socializing out there.  So we would work hard during the week, and we would party like crazy on the weekends.  And it was great fun.  And that went on for two years when I decided that California was fun, but you know, it was a little too uninspiring, and I needed to be in New York [New York].  And so I returned to New York where I lived ever since.
Story_ID: 317666
Speaker 1: And tell me about the development of your career in New York City [New York, New York].  What was your first kind of major memorable position?
Speaker 2: When I came to New York, of course, I had no job.  And so I interviewed around and I managed to get a job at the Child Study Center [New York University Child Study Center, New York, New York], which was connected with NYU [New York University, New York, New York], and was doing some of the primary research for what became the Head Start program.  And so I worked as a social worker in the special program for preschoolers, for youngsters three to five years old, and provided the social work support for their parents and their families uptown in Harlem [New York, New York] with a group of very adventurous teachers who were excellent preschool teachers.  And, you know, I learned how to navigate Harlem from one of the teachers who was a short, tough, young, Jewish woman, who had grown up in New York.  And she taught me the ropes, how you move through the street, how you deal with the people when they flirt with you and make all kinds of remarks, as you know, catcalls on the street.  And I had to learn how to do things like step over the heroin addicts in the morning when I went to visit families.  I only visited them in the morning, because that's when the heroin addicts were asleep.  So you didn't have to be bothered with them.  And at that point in New York that was an epidemic.  There were drug addicts all over Harlem it seemed, and many, many families--many black families in desperate situations.  So that was intriguing, because we were doing this research project; we were trying to figure out what's important to help children to learn in their early years.  So I did that for a while.
Story_ID: 317667
Speaker 1: --Had some other jobs after that, but essentially, I ended up working at Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America].  I worked at the Planned Parenthood clinic on the suggestion of one of my physicians, who, when I told him I was looking for new a job, suggested that I go there.  And I worked the year that abortions were legal in New York [New York], but illegal in the United States.  And I was the social worker, and we had our offices across from a Catholic Church.  And the church would toll its bells all day long while we did our work, and while we tried to service hundreds of women who had arrived on our doorstep every day.  And people would come from all over the country.  And every morning you would have these people, and we wouldn't know what to expect.  And so there was a twelve year old with her mother from Chicago [Illinois]; a nun who was pregnant, who had had an affair with some priest; all kinds of family drama.  And all of it came to me.  And so, that was a fascinating experience.  Now, my work in adoption helped me understand this whole business of reproductive healthcare and why people become pregnant in the first place.  And so, it all began as careers can, to make sense and fall together.  And so, that work gave me some extra insight.  So I understood a lot of what was happening, and I was able to be much more helpful.  And I was the first social worker doing this work.  So I was kind of laying the groundwork for how people would be treated in this circumstance.  So I worked there for a while.  And I then went to the Department of Mental Health [New York City Department of Mental Health; New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene], because the--I think I worked at Planned Parenthood that year for about a year and a half or so, and it was exhausting work.  We worked all the time, and I was tired.
Story_ID: 317668
Speaker 1: So I went to the Department of Mental Health [New York City Department of Mental Health; New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene] as a senior consultant and evaluated mental health programs and really got back into my primary interest, which was mental health.  And this was mental health policy and providing programs related to that.   And so I learned more about policy and evaluation and moved away from direct care as a result of that, I think after three years.  And then the woman I had worked for at Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America] called me one day and asked me to interview for a job in the national headquarters of Planned Parenthood to run a region of the Planned Parenthood national headquarters [New York, New York].  And so I went for the interview, and I managed to get that job.  And so, I went to work for the national headquarters of Planned Parenthood, where I worked for about eleven years.  And that had to have been the most exciting job I ever had.  And it was particularly exciting, because, you know, we were fighting the battle of reproductive freedom and worked under circumstances that we would never do today.  And when I worked in the clinic, we would get bomb scares and keep working.  One would never do that today.  When I worked in the national headquarters, we would get bomb scares and keep working.  The mail would be opened, and then there would be bricks with all kinds of stuff on them.  And, you know, they were not scanned.  So, we were in the midst--we were in the thick of all the politics around that and all the policy around that, working nationally around those issues.  So that was very exciting.  And I was there when Faye Wattleton [HistoryMaker Alyce Faye Wattleton] was chosen as the president, you know, sort of the group that helped to make that happen.  And after that, after Planned Parenthood (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I guess the Ken Edelin [HistoryMaker Kenneth Carlton Edelin] situation in Boston [Massachusetts] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: --that was before--
Speaker 1: No, no, no.  Ken Edelin was--we were right there with him through that.
Speaker 2: That's (unclear) okay.
Speaker 1: He was the president [sic. board chairman] of Planned Parenthood when I was there.  He is a prince of a man.  I mean, what else can we say about him.  Right?
Speaker 2: He's a HistoryMaker.
Speaker 1: I know, of course.  Of course he's a HistoryMaker.  He was always wonderful and brilliant, and said the right thing and was able to--when he was--I mean, certainly we went through all of this situation with him when that happened.  And then when he joined the board of Planned Parenthood, he was very astute in how to handle the board, how to handle the press.  You know, he was just very adroit with all those people with their vested interests; 'cause, you know, everybody has a vested interested in these voluntary organizations.  And working at the national headquarters for Planned Parenthood will teach you a great deal about how the world works.
Story_ID: 317669
Speaker 1: So that was a highlight, I guess, maybe the highlight of your professional career.
Speaker 2: That was the highlight of my--that was the best.  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I get a--I get a sense, because you moved through four more positions being the regional director, and then you went up as marketing director.
Speaker 2: I had many jobs.  I moved from one job to the other, on to different experiences.  I was very good.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  When you were the director of special projects at Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America], what were some of the special projects that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that was a very interesting project.  That came out of our strategic planning process.  And I think that I had been the director of long-range planning or some--of planning, and then I moved to special projects.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And out of the planning process we decided that we were going to produce, market, and distribute a Planned Parenthood condom.  So I was in charge of that project.  That was my project.  I developed that project from an idea into a product and worked with this Taiwanese manufacturer to manufacture these condoms and the marketing plan, and we distributed them.  And, you know, I was deep into nonprofit marketing.  And that's when I decided, when I asked somebody to come talk to me about the distribution of these condoms, and he asked me a few questions about our market, our audience, the costs, et cetera.  And he jotted down a few little numbers, and he got an answer that was close to the answer that I had deliberated over for several hours.  He got it just like that.  I thought, "There's something I don't know here."  And that's when I went back to school to get an M.B.A.  So that prompted me to do that.  And that was very, very helpful.
Story_ID: 317670
Speaker 1: So you went to hunt for an M.B.A., and where did you study?
Speaker 2: I went to Baruch [Baruch College, New York, New York] and I did an executive M.B.A. program, 'cause I could not leave my job to go to school full time.  So I went to school on Fridays.  I took Friday off, and I went to school on Fridays and all weekend, to be in classes.  And then every night burn the midnight oil studying, writing papers, working with my teams, and handling my job.
Speaker 1: And so you completed this program in what period of time?
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: Two years.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  The two-year program.
Speaker 1: When did you complete--when did you get the M.B.A.?
Speaker 2: I think it's in '86 [1986] or '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Yeah, '84 [1984] I think you said.  And so that specifically gave you--what new skills that you've walked away with?
Speaker 2: It gave me certainly a better understanding of the financial skills, you know, how to deal with reading financial statements; but more than that, the strategic skills, because that's what you learn.  I mean, you learn strategic planning, strategic thinking.  And that was really very helpful, just to think differently about the way you do your work.
Story_ID: 317671
Speaker 1: You stayed with Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America] for about eleven years, roughly.  What was your next appointment (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, after that, I became--I was ambitious, you know.  I thought I should be running something.  And at Planned Parenthood there was no hope of that, because people loved their jobs and never moved.  So you couldn't go to the next level.  So I decided I wanted to try running something.  So I needed to be--I needed to go somewhere where I could be at the second level so I could do that.  So I got a job at the Red Cross [American Red Cross] in New York [New York] running their health services division, which put me at the second level under the CEO.  And after being there for three weeks, I knew I had made a mistake, that I left this wonderful environment to go work at the Red Cross.  So--but, you know, I knew better than to not stick it out.  So I stayed there for five years, because I knew at the end of five years, I would be in their pension plan.  So I stayed there.  I left almost five years to the day.
Speaker 1: What were the initial problems when you first got there?  What was (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's such a different culture.  You know, I had been in this intellectual, policy-driven culture with these smart people in a place where there was high collegiality, where we all understood--you know, we could talk shorthand; we understood what we were supposed to be doing, where the goals were clearly defined.  I went to work, and I worked in a female-oriented environment.  You know, Planned Parenthood has lots of women, and women manage differently from men.  I went to working from that environment to a kind of controlled, compliant--you either did what you were told or people--you know, you would be in trouble.  It was like the [U.S.] military, very regimented; not very sophisticated, very old-styled in many ways, and not very team oriented; very different with a boss who was very--he tried to be autocratic and was a bit of a bully.  Very different from what I was used to.  So I had to adjust, which I did, and I managed to--I'm very good at non--I understand how nonprofits work, and I understand the ambiguity; I know how you work through all of that, so I was okay.
Speaker 1: Well, in addition to realizing your financial situation might be improved through pension, how else did you survive those five years?  I mean, there had to be something else that got you through.
Speaker 2: I had a great staff who worked really hard.  And we would try new things all the time, which I always liked to do.  And so that was fine.  I learned how to manage my boss, so that was good.  I mean, those are all good skills to have.  So he did not give me nearly as much grief as he gave other people.  And so--but I also let him know that I was very well connected in the City of New York, so that if he even thought he was going to give me a hard time, that there might be trouble.  So I let him know that.  That was important to let him know.  So I survived it, you know.  No job is a life sentence.  So (unclear) (laughter).  That's another one of my sayings.  You know, you can manage these things.  Nothing is forever.
Story_ID: 317672
Speaker 1: So in 1993 then, you left the American Red Cross.  And what was the next step?
Speaker 2: I put the word out I was looking for a job, and so one of my friends called me and told me about a job that she wanted me to interview for and--with the City of New York [New York], back to the Department of Mental Health [New York City Department of Mental Health; New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene].  So I went over there and I interviewed for a job as the senior deputy commissioner of mental health.  They were looking for a minority woman.  So since I filled that bill, and I'd worked there before, I had all the credentials, you know.  They selected me.  And so that was interesting to work for city government at that level.  But then, you know, that's very different from being down working with the plebs.
Speaker 1: Though you were at a pretty high level.
Speaker 2: High level, very intense, you know; very highly accountable.  Stressful.  That was stressful.
Speaker 1: How much of your work as deputy commissioner or your staff and your programs reached into and centered into the neighborhood of Harlem [New York, New York], Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center]?  Were you involved in the patients (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We, yes in their mental health services.  Yes.  Absolutely.  Homelessness was a problem when I worked there.  So there were all kinds of homeless programs in that neighborhood and the other neighborhoods too that we monitored.  And the Department of Mental Health is a conduit for the money that the state and feds gives the city for mental health service delivery.  And so it's, you know, mostly a planning body and monitoring funds, and also trying to design where the money goes and who gets it.  So we worked closely with all the hospitals.  We worked closely with the Health and Hospitals Corporation [New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation, New York, New York], and the mental health services.  There's a lot of, as you know, in these governmental jobs, a lot of collaboration amongst all the governmental agencies as they work with a certain sector.
Story_ID: 317673
Speaker 1: Were you moving into retirement at this point, or what was next?
Speaker 2: I was trying to figure out what I was going to do, and so I started teaching.  And I was moving into thinking about retiring, and retiring early; I wanted to retire early.  I wanted to do some things before I was too old and couldn't do anything or didn't feel like doing much of anything.  And so I was preparing to do that.  And so I started teaching.  It's something I can do.  I mean, I can teach.  I'm an adjunct at The New School [The New School for Social Research, New York, New York] in their health policy department, health services management, essentially is what it is.  So I was working a special program there, and when called upon I do teach such courses as ethics and health care, and multiculturalism in healthcare, community health; all kinds of policy.
Speaker 1: So you still have an affiliation with The New School for Social Research (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I still have it. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you started and had your own consulting businesses?   You have (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did start with--yes, I did start my own consulting business.  And I consulted with agencies around a lot of grant writing, 'cause I'm a big writer and I kind of--I understand how to write grants.  And so I did that for several agencies.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of your consulting company?
Speaker 2: Guided Solutions [ph.].
Speaker 1: And do you still do that, too?
Speaker 2: I do a little of that, but not much.  I do less and less and less of that.  I mean, at this point when people would call me and say, "I have this project," I say, "Well, you know, I have to deal with my tomatoes right now."  (Laughter)  I'm on the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts], so.  But in the fall I am going to do a project with a friend around the whole issue of death and dying and hospice care and palliative care, you know; the whole issues around the project for death--the Project on Death in America, kinds of things.
Story_ID: 317674
Speaker 1: I think you've had two significant--at least two significant volunteer activities.  I know when I was talking about you with somebody, they talked about your work at the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York, New York].  And you mentioned to me one time when I was talking with you briefly.  Tell me about your work with the Studio Museum in Harlem.  What has been your work there and your position?
Speaker 2: The Studio Museum is a place where I've been on the board for over twenty years.  And so, I have helped, along with other people, to help build that into a real institution.  It's now almost forty years old.  It's the only accredited African American fine arts museum in the country.
Speaker 1: I didn't know that.
Speaker 2: And it enjoys a, you know, a stellar position in the art world.  And we have worked really hard on that.  I mean, that has been (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What has been your specific contribution or role as a director?
Speaker 2: I have many different--I mean, I've been chair of the development committee and the finance committee.  Over time, I've worked on projects.  Now what I try to do, I have a fundraiser every year here on the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] and raise money in the summertime for the museum.
Speaker 1: I wasn't aware of that.  So you need to let me know when the next one comes; I wasn't aware of that.
Speaker 2: August 14th [2005].
Speaker 1: August 14th?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We put a tent outside.  We have breakfast.  It's called breakfast on the bluffs.  And we raise money for the museum here.  So you must come.
Speaker 1: I didn't know that (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  So, and that's a way of--ours is a national museum.  We see it as a national museum.  And so, it's often in various communities we have these events, so that we can tap into a national audience.
Story_ID: 317675
Speaker 1: I remember being quite pleased, I guess I am every year, when the U.S. Postal Service would start a stamp in honor of some black American.  And, of course, we had a stamp for your aunt, Marian Anderson.  What year was that?
Speaker 2: This year.
Speaker 1: Oh, that was this year?
Speaker 2: Yes.  January.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, that's right too.
Speaker 2: Yes.  We had that.
Speaker 1: Well, you have been associated with awards, and I think you said to me, the legacy of Marian Anderson with James DePreist.  Tell me about your volunteer work over the many years and perpetuating your aunt's work and her career and her accomplishments and what you've been doing.
Speaker 2: Part of being part of the family, I feel very privileged in that I, along with my cousin--and, of course, he's a natural person to do it, since he is her nephew and the executor of her estate--and so, I've been privileged to be the person who has also helped.  And whenever--when she was alive and aging and didn't feel up to it or couldn't go somewhere, when there was an award, she would send me.  And I remember the first time she would call and ask me if I would do that, you know, I was really quite flattered to do it.  And I remember going to the Urban League [Chicago Urban League] in Chicago [Illinois] and accepting an award for her; the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]; to Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] and accepting an award there.  And it was--it's just been amazing, you know, going around the country to conservatories and other places.  The most--I guess, the most famous place I went, let us say, was when I went to the White House [Washington, D.C.] when she was given the Presidential Medal of Arts [National Medal of Arts] along with other people.  And that was a weekend of dinner and lunch and ceremony.  And I had a chance to have lunch at the White House.  I sat at President Reagan's [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] table and with a group of other people who were receiving this award that year.  And that was interesting.  What interested me even more than the president were several things.  That was my first time having a meal at the White House.  My family members, my mother [Jeanette Hughes Grymes] and my [maternal] grandmother [Grace Anderson Hughes] had been to the White House.  They'd all been there several times, because over the years, Aunt Marian had been acknowledged by each president, and often family members would go with her for these things, but this was my first time.  So at lunch I looked up and I was the only black woman in the room.  I did turn and there was one black man who came through the door, and he happened to be a friend of mine, Donald Stewart, and so I was happy to see him; he greeted me.  So he was the only friend I had in the room.  When the president and the first lady [Nancy Reagan] arrived, everybody stood up as they played 'Hail to the Chief,' and then I turned around, looked over my shoulder and we were flanked--the room was flanked by the waiters, who were all black men.
Story_ID: 317676
Speaker 1: So when I looked over my shoulder and I saw all these black men, I knew that I was the safest woman in the room.  And, of course, when they served us, they were very solicitous to me.  So that was lovely.  The other experience that I had that--one of the other ones I had was, once I went to some party, some dedication of a building in New York [New York] and I was seated at the table next to one of Eleanor Roosevelt's grandchildren, her granddaughter.  And so we were chatting away and I said to her, "You know, your grandmother was a heroine in our house."  And she looked at me and she said, "Marian Anderson was the heroine in ours."  So that was a very poignant moment.  In recent years, especially since Marian's death, the City of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], every year for the most part, has a special award that give, $100,000; a humanitarian award they give each year.  It's the Marian Anderson Award.  And I've worked with them from the beginning on this project.  And the first year they--I mean, they've honored [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover, Elizabeth Taylor, Gregory Peck, [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones, Oprah Winfrey; and this year, [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee and [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis posthumously.  And so, this is a huge event in Philadelphia, the hot ticket; big concert at the Kimmel Center [Kimmel Center for the Performing Arts, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  You know, one year we had Stevie Wonder.  You know, that was just amazing, and Quincy Jones.  It was just all amazing.  So I worked behind the scenes with that to make sure that that's done well, because it's very important when you're doing what I call legacy work, that people do work and produce these benefits, et cetera, in a way that does not detract from Aunt Marian and her legacy.  And so we watch over these things very carefully.  There are all kinds of projects all over the country, and all kinds of institutions that bear her name.  And for much of that permission is given, and my cousin [James DePreist] is the one, is the one who gives the permission.  And we work--we have worked very closely with the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] on her archives, which--that has been a project we've done since 1977.  And so, that's a long-standing project.  And finally, you know, we have this fabulous archives, fabulous study center.  And the University of Pennsylvania has been wonderful.  So that's--I mean, those are the kinds of things that we do as the legacy work.
Story_ID: 317677
Speaker 1: I'm sure that part of the legacy work, which you've been involved in most recently, is the issuance of the U.S. Postal [U.S. Postal Service] stamp in honoring your aunt Marian Anderson.  Tell me about your role in helping that to happen.  You know, that stamp coming out, were you involved in that?
Speaker 2: Well, initially, when she died, you know, we all thought, "Well, of course, we need a stamp."  Now, the United States government does not issue a stamp for anyone until they've been dead at least ten years.  So you have to get your ducks in a row early.  And the request for the stamp, I think, initially came through the Connecticut Senator Christopher Dodd [Chris Dodd], because she lived in Connecticut.  And there were people in Connecticut who were close to the family who, you know, made that request.  And then I have a cousin who works for [HistoryMaker] Chaka Fattah, an Anderson cousin.  And he's the assemblyman from--the congressman from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And so, he was on the case.  So, and we've monitored this business of the stamp to be sure that the stamp, our stamp, has stayed, you know, as part of the pipeline.  And so, we knew last year that we would have a stamp this year.  So you know ahead of time.  And I was not directly involved in the choice of the stamp, because the Postal Service chooses the stamp.  They ask to look at various images.  You can download four thousand images from the University of Pennsylvania's [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] archive, photographs of the family and Aunt Marian's life and career.  And so they chose the stamp.  And once that was chosen and once there was a ceremony, and once there was a date for commemorating the event, then I helped in terms of who was there and what they were doing and, you know, the logistics.  So--
Speaker 1: Where was the unveiling of the stamp?
Speaker 2: In D.C. [Washington, D.C.] at the--at Constitution Hall [DAR Constitution Hall], hosted by the Daughters of the American Revolution [DAR].  And they took that opportunity to essentially apologize for the way they had behaved in 1939.  So that was a very important historical moment, for them, primarily.
Story_ID: 317678
Speaker 1: We have some wrap-up questions now.  And I want to ask you, is there anything else you would like to add to this interview that I have not asked you about?
Speaker 2: I think that the other important aspect of my life is, that I have six godchildren who are very important to me, and to whom I am quite important, I must say.  And I was telling one of them yesterday about this interview.  And I said, "I don't quite know what to say about all of you."  And she said to me, "Just say that you are the village."  And I thought that was very important to say because I think that as the old saying goes, "For those of us who've been given much, much is expected."  And our children are so important to us, and I've been fortunate enough to be able to help nurture these kids and see them grow up to be responsible adults and be involved with some of their children.  And I think that that's been really an important part of my life.  It's given me a lot of pleasure.  And, in a way, I learned that from the example of the women in my family, who also helped to nurture me; all my aunts, Aunt Marian [Marian Anderson], her sisters, and other families who were always around, you know, when I needed something.  And so I've tried to do that, and I think that that's something that's very important for us to keep in mind as black people that we do have a responsibility to our community and particularly to our children.
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way that you have lived your life?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm quite satisfied with what I've done, and I just wish I had a lot of money.  If I'd had some money, that would have been even better.  I mean, I would take it now.  But, you know, money isn't everything.  This last year, I went to India in the winter.  You know, I do the typical--I'm learning to do the typical Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] thing; and that is, you stay here all summer; you work hard, do whatever; and then in the winter, you take a vacation someplace exotic.  So I'm trying to keep up with you and others who manage to do that.  And I went to India, and I met this wonderful woman there who's been to this country.  And she said, "There's a lot of emphasis on materialism and consumerism in your country; the important thing to try to have in your life is a sense of joy," which is something that she could not discern as she moved around this nation.  And so I think that that was important to hear, that there is more to life than money, although we can always use some extra.  I think, too, that I would like to, of course, travel more.  I'd like to write more.  I've written one book called 'Coping with the Male Ego in the Workplace' [Sandra Grymes and Mary Stanton], after having worked with these men who feel they must control everything.  A friend [Mary Stanton] and I wrote a book about how women can manage through some of that process, how to succeed in those environments.  But I would like to write more.  I would like to travel and probably do some books about various parts of the world, especially these emerging countries that--where we have stereotypical and narrow notions about them, and where--there's a lot of vibrancy in ways that this country has lost.  We're at a different place, of course, but we could certainly learn from them, too.
Story_ID: 317679
Speaker 1: You had a very important trip when you were with Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America].  You went to China.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that trip to China when you were working with Planned Parenthood.
Speaker 2: I went to China in 1977, before the Americans had normalized relationships with China.  And I went with a group of family planning policy people; physicians, other clinicians.  And I think there may have been about twenty of us on this trip.  And we visited hospitals. You know, we saw clinics--I saw a baby being born, a C-section being done under acupuncture anesthesia.  I stood right over that woman's abdomen, watched the baby come out.  I could probably touch the baby.  I was, like, totally thrilled by that.  And we went to schools, and we talked to people about healthcare and the health delivery system, which is very different from ours, where everybody knows what your health status is, and everybody participates, at least at that point, and where privacy, which we--you know, we hold so closely and dearly to our privacy, which, we know are fast losing.  Privacy was not the issue there.  Getting the health care to you was.  So it was a very different experience.  It was a fascinating, fascinating country; and we ate fabulous food, ate things I had never eaten before.  Met people.  I would talk down the street, people would circle me.  I, of course, was the only black person in the group.  And there were very few blacks around, of any stripe.  There were some Africans, but very--I didn't see any other black Americans.  There were very few Americans, a handful of Americans.  So we were a curiosity.  And that was--it was just an amazing place.  We went to small towns and villages, and rural areas and big cities.  The other interesting thing was, of course, it was a communist country.  We were there in September when they celebrate their founding of their--of the People's Republic of China, at that point.  So we were there for the big parade through the streets, thousands, millions of people.  At that point, most people lived at the same level.  So it's interesting to see a society where the majority of people lived at the same economic level.  They were not rich, they did not have a lot of things.  They had a very contained--every region was self-sufficient in energy and electricity and things like that.  It was an eye-opening experience, to say the least.
Story_ID: 317680
Speaker 1: What other places in the world would you like to travel to that you haven't been to?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, you know I must go to South Africa to see my South African friends.  I haven't been there yet, and I get invited every year, so I must go soon.  So I'm going to do that.  And I would love to go to South America.  I've only been to Brazil.  But I would love to go there and stay, like, a whole winter in some South American country so I can learn Spanish well.  So that's another place I would like to go.  And, of course, you know, back to one's favorite spots, like, Paris [France] and Tokyo [Japan].  Those are the places that are on my list before I give up traveling in the great beyond.  And I also want to go back to India.  I thought India was just the most intriguing place I'd seen in a long time.
Speaker 1: Is there anything you've done already that you think you would have liked to have done differently?  Any regrets on anything?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think I would have liked to have traveled more than I did.  Although I traveled a lot, there are periods when I didn't.  I would love to have lived and worked in another country for a period of time.  Not as a Peace Corps worker but, you know, as a, you know, somebody in the economy of that country; I would loved to have done that.  And, you know, there may be an opportunity to do some of that.  But that's something that I would like to have done.  And I wished that I had written a shelf-length of books, you know.  I would like to have done that.
Speaker 1: You have a lot of work ahead of you (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 317681
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community today and the future?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a timely question, since we all have concerns and hopes.  I think that I was socialized by a family, most of whom were born at the end of the nineteenth century.  And so, in a way, I feel I've seen--lived through all of the 20th century through them.  And so when you look back on our experience over that timeframe, you can see that we have come a long way, to say the least.  But we also have a long way to go.  And what one would hope for African Americans in this country, particularly as our numbers diminish, and as our potency as a group appears to also decline, one would hope that we would have some strong leadership emerge that would help us to refocus on those things that are important, and that we begin to figure out ways to educate our children so that they are productive, and to figure out ways to intervene in a society that, in many ways, erodes our self-confidence and destroys us.
Story_ID: 317682
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?  What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: When I die, I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or before.
Speaker 2: Before (laughter).
Speaker 1: It doesn't have to be death yet, but as you continue in life.
Speaker 2: I know.  Usually they have kind words to once you die.
Speaker 1: I know.
Speaker 2: I mean, having written many a eulogy for my family, et cetera, I always have kind words to say about them when they die.  I may not have had such kind words when they were alive.  But I would like for them to--I would like to be remembered for being a decent human being and to being generous, with some faults, of course.  And having realized some of my own aspirations, I mean, I was greatly influenced by Aunt Marian [Marian Anderson] and her forays into the world.  And for me, personally, she presented a model of somebody whose life could have infinite possibilities.  And so I would like to feel that I--I would like for it to be evident that I tried to always expand my horizons; and that I stayed open to the world; and that I tried to approach life with an open heart; and that eventually, you know, once I got over all the agita of growing up and being an adult, that I settled into a reasonable human being.
Story_ID: 317683
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of me when I was a little girl.  I am probably between a year and eighteen months old here, because obviously I can walk.
Speaker 2: And this was taken on the front steps of the house where we lived at 18th [Street] and Wharton [Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Next, please.
Speaker 2: This is the photograph of me when I was graduating from high school [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: The year?
Speaker 2: This is my graduation from high school in 1956.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of my mother in her early twenties.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my uncle, my mother's brother, in his early twenties.
Speaker 2: His name?
Speaker 1: His name is George Hughes.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of my father, Leon Grymes, taken in 19--about 1945.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my mother and sister in 1995.
Speaker 2: This photograph was taken in the 1970s on the occasion of my cousin [James DePreist] receiving an honorary degree from the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And in it is Marian Anderson; Grace Hughes [Grace Anderson Hughes], her cousin, my [maternal] grandmother; my mother Jeanette Grymes [Jeanette Hughes Grymes], and myself.
Speaker 1: In this photograph, the occasion is the wedding of my mother to my stepfather.  And flanking them are my grandmother, Grace Hughes, my mother's mother; Reuben Brooks [ph.], my stepfather; my mother, Jeanette Grymes Brooks; and Reuben's mother.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: And this is my favorite photograph of my cousin James DePreist, the conductor.  This is at an award ceremony in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for Aunt Marian, given by the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America].  I was the speaker, and I am on the left wearing one of Aunt Marian's hats.  And in the middle is my cousin, the niece of my grandmother, who is on the right.
Speaker 2: In this photograph, I am pictured with two of my six godchildren; Yvonne Hopkins [ph.] and Ann Simmons [ph.].
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of a Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America]--typical Planned Parenthood scene, where I am talking with a patient.
Speaker 2: This is on the occasion of one of the Marian Anderson Award ceremonies.  In this picture, from left to right: Jonathan Demme, the filmmaker, and his wife; I am in the center; on the right is Midge Rendell [Marjorie Rendell] and her husband Ed Rendell, who was then the mayor of Philadelphia, who is now the governor of Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: In this photograph, I am speaking to a crowd of people on the street at a Marian Anderson Award event the first year when we honored [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte.
Speaker 2: This is an interview with the reporter at a Marian Anderson Award event in Philadelphia.  This picture was taken at the Philadelphia Museum of Art [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] the evening we honored Elizabeth Taylor, and I am wearing one of Aunt Marian's performance dresses.
Speaker 1: This is my grandmother with another union official, honoring A. Philip Randolph, who's in the center.  So the union official, my grandmother Grace Anderson Hughes; A. Philip Randolph; and John Sommers [ph.], who was my grandmother's friend and who was like a grandfather to me.  I didn't bring the one with (unclear).  I have it somewhere.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of my grandmother at a union event.  She was active in the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union.  And these women had been invited by Eleanor Roosevelt to a union event for women.
Speaker 1: During the 1980s, the United States government gave Aunt Marian the Presidential Medal of Arts [National Medal of Arts], and this was an occasion where she sent me to pick up the award.  And so, this is a photograph of me receiving her award from President Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan].
Speaker 2: This photograph was taken in 2003 at a Marian Anderson Award event.  On the left is my sister Marcia Grymes [ph.]; in the middle, Oprah Winfrey, who was the award recipient; and I am on the right wearing Marian Anderson's earrings.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  This is a photograph of Robert Williams, my great-great-great-grandfather [sic. great-grandfather].  He was my great--my maternal great-grandmother's father.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 2: This is an example of a family party, the typical party that we would go to whenever Aunt Marian came home [to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  In this photograph, I'm pictured in front of the cake; one of my cousins is behind me; James DePreist is next to Aunt Marian; her sister is next to her; her mother is standing forward; the shorter woman is her mother Anna Anderson [Annie Delilah Rucker Anderson]; my mother is on the right behind her, Jeanette Grymes.
