Story_ID: 72372
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Paul Goodnight, spelled P-A-U-L, G-O-O-D-N-I-G-H-T.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Chicago, Illinois.  The date of birth is December 31, 1946.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an artist.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 14th of April, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're in my little bungalow.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well-
Speaker 2: On 791 Tremont Street, Boston, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: This is the place they call the-
Speaker 2: The hole, the pit. (Laughter).
Speaker 1: No, the building they call the Piano Factory.
Speaker 2: Oh, the Piano Factory.  This place here is, this is the black key of the Piano Factory.  (Laughter).
Story_ID: 72373
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, before we get into depth, there are five People-magazine-ish type questions I'm compelled to ask you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They are, they just require a short answer.  Now, the first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, Lord, have mercy.  I believe... I'm really prone to fish.  But it has to be Brazilian fish, some of the, that kind of stuff.  I like... I like fish, and I like chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: No.  I'm a rainbow kind of person.  I have, I have special colors.  I like, I like turquoise.  Turquoise, and I like the hot oranges, or the hot pinks and stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yeah, hot.  (Laughter).  I like, I like the spring and I like the fall.  I like the fall, because of the colors.  And I like the spring because of the bloom.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have a few.  But I'm finding that... Brazil is what I used to go to on a regular basis by year.  So, I like, I like Brazil.  But I also like... in the United States, it would probably be... I like Denver and I like Washington and the Atlantic, and anyplace by the Coast.  I'm just, I just found a love for Charleston, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No, I really don't.  I guess you'd have to ask somebody else, and they would tell you, you know, that I...  I don't think so.
Story_ID: 72374
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, I want to ask you about your family history.  How far back can you trace your family?
Speaker 2: That's an interesting question.  Because we're just--my biological family, we are just...  Am I leaning forward too much?  Tell me.
Speaker 1: All right, keep talking.
Speaker 2: Okay, thank you... yeah, I just remembered.  I've just re-acquainted myself with my biological family.  And we now are in the process of developing a history, a biological history.  So, this has been in the last five, six months.  I'm a foster child, and I--usually I equate myself with that family.  And that's, that's how I usually... that's how I've grown up.  I've grown up under the... there's seven boys and two girls.  I'm the... and that's, that became my family.  So, we're a family of mutts under Mr. and Mrs. Lockett.
Story_ID: 72375
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell me what you do know about your--I don't know if you want to talk about your biological family or your... and your foster family.
Speaker 2: My biological family... my mother... we're...
Speaker 1: What's her, can you give us her full name and spell it for us?  That's how we generally do it.
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Marjorie... her maiden name?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah--maiden name, and her married name, as well as her first name. Her... she was married I think about three or four times. (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, give us the name that she's known by the most, I guess, or-
Speaker 1: Marjorie Brown was her last known name, Marjorie J. Brown.  Her maiden name is Marjorie Johnson.  But we come from the McKnights.  That is the--our biological, large family name, out of South Carolina.  And I think it's somewhere in Ferbane, South Carolina--one of those small towns in South Carolina that is no longer--it's no longer there, and now has become something completely different.
Speaker 2: Now, when was she born?  Do you know?
Speaker 1: She was born in 1903 or 1905, one of five children under Mary McKnight.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And her husband's name was James McKnight.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So, her grandparents are the McKnights?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.  And well, tell me a little about her, you know.  What was she like, and what did she do... as much as you know?
Speaker 1: It's funny, because I know more about my mother... by people, by my biological family.  My mother was a social worker by trade.  But she was pretty much a, a pretty active woman.
Speaker 2: Hold on.
Story_ID: 72376
Speaker 1: Okay. Marjorie Johnson is what the family--there are five family members.  She was a social worker; she went to Howard University [Washington D.C.].  But all of my grandmother's children went to Howard.
Speaker 2: So, this is your biological mother?
Speaker 1: This is my biological mother.  She... her mother [Mary McKnight] made sure that all of her children were supposed to be exactly what they wanted them to be.  She wanted one to be a doctor, one to be an undertaker, one to be a preacher, one to be a social worker, the other one to be a nurse or a teacher.  My mother was supposed to be the social worker, and she came out of Howard University as a social worker.  She was very active.  She lived in Chicago [Illinois], Detroit [Michigan]; she moved around.  She married Mr. Goodnight, and he was a, owned a couple of nightclubs.  And she liked that kind of life.
Speaker 2: Now, what's, what's his full name?  That's your father's name?  Or is that your father, or is this-
Speaker 1: Well, Curtis Goodnight.  That's (Laughter)... that's speculation.  Curtis Goodnight is supposed to be my father.  We found out later that he wasn't; that Curtis--one of Curtis's best friends is supposed...  His name was supposed to be Glen.  I think his name is James Glen or something like--Bland, Bland, out of Cleveland, Ohio.  So, I'm supposed to be the product of that.  But nobody tells you that, you know.  That's one of them hush-hush things
Speaker 2: Did you know much about James Bland at all?
Speaker 1: I know nothing about him, and that's the way that it is supposed to be.  They... I wasn't supposed to know.  I mean, Mr. Goodnight was my father, and that's who I'm supposed to be; I'm supposed to be a Goodnight.  And I kept the name, and I appreciate it.  But I wasn't raised by my biological mother or father.  So, to have a real complete history of them, I'm still finding out.  I know that she was very, very supportive of me all the time.  I know that she was a high-fashion lady.  I know that she was a good social worker, and I know that she was a strong member in holding the family--her biological family, her brothers and sisters--together.  I also know that she was pretty much of a renegade, too.  So, but I didn't live with her for very long periods of time.  So, that's about as much as I can really tell you about her.
Story_ID: 72377
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us about your foster family.  And how did they, how did you come to live with them?
Speaker 2: I was with a few foster families.  There's Mary Clark here in Boston [Massachusetts], when I was a little toddler, I stayed with.  And she was, she was more of an--I can always remember her, because she was very, very loving.  And then my aunt, who was Mae Gadpile, who was pretty much an overseer.  She pretty much made sure whatever I did, or wherever I went, she took care of me.  But I think I locked into a family...  I might have been still about nine, ten years old.  And I met up with this Lockett family, and they put me in...  Actually, my mother made sure that these foster families were really good foster families.  It was, it was Lockett.  It was the Lockett--James and Essie Lockett was really where I got all my morals, all my principles, all my ethics, all my troubles--(Laughter) everything that really was important to me.  The foundation of my life were those two people.  And James Lockett was--the man came out of Alabama--a big giant man, a coalminer.  And he played the guitar and drank a lot of liquor.  And Essie Lockett was just a hardworking woman, all the time.  Ran a brothel house, kept a gun, kept a guard, kept the cards... strong, strong, tiny little dark-skinned lady.  They decided that they were going to have children and move North.  Because at that time, everything was paved with gold up here.  And they moved North, and they got into the adoption business.  And they started adopting children who were basically hard to deal with.  They didn't...  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Now, where were you raised?  Were you raised here in Boston or-
Speaker 2: I was raised in Boston [Massachusetts] and in Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where was your mother originally from?
Speaker 2: My mother was originally from Ellington, Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she moved everywhere.  But I... she... her mother moved from down south to Ellington, Connecticut, and that's where they were raised.  They were the only black family in that small town.  And they got, they had to walk in lockstep.  They used to tell us stories...  I'm still learning stories about what they went through.  But my grandmother, who was very forceful, made sure that if anybody messed with her children or her husband, they had to deal with her. (Laughter).  So, she was an interesting character.  Essie... where I was... Essie and James Lockett decided that the only kind of people they wanted to deal with--the only children that they wanted to deal with--was problem children.  She said she didn't want no good kids, she didn't trust them.  She wanted people that she could trust.  And she said if you're a problem, she can trust that you're a problem, and she can make it work; she can work it out.  From that point on, we had a family.  We had a family of--there was Rush, Richard, Roland, George, Gloria, and Agnes, and some... and myself.  And there was a couple of others that came and went.  But there was... there was a group of us that was just nuisances.  (Laughter).  We didn't know how bad we were, because we were all bad.  But we were all nuisances.  And we had a family reunion not too long ago, and it was probably about one hundred twenty-five of us.  Just... and that's really the family that I bonded with.  The Goodnight family still identifies with me.  And my biological family from the Johnson side, still I identify with to a degree where, you know, it's comfortable.  I grew up with my brother, Carl, Carl Goodnight.  When I was little, he and I grew up together.
Speaker 1: Now, he's your biological-
Speaker 2: He's my biological brother.  He is... and Mr. Goodnight had maybe about... I think he had about six other children.
Speaker 1: Were they with your mother?
Speaker 2: No.  No, he was--you know, he was--he was a "good night" and he was gone.  (Laughter).  Yeah, but he was--I understand that he was a very, very intelligent man.  He was a math whiz, and he'd do everything in his head.  He was exceptionally smart.  And I think Carl, my brother, that's... he has that same kind of business sense.  You know, everything is--he's quite a mathematician, a clinical person.  So, he and I were completely opposite.  But I loved him, because he... I looked up to him.  But in terms of... in terms of where we went... our occupations...  He went in one direction, and I went in the other.  I was more of the artistic, athletic kind of person.  He was more of the study kind of person, he was really studious.  And he was the 'A' person and I was the other.
Story_ID: 72378
Speaker 1: Okay.  Give me some sense of what it was like to grow up.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: In Boston -Massachusetts]?  In Connecticut?  Where?
Speaker 1: Both, if you grew up in both. (Laughter).  Tell us the first place, and tell us what it looked like and what it was like, and take us to the next one.
Speaker 2: I can remember the winters in Boston [Massachusetts].  I think that's because they were really severe.  They were way over my head.  I grew up not only in the projects, but I grew up in houses--you know, different developed--well developed houses--three story houses, and sometimes even townhouses.  But most of my life was in the [housing] projects.  And I can remember people knocking on the doors, and beating on the walls, and that kind of stuff.  But we did the exact same thing.  The projects weren't really bad, bad, projects, but they were projects.  And we understood that that project mentality--I mean, you know, the cheese and the welfare kind of things that you got.  And whatever you got from the state, you got from the state.  It was, to me, I enjoyed the projects, because there was always something going on--good, no good--whatever it was, there was always... seemed like there was a nice atmosphere of activity.  And that, to me--with the nervous energy that I had, always worked.  That's what I clearly remember.  I always remember sleeping with two or three different people.  Like, I would sleep with my brother, Rush.  And I would sleep with sometimes Richard.  We were all around the same age.  So, having one bed from time to time was a, you know, sort of a luxury, but it wasn't that big a luxury.  We never thought that we were poor, even though we wore each other's clothes, and that kind of stuff.  But I think it was the love that was in that house that kept us not dwelling on anything that we hadn't... we didn't even realize how much we moved.  We moved quite a bit.  But that was never our problem.  We just thought that that was routine--move from here... and move from the projects to a house... and a house to a... back to the projects.  It was normal.
Story_ID: 72379
Speaker 1: Now tell me, how old were you when you went to live with the Locketts?
Speaker 2: I would think I was about nine years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was-
Speaker 1: You spent a lot of time not in that kind of...  I don't know... in an environment that was not as good as that, I guess?
Speaker 2: I lived in a couple of...  They put me in a boarding school at one time.  And I can't--I know that I remember that area, but it's not real clear.  I think there was something maybe that I just decided not to remember.  I remember being with the Clarks, because they were very, very loving.  And there was, they had four children.  And I kind of liked living with a large family.  That was here in Boston [Massachusetts]... Mary Clark, I'll never forget her.  And I think she's still alive today; she's in an old folks' home.  That's, that's about as much as I can really remember.  I remember incidences, but nothing real, real, clear.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when you were nine, you went to live with the-
Speaker 2: That's when life began.  Yes, the Wonder bread was wonderful. (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So well, so, there were seven children, at least most of the time?  I mean, there were some that came and went, you said?
Speaker 2: No.  We, we grew up... we pretty much grew up together.  We, we're not that far in age.  I think Roland... I'm fifty-seven.  Roland is, just turned fifty.  Rush, Richard and myself were all pretty much the same age.  Gloria and Aggie probably are about two years older than us.  George is about two years--two or three years older than me.  That... yeah, we were all in the same cluster.  So, we all kind of grew up under... you know, borrowing each other's clothes and, you know, getting in each other's way (Laughter) for the most part.  But now, we are--I mean, you didn't like one [on] one day, and you know, you favor one the next day; you fight with one [on] one day, and you...  There was always that kind of stuff.  But we, you know, there's always something going on.  And I like the idea now that we were--we were jostling for each other's--for Grandma's attention, and Mr. and Mrs. Lockett's attention, because she was very loving, and he was very, very, disciplined.  In fact, he was one of the first black policeman that we knew of in New London, Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was a police officer?
Speaker 2: Oh, he was a very stern man.  He was, he was, he was an interesting study, because he was fairly illiterate.  He couldn't read, he couldn't write.  He was very, very--but he was very clear, and he worked hard.  He would beat you... we got beatings.  I mean, if he said he was going to do something, he'd do it.  If he said he wasn't going to do nothing...  He was the clearest man that I have ever known in my life.  I mean, we have a perfect example of a man who never hit his wife, never raised his voice to his wife.  I'm sure they had disagreements, but he was the kind of guy who was clear.  And clarity was what we really needed at the time.  Whatever was happening, whatever he said he was going to do, he did.  And we loved him for it.  I didn't... we didn't like him, because he was so firm.  But we learned to love him later.  Now, you like Grandma, because she was hugging and kissing.  You couldn't hug and kiss Big Jim.  (Laughter).
Story_ID: 72380
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell me about school.  What school did you attend?  Or what schools did you attend in like--well, tell me about grade school first, you know.
Speaker 2: Grade school, I was in Norwood, Connecticut.  I remember that.  That year...  Boy, are you bringing me back.  Isn't it funny how you just blank on things that you really don't...  I think for the most part, I remember going to one Catholic school, and rebelled... and did not like that.  Came back and went to a couple of other schools.  I went to Buckley Junior High... and there must have been another school that I went to in between.  I'm, I'm really at a place of where--you know, I don't want to talk about it, or, I am just truly blanking on it.  Buckley, I think, is where... I was not a good student at all, to tell you the absolute truth.  I was more of a trouble child.  At St. Mary's, I know I got kicked out of there.  I went to another school in Groton, Connecticut and got kicked out there.  And I went then to another school, and they said, "This boy is just bad."  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Give me an example of the kind of thing you'd do to get kicked out of school.
Speaker 2: I wouldn't go to school; fight; steal; whatever I could do to get everybody angry at me.  I tried, I had a good time with that.  I just heard from a guy that told me--I was down in... I'd just come back from... where was I?  Oh, Little Rock, Arkansas, and I ran into him.  And he told me that I had... he asked me if I remember beating him up in the boys' room for twenty-five cents?  I said, "Get out of here."  (Laughter).  He said, "You don't remember that?"  I said, "Man, no, I beat up a lot of people.  But not for twenty-five cents."  (Laughter).  You had to have a dollar or something."  He said, "Really?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "No, you got me for twenty-five cents."  So, that was the kind of guy I was.  I was, I just had energy, nervous energy.  I was never a focused kind of child.  I think in high school... I think I started to focus, because I liked sports, and I wanted to play sports.  And the only time... football... I liked running track, that kind of thing.  And in order to stay on, obviously to stay on the team, you had to have your grades up.  So, most of the time, I just never considered myself a literate person, because I didn't concentrate.  But when I knew I was concentrating was when I really wanted to stay on a certain team, and all my grades would go up.  And soon as the football season was over, my grades would go back down to where they were before.
Story_ID: 72381
Speaker 1: Now, did you, when did you start discovering that you had a talent for art?
Speaker 2: I think I always had a talent for art.  I think that that's one of the things that--art chooses you; you just recognize it at one point or another.  I remember being sent up to my room, and I didn't mind being sent up to my room, because that was an excuse to go and draw, and I used to draw like crazy.  I, I always--I remember a guy, Butch Milliner, he used to be an artist in high school, and he would get all of the girls.  And I said, "Well, I can do that."  So, I would get all--you know, I would draw, but I was an ugly little critter (laughter).  And so, it didn't work for me.  The other time I knew that I had a talent is when I was in high school and I would draw these, like, nudes in English class for maybe about a quarter, because I wanted lunch money.  And instead of carrying a bag lunch, I would go ahead and do a quarter--I mean, fifty cents was like a couple.  And for an orgy, it was like a dollar something, you know.  And I'd have a great time doing that.  And I, I remember getting caught by Miss Pijeski, my English teacher.  She said, "Mr. Goodnight?"  I said, "Yes, Miss Pijeski."  She said, "Do you mind showing the rest of the class what you're doing?"  Because she was peeking over my shoulder.  I said, "Oh no, Miss Pijeski."  She said, "Oh, I think you are.  Bring your, come bring your paper up to the front of the class, and show the class what you've done."  And I started walking up to the front of the class, and eating that paper.  They were not going to see it.  She sent me down to the principal's office and told me that--told the principal that I had been drawing pornographic material.  Well, obviously, I wasn't a very good English student, because I didn't know what the word pornographic meant.  So, I thought that she said I was drawing phonographs (laughter).  She said, "You were drawing," and she said--they said, "Mr. Goodnight, I understand that you were drawing pornographic material up in the English class."  I said, "No, I ain't drawing no phonograph."  They said, "Well, take this home and tell Mrs. Lockett about the pornographic material you've been drawing."  I said, "Shoot, that ain't no problem."  And so she asked me, she said, "What are you doing home?"  I said, "They got me home here because I was drawing some phonographs."  She said, "What?  They told you to go home for drawing phonographs?"  I said, "Yeah."  And she said, "Well, let me find out about this."  Now, she's on my side, (laughter) on the way up.  Coming home, Daddy Lockett tore me up (laughter).
Speaker 1: We're going to change tapes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 72382
Speaker 1: ... What he said, he did.  And what he said--what he said he did, and what he wouldn't say he did.  He said, "That's true love for yourself, Boy."  (Laughter).  You know, and you listened to him.
Speaker 2: We're rolling again.  But yeah, so the phonograph... you know, you were-
Speaker 1: Yeah, I-
Speaker 2: You found out the difference between them.
Speaker 1: I got a little better at English.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (laughter).  Got a little better... got a little sore on my behind, and got a little better in English.
Speaker 2: So, did you go to high school in one school all the way, or-
Speaker 1: I got kicked out of [New] London High [School, New London, Connecticut] and went to Fitch [High School, Groton, Connecticut] with... came up here to Boston [Massachusetts], got kicked out of here, went back to New London, and I finished up in New London High [School].
Speaker 2: And that's in New London, Connecticut?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, well, tell me about high school.  You said you played sports.
Speaker 1: Played football, ran track.  I liked sports; I liked, probably, more individual sports, but I did love football.  I, I liked it because I was small, and it was a big person's sport.  And I was trying to always impress somebody.  And there was this, there was this girl that I wanted to really impress dearly.  So, I figured if I played football that she'd love me.  But that wasn't the case.  But I got to love the sport.  And I think during that time, I think sports always kept me out of trouble.
Speaker 2: Now, what position did you play?
Speaker 1: I was a cornerback, and I was a running back, and a half...  And it was, you know, nobody thought anything about it.  You know, they said "This guy was good."  And that's why I liked it.  And I was fast, I was fast at that time, that's why I took track.  I took track so I could play football.
Story_ID: 72383
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, were you involved in any big art projects in high school?  Did they let you do anything big?
Speaker 2: I wasn't very much of an art person.  You know, realistically, art was something that was always there.  But there was no future in art.  People told me I always drew, but I don't remember it.  I just knew that I always used that any time when I walked around.  Or those isolated moments--the quiet moments, the down moments--I always liked to draw.  I knew I just liked to draw, that's all I remember.  I drew a girlfriend, and she loved it.  And that was very, you know, to me that was very endearing.  I would draw people who I really liked, and that was sort of my gift to them.  But to really say that the direction I was going in was art, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But what was your major concentration in high school?  To just, for you to just try to get out of there?
Speaker 2: That's it, (Laughter) and steal as much lunch money as I could possibly get, that's it.
Speaker 1: So, did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: I did graduate from high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you have any mentors in high school?  Any teachers or administrators that took a liking to you, or tried to develop you on some level?
Speaker 2: Mr. Kowaso, I remember very well, because he was my football coach, and I liked him a whole lot.  Mr. Rockalls, I remember very well, because he was the math teacher.  And I didn't like math, but he had a way of teaching it that nearly made it make sense, you know.  He really kind of gave you practical math.  Miss Pijeski, she was very beautiful, she was pretty.  So, I not only liked her class, but I really had a--you know, you had this little string...  Somehow when you're a high school student, you think you can pull a teacher, (Laughter) just because they're beautiful.  So, yeah, I'd find to ways to stay after class for her.  But the true inspirations were Mr. Kowaso and Mr. Rockalls, I remember them.
Speaker 1: Now, how do you spell their names?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  (Laughter).  I'm an artist.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  Okay, I got you.  We have to ask, this is an oral history project.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: For transcription reasons.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: I understand.  So, now there's a story...  Did you participate in any other activities in high school, any social activities?  What was the social life like in high school?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  I think I joined the varsity club because I had a letter.  I didn't--I was, I was a hangout kind of guy.  So, you know, I didn't, I really wasn't--the sports was the only thing that really glued me to high school.  Some of the teachers I really liked.  But, you know, I was kind of a hangout guy.  Once sports was over, it was--high school wasn't that, it wasn't that exciting to me.  The girls and...  But, you know, what I could do to get over was what I really loved to do.  I think I was, I was, I was a middle of the road kind of student--nothing that you would think that I would shine...  I was no standout, I was a clown in some classes.  And if I really liked the class, I would buckle down.  I was pretty much, you know, kind of a regular kind of 'guy guy,' but not, nothing exceptional.
Story_ID: 72384
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now, there's a graduation story you were telling us during the break, and I stopped you.  So, now is the time for it.  This is about your father and graduation.
Speaker 2: Mr. Lockett...  Remember, he was so proud, because I was one of the first boys to graduate.  And he gave, he told me something very... this stays with me.  He was the kind of guy, like I started to say, who was very, very clear, always.  And he took me upstairs.  We lived in a triple-decker house.  And our beds were on the top, and he told me...  Oh, he started off by saying, he said, "Paul?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "You made it."  I said, "Yeah."  He wasn't the kind to give you accolades, and that kind of stuff.  He was just very gentle.  He said, "I got something to say."  He says, "You basically know how to feed yourself?"  Because they always taught us all how to cook--one meal--breakfast, dinner and supper.  And I said, "Yeah."  He said, "So, you know how to feed yourself?"  I said, "Yeah."  And he said, "You pretty much know how to count your money?"  He was always talking to us about banking, and that kind of stuff.  "Yeah."  He said, "You know you can work?"  "Yeah."  He ran down a litany of stuff.  And he gives you one of these... and when he talks, it's like one of those unarguable responses.  You can't argue with anything he says.  And he said, "You just about know everything I know."  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "Reach up under that, the bed.  I got a gift for you."  He was not a person to kind of give you gifts.  I reach under the bed, and there was a suitcase there.  He said, "You got to go, Boy."  (Laughter).  I said, "Dag!"  He said, "Didn't you say yes to everything I said?"  And I said, "Yeah, I did."  He said, "But didn't you also say that you can make it?"  "Yeah."  He said, "Well, you got everything that I have, but one thing."  I said, "What's that?"  He said, "You got a high school education."  And he said, "Now, I didn't have no high school education.  So, if I can make it without one, you're going to make it with one."  He said, "You got to go.  You got about three, four months, and you got to find yourself a home."  He said, "You're a man now, aren't you?"  I said, "Well, no, not really."  (Laughter).  He said, "Oh, you're a man.  Yes you are, you're a man."  And that was it.  And you know, and the next three or four months, I was out, probably in about a month and a half.  But he was so clear in what, you know, in how he just set me up.  He put that thing there and he said, "You're a man."  I said, "Yeah."  I kept saying, "No, I ain't a man."  And so I asked my brother George, I said "George, when you graduated, why didn't you tell me about this speech that Grandpa gave you?"  He said, "He didn't give me that speech."  I said, "No?"  He said, "Yeah.  Well, he didn't like you that much, Paul, so you got the speech."  But it's not that he didn't like me.  It's that, you know, certain... he just knew how to direct his energy.  He was a very strong common sense kind of person.  He made sense out of things.  He had unarguable... he didn't talk a lot.  But when he talked, his conversation was truly one of those things that you just, just didn't argue with.  He was a true justice kind of person; if you did this, you get this.  He almost spoke in parallels, you know, so you would understand these things when you needed them later on in life.  I mean, he's the kind of person you really do appreciate.  I still do, I really do.
Story_ID: 72385
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when you moved out, what did you--what kind of job did you find?  And where did you move?
Speaker 2: Well, I knew I had to go.  So, McDonalds, carwash--anything like that was satisfactory to me.  But I was a person that was prone to get in trouble.  And I knew that those kinds of jobs wasn't going to keep me out of trouble, and that's generally what happened.  I continued to get in trouble back and forth.  And you know, having a man who was an enforcer of the law, it was tough to have your children going back and forth to courts.  So, eventually what happened is that I was framed.  And I went to jail on a charge, and I was incarcerated for about a year and a half, on a rape charge.
Speaker 1: Oh, really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: I never did it.  A woman claimed that I was the person, she identified me as the person who raped her.
Speaker 1: Now, this was a grown woman that-
Speaker 2: This was a woman probably about my age.  We were about eighteen, nineteen... seventeen, eighteen, nineteen around the time.  And because she lived next door, and she...  We didn't particularly like each other anyway.  She said that... and she was raped.  So, she said that I was the person that did it.  This was right before Halloween, and I told them that...  "Don't worry," to Richard.  I said, "Man we'll get out there and steal some hubcaps and, you know, see if we can steal a couple of cars around Halloween.  I'm going to beat this, don't worry about, I'll be out there."  And so, when we found out the time when she was supposed to be--when she was supposed to have been raped--I was with my brother Richard.  Well, it just, it turned out to be where I was at a point that I had such a strong record, that they believed that I had done it.  And this is when my mother came back into view, and I told my mother that I hadn't done it.  My mother told me that I was capable of anything.  She says, I... see and my mother and I...  I think my mother knew me, but she knew me as an observer, you know.  But my grandmother [foster mother] knew me as a person, as a, you know, heartfelt... ins and outs...  She knew when I was lying, and that kind of stuff.  She said, "I'll tell you," she told my mother.  She said, "I tell you, this boy didn't rape this girl.  As bad as he is, he didn't rape this girl."  And she said, "Yeah, I think Paul is very, very capable of it, though."  She said, "He may be, but he didn't do it.  I guarantee you."  Well, I was found guilty, and was in jail for about a year and a half; I was incarcerated for about a year and a half.  And find out that the woman recanted the statement, because she was raped again, by the same person.  Now, her boyfriend had raped her the first time.  And then he went and raped her again.  Well, come to find out that--you know, he went to jail, she left, and I was released.  But it was a year and a half later, and I was very, very bitter.  Because rape is one of those crimes that you just don't want on your record.  You know, it's a stigma.  Even in jail, people don't appreciate rapists and child molesters, and that kind of stuff.  So, you get beat up a lot, based on the fact of why you're in jail.  And I knew I was going to have a tough time in jail, because of that.  And that's really what was, that happened.  And then I was angry with her, because at the same time when I was in jail, my mother died.  And that was like a double whammy.  Even though I think--I know I always loved my mother, as little as I had known about her.  My mother died while I was in jail, and I couldn't get over that, I couldn't get past that one.  And Lord have mercy, I can't believe I'm telling you all this, to tell you the truth.  Yeah, I remember them taking me to the funeral in handcuffs and coming...  And we got into the church... they took the handcuffs off as I got into the church, sat down in the front pew, came out of that front pew, walked back to the doorstep of the church, put the handcuffs back on me, sent me back.  Put me in solitary confinement, because they didn't know which way I was going to go.  And that was, I believe it was one of those things where I just couldn't understand life at all.  I mean I was nasty, I was bitter, I was hardening as a young, young man.  And I remember my mother come and visit me.  And one point, I would tell her, "Don't come anymore, because you didn't believe me."  And it was not too long after that, she passed.  And so my brother, Carl, kind of blamed me for her death.  And man, it all comes back.  It's strange, how that surfaces now.  But I remember that real, real clear.  And in getting out... and my aunt took me, my Aunt Mae [Gadpile].  She was always a guardian, and she took me in.  I think it was not too long after that, I went to Vietnam.
Story_ID: 72386
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, well, was your record expunged?  Did they expunge that from your record?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  The good part about is that, you know, I didn't have--I think they gave me something like a good ten years; I was supposed to do ten years.  The good part is that it happened again, you know, and the truth did come out.  The bad part is that I lost a year and a half out of my life, and I think that it changed my relationship with my brother, Carl, drastically.  Because he believed that I had something to do with the mental stability of my mother.  You know, that it was difficult for her to deal with the fact that, you know, I didn't want to see her.  It just changed, you know, the atmosphere changed completely.
Speaker 1: Had she been ill for a while, or-
Speaker 2: I've come to find out that she was.  But I didn't know that at the time.  She would make every effort to come and see me on at least a bi-weekly basis.  And there was some times that I just rejected it, I just didn't want to see her.  Because when she came, I was determined to make her believe that I hadn't done what I was accused of.  And then I was so sorry when I did get released, that she wasn't alive to find that out.  But Miss Lockett was always there.
Speaker 1: So, this was about 1965, sixty-six [1966]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right around that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the...  Wow, that was...  Boy, this is true confession.  This is not good, doing this kind of stuff.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, it is.  I mean, it gives us some sense of where you come from.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's very cathartic.  I hadn't thought about that one in a while.
Speaker 1: Was jail real tough?  Was it a real tough experience?
Speaker 2: It was a tough experience, because I was in there with people who were fairly hardened.  And I was accused of something...  When you're in there for rape, you're not a, you're not what you call the, on the high echelon.  I mean there's a hierarchy, even in criminal behavior, and rape is really low.  And so, when--because there are guys there who are down there for beating, and for killing, or something... or for somebody who had raped their sister, their brother, or something like that.  So, destruction of the family, in any way, is not a high crime.  And I, and that's what I was in there for.  So you know, right then, you knew, I was going to have to fight.  I didn't know it, but once it got out--and they find out what you're in there for, eventually.  Once it got out that I was a rapist, the guys made sure that they were going to deal with me.
Story_ID: 72387
Speaker 1: So, you were bitter when you came out?
Speaker 2: I was very, I was so bitter at the girl, because this could have all been avoided.  I was angry... she was white.  So, I was angry how easily somebody could say something, and then it becomes gospel.  Of course, there was no DNA at the time, and there was no--nobody was doing--you know-
Speaker 1: That's almost a throwback story.
Speaker 2: Oh, it is.  It's... you just... it was...  And then she was white, but she went with black guys.  Yeah, so, yeah, she was-
Speaker 1: Well, was the boyfriend that raped her in the first... black?
Speaker 2: He was black.
Speaker 1: Black, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was black.  But she, you know, it was, it all could have been avoided.  And, you know, and how--who knew how long it would have been?  How much time I would have had, if she hadn't been raped again?  You know, I would have done probably at least, you know, four or five years--or three or four years of that ten years' period.  I think I would have come out even more bitter.  I don't know.  Some people come out, and they're not so bitter.  I was angry when I came out.  I was angry because my mother died, and I never got a chance to talk with her.  I was angry because my brother didn't like me.  I was angry because she was, she kind of got off scot free, the girl.  I was angry... just... I was looking for reasons to be angry.  You know, I just didn't--I was angry because I had a record.  I was angry because when I found out that the lawyer didn't do anything for me...  There were just so many reasons to be angry, and I didn't have a pocket to be happy, you know.  I didn't, you know, didn't believe in happiness.  That was one of the things that was very, very difficult for me to accept.
Story_ID: 72388
Speaker 1: So, you're drafted?
Speaker 2: I was drafted... I was angry because of that.  (Laughter).  I mean because, I mean after--you know, they said when you went to jail, that you would not have to go into the service.
Speaker 1: Because you had a record.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: But they expunged your record, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And so, now I'm being drafted and going to Vietnam.  I'm saying, "Damn."  And I was, I was, I was on probation, because I did something else, of course, after that.  And the probation period says either you want to do your probation time or go back to jail.  Or, you can go into the service.  I said, "Damn."  I said, "Isn't there a war going on?"  They said, "Yeah."  I said, "I don't think I want to..."  But they always assured us that very few people went to Vietnam.  Most of the people have gone to Germany and then Italy, and all these other kinds of places.  So, a small group went to Vietnam.  And so, I was pretty about that.  It said and the better you do in the service and basic training, and the IT, and that kind of stuff--more than likely you're a valuable person, and we'd need you somewhere else.  I, you know, I trained real hard.  Of course, I didn't realize I was training myself right into Vietnam.  By then this thing... the good old military... they tell you those military stories...  And that's where I started my first career, in Vietnam.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, where did you serve in Vietnam?
Speaker 2: I don't know how well you know Vietnam.  But I came in in a place called Ben Het, and went to Tooey Wah [Tu Hihn], which is by the coast of Nahbetfoobai (ph.) [Ben Hai], which is close to the demilitarization zone, I think it was.  And then I was-
Speaker 1: Between North and South, right, that's where they were demilitarized?
Speaker 2: Yeah, demilitarized zone.
Speaker 1: The DMZ, the call it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Good... you know, okay.  Then I was in a place called Kun Tung [Kuntung].  Oh, and my job was a combat engineer.  So, we traveled a lot and convoyed a lot, and I was able to pretty much see a lot of the country.  And we were targets, for the most part.  As a combat engineer, you were able to--you were supposed to clear LZ's, landing zones, or to clear potential companies, so they can set up battalions and stuff like that there.  So, we were the first ones in to do that, that kind of work.  My MOS, which is Military Occupational Specialist, was a lineman.  I was supposed to be a lineman, but they didn't have any line poles there.  So, they said, "Well, you can find something else to do."  And that's basically what was there.  So, we were targets, for the most part, and we got shot at quite a bit.  I also manned the M-50 caliber machinegun on these convoys.  So, that was my other job, was to be pretty accurate there.
Story_ID: 72389
Speaker 1: It seems like it would be a nerve-wracking position to be in--out there trying to build a site for a bigger force to show up, and people are taking potshots at you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, that's... somebody had to do it.  And that's what, that's what my job was.  We also had to clear minefields--M-14 mines, "Bouncing Betties", the whole thing.  So, that's the other job.  I got pretty good at it, because we didn't lose too many.  I guess there's a couple of M-14 lines that... people either lost a foot, or lost an arm or something... fingers and stuff like that.  They were all in the string...  I mean, if you weren't careful, that's what would happen to you.  But that, my Vietnam experience was... it wasn't good.  It wasn't a good experience at all.  And, but I made some... I found in Vietnam you made the best friends in the world, and you became closer than close.   These guys were, they were so tight.  I remember losing a fellow by the name of Cortez Gomez.  And his wife used to write to me... he was from Puerto Rico.  He wife used to write to me when he wrote to her--when she wrote to him.  And there was just a pact there.  He was going to be a boxer, he was very, very good.  And all I can remember is getting those letters.  And I would wear his name tag, and he would wear my name tag.  And sometimes our shirts--we would wear each other's shirts.  And when he was killed, he had Goodnight on his name tag.  So, they thought that I had died.  And he was... he was pretty... he was blown up I think in about four--three or four different pieces.  So, he was highly unrecognizable.  And they were getting ready to write back to tell them that, you know, your son was killed.  And they found out that it was him.  And I wrote to his wife, and I had to tell her that he died and--you know, in the most gracious way.  But you know, we still...   And as soon as I got out of the war, I said that I would go and see her.  I never did, I just--you know, he was somebody that I really, really did like.  You know, there was an odd story in Vietnam, though.  This goes back to my mother again.  And I don't mind telling this.  I think this is a complete story.  There was a time...  Well, in Vietnam, a lot of things were just unlawful, and we did a lot of unlawful things.  And I can remember wanting to, you know, get some action.  And we were in Tooey Wah [Tu Hihn], we were by the sea.  And I remember I was at guard, so I guarded that oceanfront.  And sometimes children would go out and play until the sun went down.  And of course, we'd have to whisk them away.  And there was a young pregnant girl that was there.  And I said, "Boy, I need to get some action."  And I was with a guy, can't even remember his name.  I said, "I need to get this."  And he goes, "Well, go down there and get it."  He said, "Well, you bring her up to the guard post, and we'll just take her off."  I mean, it was, we kind of--it was almost as cavalier as that.  I said, "Sure."  I went down and got her, pulled her back up there, and just started to, literally starting raping her.  And I think at one point, I stopped.  And I remembered as clear as a bell, that my mother said that I was capable of it.  And I stopped right there.  And that, that was it.  Yeah, and I let her go.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: It was, it was.  I think my mother, in some sense, still echoed in my head.  And I think all of that came back and said, "That boy's capable of this."  And I stopped, and I let the woman go.  And I said, "Wow."  That is, that's amazing.  So, I knew my mother knew me better than I thought she did.  But in Vietnam, I mean, this thing went on all the time.
Speaker 1: What it says, too, is that you had a vision of yourself that was different from what, you know, you had been portrayed as in that first incident.
Speaker 2: Umm-
Speaker 1: You could see your own self-image, I mean, after what happened, from what you were actually doing.
Story_ID: 72390
Speaker 1: So, we were talking about the rape, the "almost" rape.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was one of those things where I think my mother's voice came back to me, and made I contact with her again, or she made contact with me.  And lo and behold, I apologized, in some ways, to the Vietnamese girl; helped her up, pushed the other guy off of her, and let her go, and just sort of stood numb.  It was--the channels that my mother had just echoed in my head just, just stayed there.  And that was, that was really--that was really revealing for me--about my capabilities and what I could do, and what I--you know, the possibilities of...  I had to watch that dark side of me that she saw.  And I had to be very, very cognizant of, you know, how deep it was.  But she saw it in a way where, you know, I didn't see it, and needed to understand that I had to correct it.
Speaker 1: Now, the black soldiers in Vietnam, what I've read and people have said, find themselves oftentimes caught in the middle of the racism in the U.S.  And their relationship with the Vietnamese is rather quite like the relationship of white people to the Vietnamese, you know, at least I've heard that.  And I don't know if that's been your experience.
Speaker 2: It's true, it's true.  But it also... depending on where you were, too.  Sometimes where the black soldier got there first, the Vietnamese had an affinity to them.  If the white soldier got there first, the Vietnamese had an affinity to the white soldier.  If you're closer to Cambodia, where the Cambodians were very, very dark... they had a good relationship with the Cambodians.  The Mountain Yards [tribe], which were the indigenous people in the Highlands, really had... we had a great relationship with the Mountain Yards.  In fact I have--I still have an arrow, a bow and arrow that I was given, a hunting arrow that I was given from the Mountain Yards.  Because we basically would save... able to protect... not protect there, but guard the area to some degree.  And I remember being with those people very easily.  And there was black dude who took one of the Mountain Yard women down to the river against her will.  And the Mountain Yards, I remember shooting this guy up with arrows.  And there was arrows... and we had to protect him.  So, we had to turn our guns on the Mountain Yards, which really we didn't want to do at all, because we had such a good relationship.  And then they'd bring us up to their huts.  They'd have this wine, where you'd drink the wine.  And they would really, you know, really be... we had a good relationship with them.  But this guy, he was a real butt hole, man.  And we remember turning our weapons onto the Mountain Yards, and they were surprised.  And we said, "We have to, we have to do this.  We have to get him out of there."  And they spoke their own language, their own dialect.  For instance, in Vietnamese, if you say to a young lady, "How are you today?"  It says, "ban ngay hom nay."  And in Mountain Yard it was, it had a clicking sound.  It was "a'meck, a, net tah (ph.)" And that's how you say, "How are you?"  So, you start to learn certain phrases.  And they would enjoy teaching the black soldier.  But that black soldier there almost destroyed it for a lot of us.  Because they shot him up with a couple of arrows.  And once they...  You know, we said, "Look, man, we just can't let him die like this."  But we knew he was wrong.
Speaker 1: Was he hurt?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Did he-
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I mean, they were in there.  You know, and we had to march him back out, and bring him to get these arrows out of him.  They were solidly in there, though.
Story_ID: 72391
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what else happened in Vietnam?  Did you--I mean, were you able to--I know this probably sounds strange, but were you able to do any artwork in Vietnam?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Was that part of-
Speaker 2: Never, never was a thought.  I think Vietnam and art and I, just... that wasn't, that wasn't part of it, no.
Speaker 1: Was it the same way for prison?
Speaker 2: I did.  If I remember, I loved--I just loved to draw.  And anytime... I guess when I was in the place, for a long span of time, I always drew something.  And I remember just doing that.  I, I always remember--oddly, in Vietnam I never did it.  But I did it while I was incarcerated.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, when did you get out of Vietnam?
Speaker 2: I got out in sixty-nine [1969], July 4th, 4th of July, in 1969.  I remember that so perfectly.  Because I mean, Independence Day couldn't have been better.  Eventually what I did was have a speech impediment, develop a speech impediment, as a result of the war.  And I had to learn how to talk.  I had to learn how to speak all over again.  And eventually I had some therapy, and learned, you know, to be able to at least develop some cognizant thought.  But that's actually, it was a blessing in disguise.  Because since I couldn't talk, I had to find ways of communicating.  And drawing was one of the ways that I would communicate.  And I just wanted to make sure that that was making some cognitive sense.  You know, there was a direct line between my brain and the rest of the world.  So, I found that that was a real link between me being just considered this crazy Vietnam veteran that battled, and that kind of stuff.  So there it was, the gift was there.  And at that point, I wanted to go to school.  But because I couldn't talk...  And I was, like I say, in high school, I wasn't that... I got over.  So, I wasn't that very literate person.  And I wanted to school, but I didn't think I could get into a college.  But my drawing skills helped.  I wanted to be a doctor, that's really what I wanted to be.  I mean, after I came out of Vietnam, I had this healer complex.  I wanted to, I wanted to heal somebody... everybody, the whole world.  But then I found out how difficult it was to become a doctor, in terms of the learning, and reading, and writing, and all of that kind of stuff.  So, I didn't, I didn't pursue that.  But in the back of my mind, I did the artwork.  And I went into an art college.  Well, no, that's true.  I went to Roxbury Community College [Massachusetts] to learn how to read and write, to be at least literate.  And then from there, I went to a school called Vesper George [School of Art, Massachusetts], which is a small arts college.  And then from there, I went to Mass [Massachusetts] College of Art.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was one of those things where you don't know where your future is going.  But here I figured--and I didn't want to be an artist student then.  All I knew is that the GI Bill was giving me four years to figure out what I was supposed to do for the rest of my life.  Art school seemed like a good opportunity to figure out what I wanted to do.  Why not go there?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's what I did.
Story_ID: 72392
Speaker 1: So, you were in Vietnam during, I guess, the Black Power Era, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah... yeah... yeah.
Speaker 1: During the time that Dr. Martin Luther King was killed, and-
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I wasn't--I was right before, right before.  Because I remember that was in sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: April 4, 1968...  April 8 or April 4, 1968.
Speaker 1: 4th.
Speaker 2: Was it April 4th?  See, and they asked us... because we were... I think I was in training down in...  They asked us to be part of this National Guard movement after Martin Luther King was killed.  And there was a bunch of black soldiers there at the time.  And they said, "We wouldn't be a part of this black National Guard, because we weren't going to turn weapons on our own people."  As a matter of fact-
Speaker 1: During the riots?
Speaker 2: Yeah, during the riots.  What did I say?  Part of the Black Power Movement?
Speaker 1: Well-
Speaker 2: Part of the... trying to quell the Black Power riots during that time.  And I told... we told them--and I think there was probably--I don't know how many others were in the company.  We said, "We didn't know where we would turn these weapons, if you gave them to us."  And they go, "Well, okay." (Laughter).  We were making it up, but I mean, we had the sentiment of the rest of the country that this, something was wrong.  And that's how I remember, yeah, that Black Power Movement.  In Vietnam, they had a lot of people that came over there and told us about the Black Power Movement and how strong it was becoming and, you know.  And when we got back from Vietnam, we had to get on the... and join the Mau Mau.  I don't know if you remember the Mau Mau.  Did you?
Speaker 1: You know, there's a--there's been different things called Mau Mau, so I'm not sure.  I know there was the original group in Kenya, of course.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: But I'm not sure specifically what they were talking about.
Speaker 2: The Mau Mau was a group that was--it was an offshoot of the Black Panthers, who were basically guys who came back from Vietnam who had some military training.  And they would then become the military might that would fight in the streets.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't want to do that.  I said, "Man, I just had all the fighting I needed to do."  I said, "I'm coming back here and get up on rooftops... and do what?"  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So, this was, they were actually supposed to--I mean, somebody told you that there was actually a group like this?
Speaker 2: There was.  There was, there was a big group right here in Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a, we knew--I knew a couple guys tried to recruit me.  And that wasn't going to happen, because I was--at the time I was out of Vietnam.  And frankly, I was pretty much on heroin.  I was on dope, and that kind of stuff.  So, I didn't have... I was non-functional.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was null and void.
Speaker 1: Well, did those guys ever do anything?
Speaker 2: The Mau Maus?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They were, they were a strong force.
Speaker 1: Did they actually--I mean I never read about them.  They did something?
Speaker 2: They were a strong force, and they had to be reckoned with real quick.  And they, we used to have topographical centers.  I don't know if they had topographical centers-
Speaker 1: In Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And other places.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And those--they had to destroy the topographical centers.  And it was... everybody was being infiltrated at the time.  So the Mau Mau had to be infiltrated, because they were, they were a major threat.  They were an organized military, a force within the United States.  You had to deal with these guys, because they could create some destruction.  And I think what happened, some of the heads of the Mau Mau were killed and destroyed here, or incarcerated.  And that kind of, it was short lived.  But the [Black] Panthers were still... still there, still surviving.  And that was--I guess they had SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], and a bunch of other groups at the time.  There was a bunch of them.  The Gray Panthers... they all... there were a bunch of them, man.
Story_ID: 72393
Speaker 1: You were on drugs, you say, when you came back?
Speaker 2: Gregory Hatch and I-
Speaker 1: Did you get involved in Vietnam, in drugs?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I just couldn't get past the Vietnam experience.  So they--Gregory Hatch and I, a good friend of mine, he was a medic in Vietnam.  And we came back here, and we would do heroin a lot, you know, shoot it up and that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: Did you have any trepidation about starting such a thing? What's that?
Speaker 2: About starting heroin.  I mean-
Speaker 1: I couldn't sleep.
Speaker 2: What had you--I mean, had you heard anything about it?  I mean, I often wonder how people say they started.  How did you-
Speaker 1: Well, I was always--you know, I always knew about the drug; I knew what it could do.  And I think my brothers... you know, we... they were always... they were experimenting, as they say.  So, I... when I came back from Vietnam, I just... there was... I didn't sleep... maybe about an hour a day or something like that.  And it was, it was wearing on me.  And I can remember just going and saying, "Man, I can't do this, man.  I got to get something that puts me to sleep."  So heroin was supposed to be just something to make me, you know, sleep, just cool out.  Even if I was awake, I mean, at least my body would be settled, cooled out.
Speaker 2: So, you were very agitated when you came back?  I mean-
Speaker 1: I was just--I didn't realize it, but I knew that I--it was, there was this--you know, that whole energy packet was just not there.  I was, I was a firecracker, and that kind of stuff.  Just, you know, a lot of nervous energy, and I'm sure that spawned back from my earlier days.  So, dealing with the heroin was a way of falling asleep during the day even, just to let my mind... my body just relax.  I never thought of myself as ever becoming addicted, but a way of medicating myself in a way so that I would be able to just cope, you know, and maybe forget a little, you know, of what I'd been through.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, you were doing this while you were going to art school?
Speaker 1: I was doing it in the process of going to art school.  Yeah, I remember now.  And I was, I was selling it and I was--it was, you know, it was a means of income for me.  And I... and between the reefer and the pills, and all the other kinds of stuff...  So I was functioning, but I was at the same time destroying myself.  And I think it was with Gregory... Gregory saved me again.  All throughout my life, I believe, there has always been somebody that was there to remind me that I'm supposed to live for some reason.  And Gregory hung himself.  And I went up and... getting ready to do some works...  This is a very sad story, man.  This is, like, one for B.B. King.  And I saw him, you know, found him, between I guess the bedroom and the living room.  And I ran down...  And I was scared for myself, because I thought the police was going to blame me for it.  And I called his--I believe I called his girlfriend and asked her, "Have you seen Gregory?"  She said, "No, I haven't seen Gregory in a couple of days."  I said, "Well, maybe you should go up and, you know, check him out, because I haven't seen him either."  And she lived closer to him than... she lived closed to him than I did.  And she went up there and told me what I already knew, you know, that...  I said, I've got...  Gregory and I used to talk about joining the Mosque.  We had to get off of this, and the Muslims were the only people that were going to do that.  So, I said that's what I'm going to do, I'm going to join the Mosque.  And I joined the Mosque for a short period of time.  It was like being back in the military.  (Laughter).  But there was--it was a place where I didn't... they knew that they could help me kick.  And that was it, cold turkey, I was off heroin.  And I went, you know, right back to school.  But I was still selling all of this, these drugs while in school.
Speaker 2: So, you were selling them, but you weren't on them?
Speaker 1: I wasn't on it no more.  I was selling it, because it was a good business; it was a great business.  I mean up... BU [Boston University], BC [Boston College], Northeastern [University, Massachusetts]--all of the kids in college used to just make the line.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So, where were you living when you first came back from Vietnam?
Speaker 1: I lived with a guy... I lived with my brother for a small period of time, Carl.  We tried to rekindle this... and my aunt.  That didn't work.  And of course, me kind of being the kind of person I was... it was... we really didn't have... very little communication.  He, he always wanted me to do better.  I mean, even though we had--our communication was broken--he was always the kind of person that just said, "Look, you know... my brother, and I'm going to do whatever I can for him."  And he had a good house, he had a good job... my aunt also.  But I was not there, you know--mentally, physically, I was not there.  And I moved in with another Vietnam veteran, George... George Cook.  And we went to, we went to Mass [Massachusetts] College of Art together.  And I could understand George, because we both, you know, had that same connection with Vietnam.  We had the association, we had a respect for each other.  And he was, he was--you know, he was really my buddy, he was my protege.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.  So-
Speaker 1: What are you guys doing to me?  (Laughter).  This is a hot seat all over again.
Story_ID: 72394
Speaker 1: So, what happened next?  I mean you had several different... you were with the Vesper School of Art?
Speaker 2: Vesper George School of Art [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Vesper George School of Art?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and Mass [Massachusetts] College of Art.
Speaker 1: How was it?
Speaker 2: It was, it was still... there was that festering of the black militancy.  You know, there was still...  These were still like in the seventies [1970s].  So, it was--you know, you were either like a hippie or, you know, you were a militant.  You know what I mean?  There was... those... those... those were your parallels.  You know, you kind of gravitated to one or the other.  Those were the... seems to be the kinds of groups that was doing... was creating most of the energy in the country.  And then I think after that, around that time, I think they were asking the boys to come back home from Vietnam.  If I can remember... I think...  When did the war end, in about seventy-five [1975] or so?  And we were just active about being--I was in school, but active about being--sending the boys home, and at the same time, you know, screwing all the girls and passing out the reefer and trying, you know, angel dust and sunshine... orange sunshine and purple haze, and all those other kind of crazy...  You know, it was, you... I... you know the time.  The time was just as wild as it possibly could be, with...  So, I kind of got into that, you know, wanted to get away from everything that had any kind of association with war.  So, that kind of hippie movement and all those things, that was very appealing to me.  The orgies, and all of those kinds of stuff... that was very appealing to me.  And in being an artist, you couldn't help meet... run into those kinds of folks, being in art school.  That's, I think...  But I was--at one point, I think--I was a little older, and I was trying to take my life seriously, trying to take myself seriously.  And I figured out that I really wanted to be-- I think I--after I think I got into my junior year, I really wanted to be an artist, to find out what it really was about.  And there was a lot of people who I can remember...  My grandfather would always, you know, come back into my mind, about who was right... the right thing to do, and you know, the right place to be.  And I wanted to take this artwork seriously.  And I did--I did an album cover for Kool & the Gang, while I was in college.  Kool & the Gang was a big deal for us, you know.  And I can remember it, it was a long time ago.  I would harass... my play sister, Penny, made the connection for me.  And I would harass them.  I'd say, "Man, you got some terrible album covers.  I can do a better one than that."  And just by osmosis... just... I was aggressive enough to make sure that that was my first working gig, is to do this album cover.  So, it got me some real recognition.  I particularly really loved the attention.  You know, I would hang out with Kool & the Gang and, you know, prop myself up.  I just knew that I was somebody, I was something to be proud of.  I mean I would go down to the stores, the record stores, and stand by the albums.  "Hey, how do you like that?"  (Laughter).  They'd say, "Yeah, that's pretty good."  I said, "Yeah, I did it."  (Laughter).  They'd say, "Do you know Kool & the Gang?"  And I said, "Of course."  You know, I barely knew them, but you know, it was-
Speaker 1: What was the name of the album?
Speaker 2: 'Spirit of the Boogie'.
Speaker 1: 'Spirit of the Boogie'?
Speaker 2: 'Spirit of the Boogie'.  It was... it was... it was a shining moment.  It didn't last.
Story_ID: 72395
Speaker 1: --(Laughing).
Speaker 2: What happened?
Speaker 1: Well, I actually thought that that's what I was going to be doing in life.  And I actually thought that these kinds of jobs are just going to be handed to me.  And, you know, the reality is that was a fluke.  To get a job with a group that was that popular at that time, was not realistic.  It was something that just happened.  So, it never materialized, and I went into teaching.  I was... as a matter of fact, during the seventy-five [1975], seventy-eight [1978] period, I was... taught at Charlestown [Boston, Massachusetts] during the bussing era.  And-
Speaker 2: Okay, so you graduated from-
Speaker 1: I graduated from Mass [Massachusetts] College of Art, yeah.  And during the bussing era, they had me over at Charlestown [Boston, Massachusetts], teaching the kids over there.  And that was an experience within itself.  Because now, I'm saying, "What am I doing here?"  (Laughter).  This is... I'm going to be riding the bus... they're going to be throwing rocks and stuff like this.  I don't particular like...  But I volunteered for it, because it was a good--it was good to see somebody else that was of your hue that was an adult that was willing to go ahead and take the chance to go over there.  I mean, it was quite a few of us, you know, that would do that.  And it was--it was alright, it was alright.  I wasn't a real good teacher, though.  (Laughter).  That was the other part, I didn't teach very well.  But I was there to basically support those kids.  So, teaching didn't seem like it was going to be my forte.  I really needed to know what it was to be a good teacher.  And to be a good artist and to be a good teacher, is two different things.  But I had a nice alliance with the black artists in college.  Omobolanle and a bunch of other guys, we just, we were really very active.  And so we formulated art shows, gallery shows.  We did a lot of stuff with--that were against the war--you know, pictures that were basically about how we felt.  And we--you know, and they were very, very political in nature.  And I think that's when in joined the NCA [National Conference of Artists].  We were very... to find out that there was a group of artists of culture that really were about something...  And the NCA is the National Conference of Artists.  And that was, that was an explosion.  That pin-pointed, that formulated my direction, because I met some very good artists.  And I met people who were icons that I didn't know anything about... Romare Bearden, and Jacob Lawrence, and John Biggers, and Elizabeth Catlett, you know, those... [Lois] Mailou Jones.  There was a host of names of people who are now, you know, considered very collectible, very instrumental... very educational.  John Lockhart... Bing [Davis]... all of these people were really powerful, powerful, people.
Speaker 2: Bing Davis.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Bing Davis, I'm sorry.  They... they... it was the first time in my life I ever heard of somebody saying, "You're an image maker."  That... that to me... I never heard that term before. Yeah, what did they mean by that--that you're an image maker?
Speaker 2: Well, John [Lockhart]... the artist that's always been the supporter of dynasties, of dictatorships.  He created... he created the image of those huge civilizations.  He created... in terms of he held that particular civilization for all folks to see, all folks to see after that dynasty was over.  So, the image that... the Roman Renaissance... was created by the artist.  The Egyptians, the Benin civilizations... even dictatorships...  Like, look what they did with Saddam Hussein.  The first thing they did was destroy the image.
Story_ID: 72396
Speaker 1: Those artists must have been paid pretty well, because they did some incredible stuff.  I mean, look at Michelangelo, I mean, the Sistine Chapel [The Vatican].  Are you ready?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're ready.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we'll just continue this.  Because we were talking about this-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --image of being-
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I mean, he would tell me the Sistine Chapel was just another chapel, that's until they did that painting---you know, Michelangelo did that painting.  Then, the Sistine Chapel becomes now--even today, it's one of those things where you have to pay and go... and it's well-preserved, the whole thing.  But it was an image, it wasn't a reality.  It was an image of what the Catholic Church wanted their people to see.  They had loads of money, they were decadent, you know.  But it... it's... it's... what is an image maker?  What does he do?  Where does he go?  Who does he do it for?  Why does he do it?  The way that they described it was a way that I had never even thought about.  Because I thought of artists as kind of, almost this kind of Bohemian kind of person, and everything was basically kind of for himself, you know, they did things for themselves; you know, it was a very, very selfish situation.  John [Lockhart], Bing Davis, John Biggers, Elizabeth Catlett, and [Lois] Mailou Jones... the list is many.  They all found that they, you know, artists can be educators; artists can be historians; artists can be the preservers of just the esthetics, and didn't have to be deep.  But, you know, just--you know, it could just satisfy the soul, just like music.  They were the patrons of the spiritual, you know.  Of course, the churches were the biggest patrons at a certain time of period.  But the artist, of course, the artist was always getting ready to develop something that put these people up close to Heaven as possible.  In that vein, I felt as though maybe there is something about this that was really worth pursuing.  Because I don't believe art was my choice.  And certainly... certainly not based not on anyone that I knew.  I didn't know of any artists that truly made it.  So, it certainly wasn't the choice that I would make.  And I remember the adjectives before art.  They would say, "In order to make it, you know, you'd have to be a starving artist."  That's not... it didn't sound like something that I wanted to do.  Or the other one was, you know, "The only successful artist is a dead artist."  I said no, that's not an adjective that I liked, either.  So, those kinds of things that didn't--nothing connected, you know, in terms of the art.  And black artists... if white artists didn't make it, you know, where were we going?  I, but I knew that there was a kind of a magic that people liked about it, even though they didn't know how to buy it.  Still, there was a magic in it.  And again, I said art doesn't--you don't choose it, it chooses you, if you're really going to stay with it.  And that was a choice that I followed, that chose me.  And I realized it was actually building me.  I was going places and doing things that I had never done before, based on the fact that I was just, you know, pursuing a dream I loved... a real like for what I do.  In fact, that's where I discovered Julie, Julie[anna] Richardson.  It was at, I think I had a show at Harvard [University, Massachusetts], and I hooked up with her.  And she, she was really a patron of the arts.  She took it the next step.  Yeah, she was one of the people who made some of my dreams come true.  She made it helpful for me to go to Haiti for a period of time, and record the lifestyles of the people in Haiti.  And I guess they did about four or five months or so.  And she was, you know, shepherding that money down there and making sure that I was... you know, things worked out well for me.  And unbelievable... I mean she took on being my agent, and the whole thing.  I never would have thought about going to Haiti.  I never would have thought about leaving, you know, the United States.  But that was eye-opening.  And I... one of the reasons I guess why we're here almost is because of my relationship with her.  Her relationship with me was really a good relationship, it still is.  But it was an, you know, it was incredible relationship that-
Speaker 2: What time period is this?  This is-
Speaker 1: It's about the eighties [1980s], the beginning of the eighties.
Speaker 2: Early eighties [1980s]?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, is she your first agent?
Speaker 1: Yeah, absolutely, very first.  First person that really I even knew about.  Agents, and art, and business, and anything like that, she kind of... and she didn't know that much, either.  You know, she... it wasn't... but she had... she had this...  We liked each other.  But more than liking each other, she really was supportive.  And I stayed down there in Haiti, and I learned that the arts...  I met this woman again, Lois Mailou Jones.  I met her here in a line, just to come by and shake her hand and say, "Hi, how are you?"  And so forth and so on.  But then I met her again in Haiti, and that, that launched my career.
Story_ID: 72397
Speaker 1: Now, was there a certain program that you attended in Haiti?  Or did you--I mean, how were you set up in Haiti for four months?  How did that-
Speaker 2: Just... I was on my own.  You know, all was... the only thing that was provided for me was the materials to do the art; money that I can move about.  I could not... I thought that was... that was, it was great for me.  I couldn't speak the language.  I didn't know where the hell I was going.  I just--you know, I was truly an infant again, I was a child.  You know I was reliant, or dependent, on everybody there.  And there was one person, Dr. Jean-Charles, who told the newspaper reporter that was here that I was going to Haiti.  She told Dr. Jean-Charles that "He was going to Haiti, where should he go?"  And he gave her a name to give to me.  And I looked that woman up, and she kept me for maybe about a month, a month and a half, so I could really kind of get acclimated.  And she said, she told me, she said, "You're a child.  You don't speak the language, you don't know where you're going... you're depending on someone."  She said, "You're no better than my five year old child there."  She said, "The only thing you have... the only difference between you and him... he speaks the language."  (Laughter).  I said, "Gee."  And I said, "Well, I also have an instinct of an adult.  So I know when I'm in trouble, and I know when, you know, where to move and where not to move."  Yeah, and I did a painting, I did a lot of drawing.  And Lois Mailou Jones was one of those people who just embraced me.  It was right after the time when her husband passed, and I was able to help her through that period of time just by being there for her, whenever she wanted.  And she would take me out to her little watering holes, where we would paint and draw.  And she would just, you know, she was disciplined.  And that's what she needed at that time, because, you know, it was a mournful time for her, and she was going through her transition.  So, it was perfect, the timing was perfect.
Speaker 1: Haiti is, Haiti is the only independent black nation in the Western Hemisphere.  So-
Speaker 2: Well, it was a dictatorship, too.
Speaker 1: Yeah-
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They had Baby Doc [Jean-Claude Duvalier] and Papa [Papa Doc, Francois Duvalier]-
Speaker 1: Baby Doc was a dictator.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Baby Doc [Jean-Claude Duvalier].  And that was, it was volatile at that time, because they had the Tonton Macoute [paramilitary].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I got myself in some trouble; I needed to come back here.  Because I mean, I'm just outspoken.  I was American, and I didn't see...  I said, "You artists..." then, I was a little bit more militant.  I said, "Why are you artists just painting, you know, all of these nice little serene Haitian drawings of people shopping, you know?"  I said, "You all should be painting this... and this."  (Laughter).  I formulated a black-Haitian artist alliance.  We were going to paint the atrocities in Haiti, and we were... and I'm going to organize this and we're going to put it together.  And of course, at first, a lot of Haitians, they were frightened, because their lives were in jeopardy.  And I didn't realize how, you know, how much my life was in jeopardy, to go try and do something stupid like that without really understanding, you know, the politics of Haiti.  And I was just... you know, I said, "You guys, you can't let this go on."  You see the Tonton Macoute run in there and they throw you off the bus, they throw you off of this, they take...  I said, "You can't let this go on.  Paint it, paint it.  Talk about what's going on, talk about Baby Doc [Jean-Claude Duvalier], talk about Michel.  Talk about all these things.  Paint about it."  And we developed--and I was so stupid, because I went on TV (Laughter).  And of course, they would translate, and I would talk.  But I knew--I wasn't that stupid.  I knew that I was on, you know, Telehaiti, and that I should cool down some of this rhetoric here.  But the two guys who went with me could use me for their platform.  So I would say something like, you know, "Oh, Haiti has some poverty that really is not that good.  But overall, this is a great country, and these are warm people."  And the translation would come back, "Haitians' poverty is because of the militia here, and that kind of stuff.  Regardless of how good the people are, we need to get..."  And I'm going like this (nodding head), because I don't understand what they're saying.  And the woman who took me in, she said, "Paul, you can't stay here."  I said, "Why?"  She said, "Do you realize what you were saying on television?"  I said, "Yeah."  I said, "I didn't say anything wrong."  She said, "Oh no, you didn't, because I understand English.  But the translation was, you know, through these other guys, and that's what they heard."  And so, they rode me different places so I, I wouldn't be in any one place.  They said, "You're a target now."  And they at one point tried to drive me off the side of the road, so it wouldn't look like I was shot, but that there was an accident.  (Laughter).  And I said, "We got to get out of here."  And I think that's when it was time for me to leave.  But it was, it was an eye-opener, though, about what... how... not knowing the country and not knowing anything about the true politics, and how a dictatorship is really run.  It's easy to destroy a person, or anybody, and just get away with it.  So I had to be very, very careful about that.
Story_ID: 72398
Speaker 1: Now, how did that experience affect your artwork?
Speaker 2: The experience didn't... because for the most part, I had a great time in Haiti.
Speaker 1: I'm talking about the trip to Haiti altogether, I guess, not just that-
Speaker 2: That experience?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That affected my artwork, because I had got in touch with Jean Rene Charon, a fellow named Ralph Allen, Le Gosier --these were top Haitian artists.  And they gave me kind of the green light.  They just, we just liked each other.  It was just something about... we just gravitated toward each other.  So, they gave me a show in Haiti.  They really wanted to do this kind of, this organization of Haitian artists.  And it was good that, you know, that I was there--that they could use me to do something like that, and help organize it.  Because if this man can come down here and see the side of Haiti that we can correct, it was good.  But it was what we needed.  But for the most part, I had great relationships with most of the people that were in Haiti.  I had... and Lois Mailou Jones was just perfect, it was just something that I needed.  She made it possible that when I came back to the United States, that I would have a show in one of the top galleries, black galleries, in Washington [D.C.].  I can't... Nyangoma Gallery in Washington [D.C.]... and that she would show with me, because I couldn't have gotten the show without her.  And I did a huge painting for her that I gave to Howard University.  And the flyers for the show said, you know, "Lois Mailou Jones" you know, in big letters, you know, and two other artists--Paul Goodnight and Jean Rene Charon.  So we were low-lighted, and she was highlighted.  So, she got a huge crowd of people that came to see the show.  Now, she only put two or three pieces in the show.  All the rest of the show was ours.  So, the group that came really came to buy her work, but they bought our work.  And that was the first time...  I think we sold something like... I had thirty-six pieces in that show.  I had, I sold at least twenty-four pieces.  Unheard of.  I just, but it was through her.  And she made me promise to do that to other artists when I got to a place where I could, you know, because that was a gift.  And I said, you know, it was the biggest gift that I'd ever gotten in my life, in terms of the arts--that somebody would take that time to make sure that my career would be moved.  And that was a good experience, because certain doors started opening, along with the fact that Julie[anna Richardson] was still, you know, working with me at the time.  And not too long after that, she moved to Chicago, pursuing her lawyer's career.  But she was still... still an agent of mine while she was in Chicago.  It was a good, it was really a good time.
Story_ID: 72399
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now, so what did you do--did that just get you off the ground as an artist?
Speaker 2: It launched... it launched the career.  And then it was a thing...  They were asking people to go to Nicaragua [1979-1980 Revolution] during that, during that conflict. And, (Laughter) this is a crazy life, man.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: They're asking artists, or just-
Speaker 2: No, they were asking Vietnam veterans.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Vietnam veterans.  And I was a part of a coalition of black Vietnam veterans.  And so, they volunteered me.  They said, "Paul, you should go down there, because you can do this art work and bring the truth back."  I said, "So, well, shoot, a photographer can do that."  I said, "These people are fighting down there."  They said, "Right, but you can do it."  I said, "I'm not sure.  I think I've had enough of war.  I'm not into doing the war thing anymore."  And they go, "Man, this will take your art in a whole 'nother level, another level."  I said, "Shoot, man, this will take me out, this will level me."  (Laughter).  So they finally convinced me, or volunteered me to go.  And I went down there for about four months.  And I learned a lot about who I was in the war, in Vietnam--in Nicaragua.  I stayed with a woman called Blanca Sevelia.  And I thought this woman was the most extraordinary woman I've ever met in my wife.  She was shot in her eye.  It was, had her eye put out.  She had, I think, five children.  Her husband was wounded, her son was killed.  I slept in her son's bed.  She would write leaflets and... I'm trying to think of the word.
Speaker 1: Flyers?
Speaker 2: Flyers throughout the pueblos about how the Sandinistas were going to take over, and what they needed to prepare for.  She was a part of the group called AMNLAE [Asociacion de Mujeres Nicaraguanses Luisa Amanda Espinoza]. And AMNLAE was a woman's military fighting faction.  And it had, the letters stood for something, I can't remember what it was right now.  She, she coordinated efforts to bring the prostitutes together to help to display leaflets throughout the areas, and make them involved in the war.  She taught her children to mantle and dismantle three or four different weapons, to shoot them, and shoot them clearly.  She, at the same time, she would teach me Spanish, you know, in order to...  And she would go up into the mountains and teach the combatants up in the mountains how to read and write, in order that when they became empowered that they would be literate.  She would come back down, do her vigils, nightly vigils.  And this woman was truly one unbelievable person.  And at the same time, she would do her domestic chores--cooking, cleaning, you know.  And get up, probably with two hours of sleep, and do the whole thing all over again.  I said, this is a miracle, this woman is a miracle worker.  So, I then understood how important it was for the Sandinistas to fight against the, what they called the dominant country-- this was America.  Because they always thought that they were going to be invaded by the United States, always.  I mean it was always in their mind.  They would have Meg planes that would fly by low, and break the sound barrier.  And they thought they were being bombed.  I was there, and I just... they would shatter them.  And so, they thought that was always the beginning.  Of course, they had an embargo at this time.  So, they couldn't get their John Deere products, their farm products, and they had to get them from somewhere else.  So, they always were under the threat of the United States; they always thought that they were going to be invaded.  At the same time, I would have to draw their lifestyle.  While they were doing whatever they did, I would be there drawing it.
Story_ID: 72400
Speaker 1: And I kept understanding what it was to be now a civilian in Vietnam fighting against the tyranny of the United States, that monster of the United States.  So, the script was flipped on me.  And I'm saying, wow, I couldn't...  This thing was really, really cathartic; it changed my way of thinking completely.  And knowing that they didn't have a leg to stand on... that they couldn't possibly beat the military might... that they were willing to fight it.  And at the same time, they were fighting the Contra.  The Contra was constantly being fed by the United States.  They weren't--they were being fed militarily by the United States--their weaponry and that kind of stuff.  And they had what they call I guess advisors, military advisors.  And we would--I would observe some of the, some of the...  I was never in any way in the line of fire.  But I would see the effects of the war--people who were killed, people who were...  They had these huge funerals, and these would always be open casket funerals especially--even if they were destroyed--if they were shot, and that kind of stuff--to show the people that they--this is the kind of thing that they had to fight against.  And they lived by principle.  So, I said, I'm going to do something.  And I went and said, "I've got to make this mural about what's going on here.  And I want to do it on the fighting women of Nicaragua, the women of AMNLAE."  And they said, "Fine, wonderful."  "And I want to do it in your office.  I want to do it on your building."  And they said, "Sure."  And I just, this was a spontaneous reaction.  I had no idea how I was going to do this.  I didn't have any material, nothing.  They went out, burnt wood to make charcoal so I could draw.  They went out and got paint, whatever paint that they had in their buildings; they made sure I had that.  They cut off horses' tails and wrapped them around, so I'd have brushes and that.  It was amazing, and it was totally supportive.  So, I showed them the cartoon, a small drawing of the piece that I was supposed to do.  And Blanca Sevelia, the woman who was taking care of me, was in it.  And they told me no, they didn't want her.  I said, "Do you know what she's done?"  And I'm arguing with these people.  I said, "She's got to be in there."  They said, "No."  I said, "We've all done this, she's not the only person.  This is a..."  And he said, "Well, I can't."  I said, "She's got to be in this mural."  They said, "No."  I said, "That's the United States, that's an American thing."  He said, "We don't put people in our... unless they died by our principles.  They die by the values, and they die by the principles.  Because if you paint a person in there, and they happen to defect in some way, or do something stupid, then you've automatically destroyed the values and the principles of that country."  He said, "When she dies, she goes up there."  He says, "As long as she's not dead, she stays off of the wall."  So, I did the mural without doing...  I did the mural doing maybe about four or five of the people who had died.  And the rest of it was all on the principles and the values, and that kind of stuff.  So, I have still pictures of mural, too.  And that was... and it was interesting, because I learned a lot.  She said, "That's America.  You have James Brown Avenue, you know, and he ain't doing nothing.  You got Michael Jackson Square, you know."  And she said, "All of these people who are so..."  They said, "We don't do that."  The funny... you know, the first book they gave me when I came in the country...  And of course, I couldn't read it, because it was all in Spanish.  But it was "Malcolm X Hablas." (Laughter).  That was the first book, I still have it here.
Speaker 2: Malcolm X-
Speaker 1: "Malcolm X Hablas" ['Malcolm X Speaks', 1965] yeah.  So, that was... and I came back here and I did a lot of rallying around the war in Nicaragua, and how we should stay out of it, and that kind of stuff.  And I showed them the pictures that I had drawn.  Of course, I had lots and lots of pictures and paintings of the pieces that I did while I was in Nicaragua.  And it was, to me, it was a growth period, too.  So, again, you know, you're finding these little plateaus where you grow.  And you had... my vehicle was always the art.
Story_ID: 72401
Speaker 1: Now, in the late eighties [1980s], I guess early nineties [1990s], your work started to appear all over the country in the form of prints.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did that happen?  And they developed a movement in prints that was... I don't think existed before, you know, black art prints.
Speaker 2: I think the only black art prints they had--remember the--you know, those Angela Davis prints, and it was more political.
Speaker 1: And then there was some, these fantasy-
Speaker 2: Black power-
Speaker 1: Yeah, with the guy with the big Afro.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --with a sword-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and a woman by his side.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  Or black love-
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: You know, women with big breasts and all that kind... yeah.  Well, those were basically the only black prints that they had, you know, other than Martin [Luther King]-
Speaker 1: Bobby [Robert F.] Kennedy-
Speaker 2: Kennedy and Martin, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.  Those were... every grandmother... over her television.
Speaker 2: On the fans and everything.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, yeah, right.
Speaker 2: So they had church prints, but they didn't have really any real, real, prints.  Varnette Honeywood and Joe Holstein were the two people who did make prints.  And I kind of thought they were selling out.  I said, "Why are you all duplicating yourself like that for?  You all are selling out, you're going for the money.  It doesn't make sense."  Varnette [Honeywood] pulled me to the side and said, "Paul, you know, we are the only art form that doesn't duplicate themselves.  You know, we try to be this purist... paint a person and try to sell it.  And she said, "You look at, you know, people who make records.  And they make records after records.  It's not one record, you know.  People who write books, it's not just one book.  You know, people who do movies...  She said, "All these other art forms are duplicated forms.  You know, we're the only fools that are sitting up there trying to sell just one of these pieces, and hoping that it'll go."  You...
Speaker 1: [Just about, it's 10 and 1.]
Speaker 2: Okay.  It made sense to me.  And I thought at that time, maybe this might help launch my career.  "Along with the fact," she says, "the more prints you have, the more people will see your work."  And she was on the Cosby show at the time.  This was at the advent of all of these sit-coms.  And they... [Bill] Cosby, I think was one of those people who really wanted black artwork in his show.  And the way I understood it is that he asked a whole lot of artists if he would--if they could use their work in order to do, you know, the background of the set.  All of these artists wanted to negotiate, you know.  But Varnette [Honeywood] said, "No, here, take it."  And she got her work... along with Brenda Joysmith... got her work on the show.  And every week, they had a gallery, they had a display.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, you're right.
Story_ID: 72472
Speaker 1: We were talking about the growing proliferation of black prints.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There was a kind of movement, you know.  You said Varnette Honeywood started it?
Speaker 2: Varnette Honeywood was...
Speaker 1: [AUDIO DISTURBANCE FROM 05:00:47:29 TO 05:00:54:14]
Speaker 2: Ernie Barnes had books, and he had album covers, and he had that TV show.
Speaker 1: 'Good Times.'
Speaker 2: 'Good Times.'  "J.J." was the artist.
Speaker 1: Was the fictional artist of Ernie Barnes.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  And that put Ernie in another class and, you know, we really liked what he did.  But I didn't get a chance to know Ernie [Barnes].  I did get a chance to know Varnette [Honeywood], because I think we were pretty much the same age.  And Joe Holstein, I liked Joe a lot, because we really just gravitated to each other.  And they were kind of...  They said, "You need to go out to California to see what you can do."  I went out to Hollywood Cinema Arts.  A guy named John Cleveland was... he had this studio where he had artwork of all kinds.  Every... every era, every country, every dynasty, every culture... so forth and so on.  So, if you needed Western art, he had the Western art.  So, all the set designers used to go to him.  And they would pick from his collections, huge studios, about as big as this building as a matter of fact.  And they would pick the Egyptian art, or Western art, or whatever the movie was about.  And that was, you know, that was his claim to fame; he had that thing going.  But there was a lot of black sit-coms that were coming out.  There was, there was '227,' 'Different World,' and oh, God, what was the... 'The Cosbys,' and what was this one with Will Smith?
Speaker 1: 'Fresh Prince [of Bel Air].'
Speaker 2: 'Fresh Prince,' and it was piles of them.  And he didn't have, he didn't have the work, enough black artwork, to fill these set designs.  So I was, I was a blessing to him.  I had just published and printed four black prints that we couldn't sell anywhere.  When I say 'we,' there was a woman by the name of Elba Vargas, who became, we became very, very close.  She was a beautiful woman; but business savvy, real good business sense.  And we were able to parlay something like twenty-seven thousand dollars together to make these four prints.  And she was the one that told me that, "Paul, it's necessary for you to know the business.  Not do the business, but know the business of art."  I said, "Really?"  So, she said, "Because business was business."  She said, "You need to know how to develop a business strategy for art; your legal business in terms of the law and business regarding your health; business in negotiations and contract reading and the whole thing; and what lawyers were probably the most instrumental lawyers that would help you along the way--the intellectual property lawyers."  She was really smart.  And she was a lawyer, she was studying law herself.  I thought that this was a miracle, another one of the "Julies" [Julieanna Richardson] that just...  And at that time, Julie[anna Richardson]'s -- the law thing, was really starting to take off.  And so, she had to really kind of put me on the back burner.  But she said, "I'll still support you in whatever way I can."  But you knew it was coming to an end.  She came in there, and this business thing, it just blossomed.  So, we made these prints, and we just knew that these prints were going to be the print de jour, going out everywhere.  We were going to make all kinds of money.  We made four black prints, and they flopped.  They didn't go nowhere.
Story_ID: 72473
Speaker 1: And what were the titles?
Speaker 2: 'Links and Lineage,' 'Floral Arrangements of Senegal,' 'Listen to the Hip Bones,' and 'Cousins by the Dozens.' (Laughter) They were, we thought they were great, you know.  And of course, all of our friends thought they were great.  But we didn't know, and I had no idea that on the mass market people just weren't buying black prints, even though these sitcoms were starting to demonstrate some income for artists who did have their works on these programs.  So, I said, oh--and we had borrowed this money from people who she knew, and who I knew, and that we were going to pay it back by giving them the money back and doing the watercolor.  So, it was--you know, it was a, it was a loan.  And I said, "Elba [Vargas]," I said, "we've got twenty thousand dollars of wallpaper here.  We can't do anything with it. So, we've got to go to the convention."  We snuck, we got into the convention.  Of course, we did everything wrong at the conventions.  We just peddled our works around to all of the publishers and printers in the convention until we got thrown out, because we weren't supposed to do that.  And nobody would bite, nobody was interested.  A small arts organization, a publisher and printer called 'Things Graphic,' ran by a man named Ed Robinson, was the only person that really was interested in these prints.  And all of a sudden, out of nowhere, he started selling these prints.  And they started going like crazy, and money was coming in.  Meanwhile, the Hollywood Cinema of Arts, John Cleveland, really wanted it.  The 'Fresh Prince of Bel-Air' was one of the most popular prints, it was called, a piece called 'Red Snapper.'  It was on the 'Fresh Prince of Bel-Air' and it was somewhere mounted between the kitchen and the living room, and you would pass by it all the time.  We couldn't sell this piece for nothing.  It came on Monday, 'Fresh Prince of Bel-Air', and on Tuesday the piece started selling.  I said, "Well, I'll be damned.  This is, this is just unbelievable."  We made close to--and I don't even want to give you figures--but we made some real fat figures the first three or four weeks--the first three or four years of that; it just blossomed.  People wanted to buy the originals of the piece.  I gave her [Lois Mailou Jones] the originals of one. Her mother mother [Essie Lockett] got, bought the originals of another.  But it just, it kept blossoming, it just kept going.  And I realized that I'd better really understand what the business of this is all about.  She was good, she had business savvy, coming back and forth.  And she was, we were piling it in; had no idea that this thing could really, you know, you could sustain yourself over long periods of time.  It was one of those things that, "Okay, we're set for life." (Laughter) This is it.  This is the highest point of our lives.  But like everything, it's a roller coaster; it had its ups and downs.  But there were a few artists out there at the time and so, we were sort of, we were sort of pioneered that way.  But at one point, I still found myself not--and once you make all the money and that kind of stuff, you find yourself not completely fulfilled as an artist.  You know, and that's when I needed to get back in touch with these people who are really solid artists--solid people about the arts, solid about what their mission was supposed to be about.  You know, and John Biggers was really solid about that.  Allan Crite, there was a guy here, Dana [C.] Chandler.  He was very political, very--his work spoke volumes.  He never, he never bit his tooth about what he really wanted--bit his tongue about what he was supposed to do, and what his mission was as an artist.  That, to me, was content.  And I was kind of getting away with that--getting away from that because of the amount of money that I was making.
Speaker 1: Commercial success.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 72474
Speaker 1: Yeah... exactly.  And I needed to get some reference about what it is that I'm supposed to be again.  And I was starting to get typecast as kind of this commercial artist, and was kind of juggling.  You know, really, is that what I want to do?  Or, is that not what I want to do?  I always considered myself a person that was afraid of happiness, didn't trust it.  You know, it was one of the things I really had a problem with.  Because you know, the better things got, I just knew it wasn't supposed to be that way.  So, I would kind of destroy them in my own way, because I didn't trust happiness.  I understood the opposite, so I could handle that.  But happiness was just too--it was just too, it was just too high a high.  I hadn't even sold anything that was that high.  So, I always kind of made sure that I would try to keep myself in another place, because this living was just too good.  I, I knew I wanted to get back in touch with these guys, because they were real.  I know at one point I said, "Look, Elba, we got to do something else."  We went to Mozambique.  It was another war, right?  Another civil war [1977-1992].  And I said, "We can be of some help in Mozambique if we, you know, if I go there and I document that war that's going on over there."  There was a group that was coming out of Boston [Massachusetts] that was going, that was asking for people in all walks of life.  And I volunteered.  I said, "I want to go to Mozambique and really draw and paint the activity there."  And she said, "Sure, go ahead."  I said, "That's what I want to do."  And I said, "You've got to come with me."  She said, "Paul, that's not my thing."  But she went, and it was, again, it was another experience; I did a lot of pieces on Mozambique.  And then I went down with Elizabeth Catlett to Brazil.  Because we had now some liquid cash, where I could move around and stay for a while.  And Elizabeth Catlett and a few other notable artists, who I can't think of right now... Samella Lewis and a couple of others... all went down to Brazil to deal with-
Story_ID: 72475
Speaker 1: Was that when the NCA [National Conference of Artists] went to Brazil?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: That's not, that's different?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  This was, this was--in fact, I didn't go to Brazil when the NCA {National Conference of Artists] went to Brazil.
Speaker 1: So, you and Elizabeth Catlett and-
Speaker 2: Went there for about a month and a half--dealt with the spiritual aspect of this.  They asked me if I would come down and do some documents on the Sisters of the "Bora Morte".  I said, "Sure, I'd love to."  I'm most frightened going to these other countries, but I'm also very curious.  You know, there's a thing about curiosity... if you... if your curiosity just won over.  And so, although I know these places are not going to harm me... it's pretty much me harming myself.  But it's also me understanding a little bit more about myself, and understanding a little bit more about the other worlds, you know--the attachments and all the other kind of stuff.  I went down there and then, again, things just opened up.  I did a lot of things on Brazilian life.  And I learned about these women; these women were called "Women of the Bora Morte".
Speaker 1: What does that mean?
Speaker 2: "Women of Good Death", I'm sorry.  I went to see one, because they're spiritual women.  I went to see them.  I go, and I wanted to get "read" as they call it, you know, "spiritually read."  And they told me that, "This boy, we can't read him."  They said, "He's either confused or confusing."  (Laughter).  "Gosh, shoot, man, what are you talking about?"  And then these women didn't know me.  And of course they spoke in the language--you know, in their Portuguese language.  So, they, the translator said, "Boy, you're either confused or confusing."  And I said, "What does that mean?"  They said, "Well, if you're confused, then you're lying to yourself.  If you're confusing, then you're lying to everybody else."  Okay, well, I was hurt.  I mean I didn't know these ladies, and I was, of course, in denial.  And I just didn't... didn't understand what the deal is.  [pointing backward: "That's the record"].  But it stuck, and that... I wanted to know what did...  How do I get to meet these ladies and deal with...?   You know, this is confusing to me, because that didn't make sense to me.  And they said, "Well, you have to go to Itaparica [Island, Brazil], and you're going to have to bleed."  I said, "Whoa."  I realized that bleeding was a sign of obedience, in opening up.  If you want to help yourself... bleeding was nothing, just a little scratch.  But it was ceremonial, and that was their test to me whether I was willing to deal with, you know, really helping myself.  I said, "Oh, okay."  So, I went to the ceremony and they--after I went through the ceremony, I said, "Okay.  How do I deal with this confusion... and confused... this thing here going on?  I really do believe you know what you're talking about."  They told me, "You need to seek clarity."  I said, "That's it?"  (Laughter).  I said, "Now, you really got me confused."  And I couldn't, you know, I couldn't put it together.
Story_ID: 72476
Speaker 1: And at one point, it hit me.  I asked Jimmy Lee, the guy, one of the guides that was there.  I said, "Jimmy, what does that mean?"  He said, "Seek clarity.  You have to find some clear people."  I said, "Clear people?"  He said, "Yeah, people who are not, they're not running game all the time.  Or you're not... you know, you're not dealing... you're not getting over.  And it's not always, you know, who's on top and that kind of stuff."  He said, "People who are clear, who really understand what yes and no means."  I said, "I don't know those people."  And he said, "Yeah, you know them."  He said, "It's going to be somebody that's always been clear with you."  And I stopped and I thought about it for a long time.  And I said, "My grandfather [foster father James Lockett], he's always been clear.  You know, the whole thing about lying and everything."  I said, "That's, that's..."  And I understood then.  When I went back, I said, "We had a relationship that was so close after that revelation that it was like--when he died, I just, I cried, I cried for like three or four days, I believe."  Because it was just when I got to the point of understanding what it was--and seeing an example and having an example pretty much all my life of what it was... was what I had to strive to.  And that to me is still something I'm working on today.  And I said yeah, that way, I can start to trust happiness; I can really start to accept that.  I can start to accept my emotions, whatever they are.  There was one that guy that said, "The best doctor is the person who denies... who can display a denial of emotions."  I said I couldn't understand that.  He said, "Yeah, the best actor is the person who can display a denial of emotions."  Like, if somebody is really getting ready to cry and won't cry, because there's some...  And if you can display that, if you can act that it out...  It's easier to act that out than somebody who just whimpers and just... an open display of it.  He said, "That's what you have to come to when you're drawing and painting.  And if you can come to that, then you'll start painting with your heart, you know, translate that to your head, and it'll come out in your hands."  I said, "Whoa."  I said, "These are two big lessons here."  But all of these are fixed lessons for myself.  You know, and that's when you get into the Wynton Marsalis.  But I went to, I deviated from going Mozambique; I learned a lot there.  The business was taking on a shine of its own.  But I was more, I was more...  And I think still today, I'm more acclimated to what else am I supposed to do in life?  And I like the business, and I do wear that hat.  And I like it, because I know it, it is sustaining me.  And we have a business downstairs where my brother works, and my daughter's mother works and manages it.  And so, it's providing for, you know, my daughter and my brother and her brother.  So, it's almost like a family affair.  We've got about six or seven people who work down there--frame shop, the whole thing.  But the other lessons I think are really like, you know, real levels of which to strive to.  And the last part is when I was talking about the drawings that I'm doing now.  It's like Wynton Marsalis said, you know.  I heard it somewhere that--you know, the only freedom--there's no freedom in freedom, there's freedom in foundation.
Story_ID: 72477
Speaker 1: And that prompted me to go back to school.  Because I had gotten my bachelor's degree and a quasi-master's degree.  But I didn't really feel as though this--that was complete.  So, I'm back in school.  But I'm back in school because I want to--not learn how to draw and paint so much.  It's one of the things that I want to learn to do; but I want to learn how to teach it from the fundamentals--teach those talented kids, those kids that are in my neighborhood.  But you know, there is something that they have to learn to grow from.  No matter how much talent you have, you still have to have something that funnels it, holds it, and that you can grow from.  That's where I am.  I take kids, and they go to school with me.  I pay for their--pay for their semester.  And at first, I couldn't get this processed; it was a pain in the ass.  And I couldn't, I couldn't...  John told me--John Biggers told me not to do it, not to go back to school.  And a couple of other people, they said, "What are you going to go to school for?  You ain't going to learn nothing."  I said, "Well, I think there's always something you can learn.  You can learn that you don't need to learn."  That might have been good enough for me.  And John [Biggers]--I mean going back to school really helped me.  I had an old teacher that I had at Vesper George [College, Massachusetts].  It was Paul Rahilly, who I always liked, because of his teaching style.  And I came back to him, and I'm doing him now.  And he's been my teacher for the last two and a half years.  I also take--I started to say that I paid for the students.  And if they missed class three times, then they paid me my money back.  But I have them there, because if they miss class, I have to know it.  So, I can't miss class.  So, I'm constantly there, and learning.  And this style, this development, this process, has taken me two and a half years to develop, and still hasn't developed as of yet.  But I'm getting it.  I, you know, I understand what it's about.  And in it, you learn, you know, in varying increments, in very small increments.  And you stop and you start, and you stop and you start.  And I could find myself really developing this process.  And sooner or later I assume that I'll be teaching it, and I think that's where I really want to go.
Story_ID: 72478
Speaker 1: So, that's what's next?  You really-
Speaker 2: I've got the feeling that that's where I know that my contribution can really be valuable, is to go ahead and teach.  And teach in a way--not in the schools, not with people who just want degrees.  But people who really have the talent, who have little means, financial income, to do it in my neighborhoods, and just take this talent and develop it.  Now, a lot of the kids that have gone to school with me, dropped out.  Because this is hard, this is very difficult to learn.  And they're talented, and they don't want to go through this exercise over and over and over and over again.  But there's a couple of them that stayed.  And all of them have made me stay.  (Laughter).  All of them have really been a pure complement.  And I couldn't get it--and they looked at my work at first, and they go, "Um, Mr. Goodnight, I thought you could draw."  They didn't even call me Mr. Goodnight anymore.  They just said, "Hey, Paul, I thought you could draw, man."  (Laughter).  Now, it's... and it was quite deflating.  But it is one thing that I really love doing, and I have a love for this.  This is I guess the gift that I was given, and I'm going to go ahead and pursue it as far as I can.  But the gift has taken me from Japan, China, Russia, throughout the Caribbean, throughout Central America, South America--you know, all throughout the United States.  It has been motivating; it's really made me...  I'm not making it, it is really making me.  As I get older, I start to recognize that this is really what I'm supposed to do.
Story_ID: 72479
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns about the black community today?
Speaker 2: In terms of what?
Speaker 1: In terms of the conditions of people, and where they are I guess politically, socially, economically, culturally?
Speaker 2: I always think they probably need to expand their horizons; probably need to know what our origin is; probably need to know what indigenous... what our... what contributions we made.  My hope is that if I become a better person, then I can lend it to a person.  And then so forth and so on.  I don't have huge... I realize now that I don't think too far or too large for other folk.  But for myself, I want to improve.  You know, I think that's where it really, where I've got to start.  I always--you know, like most folks--you look at our folks, and you always want--we're always more critical of ourselves, and we want more for ourselves.  And we always can find excuses for ourselves.  And you just want to keep challenging them the way that I'm challenging myself, the same kinds of things-- "Look, you can do it, you got it."  I do it, but in little pockets; I don't do it in clusters.  I don't see myself as, you know, anything more than a person that's got a job.  And I always still see myself climbing from somewhere, not on top, but always from the bottom, moving up.  Because I always look at the people who've done so much more than I have done, and I don't see myself as really being...  I'm even surprised that I'm on this, this HistoryMakers thing.  Because I just kept saying, "Julie[anna Richardson], come on, you've got to be kidding.  You know, this is not, I'm not there yet."  But she convinced me that, "Yeah, maybe you do have a story of overcoming challenges."  So, I, I, like I said, I'm not one to be a prognosticator of what the black community should do.  Just try to do right and work within them, and maybe you'll touch a couple of those people, and that will help; they'll see some other stuff.  I do, in the business, though, try to make links with the community, like calendars and that kind of stuff, to show how we can as a community show the image and the calendar as functional, and they can use them as fundraisers and different things like that.  That... that works for me.  So, the business works within the black community a lot.  I just got a job to do something for the Urban League, and building strength within the family.  So, we get projects like that, that make things work with black organizations.  And I love doing that kind of stuff.  But other than that, I'm just a mild-mannered little turpentine-snorter.  (Laughter).
Story_ID: 72480
Speaker 1: That's a strange way to put it.  Your most famous print probably is 'Links and Lineage.'  Is that it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Links and Lineage.'
Speaker 1: 'Links and Lineage.'
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's the one that's owned by the Links club, you say, right?
Speaker 2: Owned by the Links organization, yeah.
Speaker 1: Links organization.  And that was actually--the original was actually stolen at one point?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You want to tell us that story?
Speaker 2: The... this was, it was stolen, it was...  I think the Links organization was allowing the hospital to use it, one of the Jewish hospitals up there.  And late one night, the security guard decided that he liked it a little bit more than the hospital, and he stole it.  And of course, the Links were a pretty strong organization.  So, they're going to come down on it, and they were going to make...  They said, "No, we're not going to the police.  We're going to, we're going to the newspapers, the television.  We're going to, you know, we're going to get some public attention about this."  And that's exactly what they did.  And of course this guy, a little security guard, thinking that he's got... now, just an ordinary piece... sees this piece in the papers, you know.  And that piece, all on TV, "Black artist's work stolen."  "Oh, Jesus," he said, "What did I do?"  And it got around, because he was bragging about this piece that he acquired.  It got around.  And he lived in one of these little small tenement houses... big giant piece of artwork on display.  He thought that he had this fifty million dollar piece, or something.  He thought he had a very, very expensive piece.  Now, he wants to negotiate.  He's caught, but he wants to negotiate.  First, he wants to negotiate for big money.  People were laughing at him then.  Now, he wants to negotiate for staying out of jail, (Laughter), of being arrested.  And he had a friend that worked at the Boys Club up the street.  And he said that he would take the piece to the Boys Club if he would not go to jail, or if he would not be arrested, and that kind of stuff.  They negotiated; they realized that all they really wanted was the painting.  So they, but, and in one way, it was very favorable for me, because I got more attention behind that than I probably would have ever gotten, because it was a piece that was stolen.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 72411
Speaker 1: We were talking about the pursuit of happiness on some level.  But now, you've had a mentor, though.  I mean, you were talking about John Biggers being one of your primary mentors.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And he was mentored by someone at one time, and seems to be, in terms of linkages--you know, "reach one, teach one" type thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And he--John, John Biggers, and Charles White, and Elizabeth Catlett--and one of our icons here, John Wilson, all went down to Mexico and learned under the great Mexican muralist, Diego Rivera.  These guys... Diego Rivera, as we know, was a Communist.  So, he had a political slant.  And he knew that the politics in this country for black folks was terrible.  And he wanted to get those talented people to basically paint in the way that he painted, to deal with the exploitation of his political agenda.  It wasn't so clearly iron-cut like that, but that's generally what was going to come out, I guess, if you live amongst people who really have an agenda.  You're going to--that's going to spill off.  But most of what he did was teach them a style of painting, like Flemish style and Renaissance style, and the different kinds of Dutch styles--many different houses of art.  And that's what they took with them.  Elizabeth Catlett decided to stay down there in Mexico, and still lives there; still resides there.  At one point, she was ostracized and couldn't come back to the United States.  But John [Biggers] and Charles White, they continued to teach here in the United States.  And I met John [Biggers] in Africa.  And he was holding court, and everybody was laughing.  He was a great storyteller.  And everybody would laugh, even the Africans, who couldn't understand what John was saying, would laugh like crazy.  (Laughter).  You know, it's one of those kinds of people; he was so expressive.  And his eyes--he had these big hairy eyebrows.  And his eyes would buck up, and you'd see those eyebrows go up and down.  So, when he got a chance to tell them stories, he would really tell them stories.  He was funny, and he was good, and he was smart.  But he had a Southern way of releasing the story.  So, he pulled you right in.  He didn't feel like he was teaching; it feels like he was telling you a story.  But all the time, he was teaching you.  And he had all of these little funny anecdotes between the lessons.  And when you walked away, after John [Biggers] was finished, you realized that you had been taught.  And he then... we saw each other again and...  He was a good drinker, and he was a good storyteller, and he was really a garish man.  He had a personality that just linked people, and we, all of us were just leaches.  We just sucked onto him, and every one of his words.  I then met him again in Hampton [University, Virginia], where he saw my works.  And he goes, "Man, this shit is good."  (Laughter).  I said, "Really?"  "Yeah, man."  He said, "You don't know what you got here, do you?"  And then I--you know, I'm smiling and laughing and carrying on, and I'm feeling exhilarated.  "Yeah, boy..."  And all the time, he is then not so much talking about my artwork, but where am I going to go with this?  "What are you going to do?  How are you going to present it?  What are you doing it for?  Who are you doing it for?  Why are we doing it?"  That, to me, was questions that he was putting in my head that I hadn't even thought about, you know-- and made me answer them.  And then started injecting me with things like--you know, Habufa Mantus, who was a great, who is a great philosopher of the world--and told me to read his book, 'From Water to Spirits' ['Of Water and the Spirit', Malidome Some] and that we would talk more.  And he wouldn't talk to me until I read the book.  He said, "Did you read that book, man?"  I said, "No."  He said, "Okay, I'll see you."  (Laughter).  And then he'd hang up.  I said... you know, so I started reading the damn book.  And I loved talking to him.  I said, "Hey, John [Biggers], how you doing?"  He said, "Hey, man, how you doing?"  Then he'd talk and laugh, and stuff like that for half a minute, and he goes, "How's that book?"  I said, "Well, I'm halfway through it."  He said, "Okay, well, I'll see you."  (Laughter).  I said, I got to finish this book, there's no doubt about it.  I finished the book, and I realized how deep that book was, about rites to passage, and that we all had to go through it.  And we had to understand what that rites of passage was.
Story_ID: 72412
Speaker 1: And one of my best paintings is going to be 'The Rites to Passage.'  Because I'm going to have to understand it... and that black men do not always have that rites to passage for the most part, because our rites to passage in America has been jail, has been some other kind of atrocity.  We haven't had that mentorship to take us to one point to the next--to take us through that age of seven to fourteen comfortably without getting into trouble--that there was something that we had to do before we get to seven to fourteen, and fourteen to twenty-one.  To learn how to be a man was very, very important.  And they say they have it in every other culture.  They have it, you know, like the Bar Mitzvah; they have those ceremonies that tells you that you have graduated to that stage.  So, we don't have that.  That's why there are so many people--like so many black young men--that are flaunting and looking for that, and we don't have it.  And you see them going to jail.  He said, "You are a perfect description of one."  He said, "That's why you got to paint it."  He said, "You paint 'Rites to Passage'--what it means... understand what it means.  You talk about it, you live it, and you make somebody get through it; you help them get through it.  That's your job."  I said, "That's a big job."  And he said, "That's what I'm talking about, it's a big job."  So, I did one calendar.  It was called 'Fire, Function, and Foundation.'  And I used a young man by the name of James Ayres in the calendar.  And the other one was John Biggers in the calendar, and of course myself.  'Fire [Function and Foundation]' was the young man, with the eagerness to learn; the eagerness to ask questions and make mistakes, and challenge you, and that kind of stuff... just the hutzpah.  You know, that young men's mentality, that "I can do everything.  You know, you can't tell me anything, but I still need to learn."  The blockage of bravado and that stuff, you know, and how you get through that, but knowing that they had the talent to do what they got to do.  I said, that's fire.  You need fire.  You got to get burnt in order to stay alive.  And then he talks about foundation.  He said, "I'm 'Foundation.'  I'm here to teach you to teach them.  They don't get to me before they get through you.  You are function, you are nothing but a conduit.  You are a teacher as well as a student.  You know, you are vulnerable as well as educated."  And he said, "And if you don't know your role, that's the rites to passage.  If you don't know your role, you'll skip over a role, and you'll never make it.  Because you can't..."  He said, "You can't crawl... you can't walk until you crawl--you just hurt yourself."  (Laughter).
Story_ID: 72413
Speaker 1: And so, that's the kind of mentoring that John [Biggers] gives you.  He doesn't--and he puts it in that nice, general southern dialect that's exciting.  But all of a sudden, you find yourself being so attentive to every word that he's saying.  But he wasn't going to talk to me until I read that book.  He wasn't going... and he was still going to be nice and gentle and kind and funny.  But as soon as he asked one question, he hung up.  He said, "You know, I'm not here to just talk to you, you know.  I don't need you as my best buddy, I got good friends.  (Laughter).  But I got, you got yourself a job to do, you know, and that's part of it."  So, the mentoring wasn't always in the work, although he was one of those people that says you've got to do a lot of work.  He said there's no such thing as a lazy masterpiece.  He said, "You got work, boy."  And he said, "Right now, we see a lot of masterpieces."  He said, "A lot of quasi-masterpieces.  And we've got a lot of people they call geniuses."  And he said, "That's a word that's been thrown around too much.  These people don't know it."  He also said things like, you know...  And I asked him how does he do all of the work that he does?  And he said, "How do I do all the work?"  And he said, "How do I find...?  He said, "How do you not do all the work?"  He just put it back on you.  He said, "Man, I got so much work I ain't done.  I just can't imagine myself living this long.  So, that's how I do all the work.  I don't think about the work I've done, I think about the work I've got to do."  He would put everything in kind of a context that sounded like wisdom was just pouring out.  But this was a guy that, you know, he would talk about everything else, too... and laugh and joke about women, chasing skirts, and all those other kinds of stuff.  But he--when he wanted you to get something--and he targeted you as one of the people who was going to do something--he made sure that you did something before he'd give you something.  And I always thought that was very, very wise of him.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was talking, he talked about [Georg] Hegel.  And you know, he said, "Hegel said that we were pre-logical."  He said, "Do you believe that?"  I said, "Who the hell is Hegel?"  He said, "Hegel, he was a German philosopher.  He was one of the people that put together the encyclopedia.  People listened to him.  He said brown-skinned people and black people were pre-logical.  That means that they didn't, they couldn't put things together."  He said, "See what you've got to deal with?  See what you've got to come up against?  They look at the encyclopedia and know the person who writes the encyclopedia, and the next thing you know, you don't have a platform.  This man already created a platform for them."  He said, "Thank God for [Louis] Leakey."  (Laughter).  So, I'm saying, "Wow."  He said, "That's what you're dealing with.  You're not a pre-logical... you couldn't think logically.  That's what he was saying--that you didn't have A or B to sit it in."  He said, "And we know better than that.  We look at the Pyramids, we look at the Sphinx; we look at the things that happened in the Benin civilization."  And then he would go on about the Benin civilization--where it is, and how we left footprints, cultural prints, all throughout the world.  And then he said, "Boy, I got... I can't... I ain't talking to you no more.  Man, you hurting me."  (Laughter).  That kind of mentorship is better than somebody that's trying to teach you how to draw and paint.  Because you can be drawing and painting, and he'll be talking to you while you're drawing and painting.  And then he'll say something about your artwork.  "That don't look right."  But then he'll come back to the other part.  I've had that kind of mentorship from John [Biggers].
Story_ID: 72414
Speaker 1: I've had Dana [C.] Chandler, who I always thought was a great role model--who was direct and forceful, and did some of the murals in this city during the time of the sixties [1960s] and seventies [1970s] when art had to take its voice, too.  He made huge murals, and he took chances; and he stood out there amongst everybody, and just challenged folks visually.  He said, "You got to clean up your community."  And he said, "Murals are not for the artist, they're for the community.  If you don't do a good mural in the community that the community accepts as a building block, it'll be destroyed tomorrow."  And he meant it.  He said, "So, get your ego out of it, and start working in that community."  Dana [C. Chandler] was perfect.  And Allan Crite was just an old, smart man, you know, just to hear him talk.  He's an old, smart man; it's amazing.  I heard the interview didn't go as well as Julie[anna Richardson] wanted it to go.  I wish I would have interviewed Allan [Crite], because you know, he's--he talks about, you know, the industrial revolution and all the other kinds of things, and how it plays a part--is playing a destructive and productive part in our life that we live here.  I had a whole tape of his, you know, where I interviewed him.  And just, he just went on and on.  It's his own philosophy, but he's quite a philosopher.  He went to Harvard [University, Massachusetts], he went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] and all of that.  But that's, you know, those were just--he said, "Those were just citations, that wasn't the real thing."  (Laughter).  I believe in [Lois] Mailou Jones; I think that she was always trying to teach me.  In her own way, she taught me the discipline of art, the working discipline.  But I learned not only from these old, wise, fundamental people--I learned from young people, you know.  I learned, because they know how to push me.  I learned, because they know how to ask questions that I don't know how to answer sometimes, and I can't make it up.  I learned that they need to get some direct answers; they don't need a whole lot of flowers.  So, the learning comes from a whole lot...  And understand that being... function... to conduit... is that things are passing through you at this particular time.  And as long as they're passing through you, they don't belong to you.  He would, John [Biggers] would say--he said, "Man, you got all that artwork."  I said, "Yeah."  And he said, "Are you afraid to sell anything?"  I said, "Well, there are some things I want to keep."  He said, "They ain't yours."  "What do you mean, they ain't mine?"  He said, "They don't belong to you."  He said, "Most anytime you sell a painting, it did more things for you than you ever did than just for you having it."  He said, "It's like having children.  You may make them; you may, you know, create them; you may go ahead and nurture them and help them grow. But they don't belong to you.  No, fool, not yours."  (Laughter).  He said, "Get rid of those paintings."  He said, "If you have too much of your own work around, you start to stifle yourself in your own ego."  He said, "Get rid of it, and put some other people's work up there."  He said, "Grow from that."  And he said, "Let them, somebody else, have your work.  That's when it's going to grow for you.  They do more for you in somebody else's house than they do in yours."  I said, "Dang."  (Laughter).  So, and John, John Lockhart is always a great philosopher; you'll see that.
Story_ID: 72415
Speaker 1: Now, you just returned from Ghana, and it's been inspiring some of your latest work.  You've got a whole lot of work backed up, you said, in your mind, you know, from this trip to Ghana.  Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: I really don't.  Because I hadn't, I hadn't spent that long in Ghana; I've got to go back.  I'm, I need to have the experience.  I just went to the honeymoon, you know, being in Ghana.  But what I did do was track some of John Biggers' watering holes, as I coined the phrase--some of the places where he's been.  And I think that kind of encourages me.  Because he's got a book called In the 'Upper Room.'  And most of the work that he has is works of Ghana.  He spent, I think, about eight--he and his wife spent about eight months in Ghana, if I'm not mistaken.  But he spent the rest of his life painting.  I said that's got to be some powerful stuff, you know.  And if I can go to a place and never get energy-deficient from the inspiration of one place...  He spent a lot of time in Africa, different places in Africa.  But he painted the African experience, that indigenous African experience, and he understood it really well.  I have gone to Ghana and found some fascinating things to paint, you know, just because I like the sights.  But I hadn't really got into the total meaning of what it feels like to have Ghana coming out of your heart--you know, running through your head and running through your hand.  That's the kind of painting like I did in Brazil.  That's... and when you regurgitate that stuff, you want to just keep regurgitating.  You don't have enough paper to, you know, to do the next piece.  And that's when you realize that you really absorbed a whole lot.  Because the next piece, you're just as anxious as the piece before that.  I'm at the stage where I got excited about a marketplace, and I'm painting that.  I'm also painting a couple of other things that I had in Ghana.  But I've got to back.
Story_ID: 72416
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, at this point--and I know you're still young and still working, you know; and still the conduit is still the same.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: At this point, what would you consider as your legacy?  I'm asking it, because we always ask people this. [telephone starts to ring.]  We were asking you about what at this point do you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I think if I make a minor contribution... that is my legacy.  I think I'm here to be a contributor.  So, I don't, I don't see big things.  I think the little things are big, if you do enough of them.  You know, you just continue--you follow that path, that's it.  I know other people see themselves as something real big.  I just think those little things really mount up.  And that's where I want to go and just continue to do those little things, and they'll speak for themselves.
Speaker 1: Here's a slightly different...  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  That's very "slightly."  Maybe the way I remember my grandfather--as a person who sought clarity.  If that's as much as I leave, I really have done a lot.  Because he was saying that clarity is truth, and truth is love.  And that's, that's a pocket full.  That's a whole lot of--that's a long way to go from where I am right now.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you, Sir.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 72417
Speaker 1: This noble lady here is Mae Gadpile, who has been my spiritual guidance throughout my life, always there as the intercessor.  She graduated from Howard University [Washington D.C.], had a religious affiliation; owned a school, one of the largest Montessori schools in the Roxbury [Connecticut] area.  And decided to go back to school at the age of ninety, to go to Africa and teach... but has taught all of her life, never had any children, and married maybe about two or three times.  That little rascal is me, that's me.
Speaker 2: When?
Speaker 1: That's 1963, I think it is.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's my grandmother, that's the matriarch.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's her again with her husband.  She was determined not to fall into that light-skinned, dark-skinned thing.  And they told her that, you know, they wanted her to marry light, because it was a thing.  And she went and found the darkest man she could find, (Laughter) and married him.  She was part Indian... she was part Cherokee and part African-American; that's my Uncle Bernard; he was the renegade.  I remember in--I don't remember it, but when they moved to Ellington, Connecticut, the white folks blamed him for, I think it was stealing something, and they were going to burn the house down.  And this... actually you went past the... that's the house in Ellington.
Speaker 2: Oh, Okay.
Speaker 1: And they were going to burn the house down and lynch him, and that was their house in Ellington.  It was the only black house, black landowners, in the area.  They owned a big farmhouse.  And they all came out to lynch him.  And he was ready to fight, and then they finally dispersed; I believe that's my brother Carl [Goodnight], myself, and my mother.  The little guy in the lap is me.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: "Punky Brewster" there; and that's my mother and my grandmother, and my mother and her children, all of whom I don't know.  I know my Aunt Mae [Gadpile] is in there, I know Uncle Bernard and Uncle Grant's there.  And I don't know the other people.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: That's my Aunt Mae [Gadpile]'s wedding.  And the woman right next to her in the center is my mother.  And to the far right, seated, is their mother.  That's Grandma.  And then there's their brothers and the groom--brothers on either side, and then the groom of Aunt Mae's.  I think that was her second marriage.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's Aunt Mae [Gadpile].  Isn't that a classy picture?  Yeah, I think she was in her twenties or so then.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's my mother and Mr. Goodnight in Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 2: Was he from Detroit?
Speaker 1: He was from, he was from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], right outside Pittsburgh.  And he went and got employment and stuff up in Detroit [Michigan]... he liked the Detroit area.  (Boy, that thing can really zoom in on things.)  That's Aunt Mae [Gadpile] again.  I think she was sixteen, or she might have been a little older than that.  I think she was getting ready to go to Howard [University, Washington D.C.]; and that little guy is me, wearing suspenders and the rope (Laughter) tied around his pants, and making sure those pants didn't fall down.  And that's my cousin Joannell, hoping those pants don't fall down, you know, her dress is up so high; that's my Uncle Bernard, that's Joannell, and Uncle Asbury and their sons and daughters. And Aunt Mae, that's her in the middle in the white dress.  That's Tommy, the tall guy on top.  That's Joannell's brother, that's my cousin; and that's Aunt Mae there.  She was a special woman in my life, she really...  Well, I don't know if you... did you do this one here?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: That's my daughter and Aunt Mae [Gadpile].  That's Aziza Ali Robinson Goodnight [daughter].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Her eighty-seventh birthday.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Say that one more time.  I had just started rolling the tape when you-
Speaker 1: Okay.  That was Aunt Mae [Gadpile] at her eighty-seventh birthday.  She would have a birthday celebration every year for herself, and she would charge people admission to come.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Really?  Just say that that's you with her.
Speaker 1: That's myself with Aunt Mae.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I had the first dance.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's John Biggers, the man himself.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.  All right, this one.
Speaker 1: That's John and Hazel Biggers in 1963, I believe, in Ghana with the chief that he was staying with at the time.  You want me to turn that down?
Speaker 2: It's up to you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is just--what you're saying is just for creating a caption.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Story_ID: 72418
Speaker 1: I mean, he was a guitar-playing... rousing... and he fell in love with her because she didn't take no mess.  And she had a little gun.  She used to carry a little gun, and she'd deal all the cards.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.  We got the tape on now, so go ahead and give us the description.
Speaker 1: For these two people?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This is Essie Mae Lockett and James Lockett [foster parents], two people who raised, I think, fourteen children.  And when I came, there was only seven or eight.  And she raised us to, all to be one family.
Speaker 2: And next?
Speaker 1: This is Lois Mailou Jones and I in Haiti in one of her watering holes, where we would sit and draw.  And I would listen to stories about her and her husband, and how they used to go to these spots.  But this is way up in Kenscoff; it's way up in the mountains.
Speaker 2: Spell that last word.
Speaker 1: Kenscoff?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: K-E-N-scoff.
Speaker 2: Okay.  C-o-u-g-h?
Speaker 1: I don't know. [Kenscoff]
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right.  These are six of my [foster] brothers and one sister, I believe, and her husband.  Roland, Richard, Rush, Junior, Junior's son--Little Junior who's the big guy-
Speaker 2: Are you going left to right?
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  You want me to do that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  If they're going to caption it, they need to be-
Speaker 1: Okay.  Left to right is Stanley, who's a cousin.  [Foster brother] Richard, right on top of him.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: [Foster sister] Aggie, and to the right of her--right of him--the fellow in the background with the glasses is [foster brother] Rush.  Then right of Rush in front of him is Aggie's husband.  Oh God, I've forgotten his name, it'll come back to me.  And [foster brother] Roland in front of him on his knees.  To the right in the background is Little Junior, the big guy.  And then there's [foster brother] Junior, and then there's myself.
Speaker 2: Okay.  When was this taken?
Speaker 1: Probably about, oh, about a month ago.
Speaker 2: Okay, very good.  Next.  We'll start with this one here.
Speaker 1: Oh, who's that handsome guy?  That's a long time ago.  That's during the Temptations.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: The suit and everything.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  You don't even look like a troublemaker in that photo.
Speaker 1: Yeah, because I had just got my hair done.  Don't mess with it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I was thinking.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  "Konkaline" [Vaseline].
Speaker 2: That's one of those troublemaking hairdos.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That is Mary and--no, that's Marva, I'm sorry.  That's Marva and myself when I was in Boston [Massachusetts] with the people that took care of me.  And that was the one, we called her Sister; that's a more recent picture, probably about two years ago.  It would be nice to have her mother, [daughter] Aziza [Ali Robinson Goodnight]'s mother, in there; Ali and her tour guide.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Let's start again.  You caught me... I wasn't quite rolling.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: That's Aziza Ali and her road manager.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: I have a--this is not too bad a picture of the three women. Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's [daughter] Aziza [Ali Robinson Goodnight] and her other road manager.  Okay, from--I'll go from right to left.
Speaker 1: Left to right.
Speaker 2: Left to right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, God.  That's Bernice Robinson, [daughter] Aziza [Ali Robinson Goodnight]'s mother, Miss Pettis, a person we used to visit in Florida, and that's Aziza.  She, Miss Pettis passed away just last week--last year.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.  Who's in this one?
Speaker 2: That's her mother again and [foster brother] Roland's--my niece and [daughter] Aziza [Ali Robinson Goodnight].
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Hold on a second.
Speaker 2: The many faces, huh?  Good Lord, I don't even know the year.  All I know is I was out of trouble, I was still wearing my bibs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  The changes we go through in life, huh?
Speaker 1: Do you know the year, a time, or anything?
Speaker 2: This is in college.  This is in, yeah, this is in Mass [Massachusetts] College of Art, protest time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Can't you tell by those-
Speaker 1: Yeah, right. (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --that mustache?
Speaker 1: You're right, okay.  Okay, you ready?  Vietnam-
Speaker 2: --that handlebar mustache.  Yeah, that's in Vietnam.  I had a monkey called T.T.  We found him in the jungles.  He lasted probably about a good four months, three months.  He actually thought I was his mother.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Get out of here.
Speaker 2: He did.  I mean, he would... nobody could... he would bite people if they came close to me or anything.  Don't mess with me.
Speaker 1: T.T. the monkey.
Speaker 2: Actually, what you saw was me reading to him.  He was actually, (Laughter) he actually would sit there and listen to me read to him.
Speaker 1: You taught him, you know.  Okay, the next one here?
Speaker 2: This one is--we were going, this is in Tooey Wah [Tu Hinh].  We were going to hop in the Snook helicopter.  And I was doing a courier run with the "45".  And I can't remember who this guy is.  But that was one of the Koreans, of the Rock Force.  They were brutal people.
Speaker 1: Next.
Speaker 2: Searching for mines... I think I was there doing a mine sweep; that's with the M-79 grenade launcher in Ben Het in northern Vietnam.
Speaker 1: All right, next.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  Oh, Lord.  Okay, we're going to do some celebrity-
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry, repeat the caption once more.
Speaker 2: The Boston Marathon in nineteen--I'd say eighty [1980].
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's one of the shows that I gave at the Piano Factory here.  I was standing on the beams there, the wooden beams.
Speaker 1: And over here?
Speaker 2: Oh, Lord.  Those were the days, my friend.
Speaker 1: What year do you think that was?
Speaker 2: I was pretty thin then, huh?  (Laughter).  Could have been, that could have been any...  I think it was during the marathon days.  It might have been in the late seventies, early eighties, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Next.
Speaker 2: Back down memory lane.  That's Aziza [Ali Robinson Goodnight] and I painting the same painting.  She did it with her fingers, I did it with a brush.  It's amazing.  We had that painting, we put it into a show.  And I go and look, and they just put "Goodnight" under it, right?  And they said, "Wow, look at... Paul's gone in a whole 'nuther direction."  Didn't put a price on there, and a person offered us--I think it was close to about six, seven thousand dollars for it.
Speaker 1: Next?
Speaker 2: That's an article in the Boston Globe.  They were trying to feature myself dealing with the fact that I did a lot of television--did a lot of set designs for TV and movies.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  You didn't tell us that in the interview.
Speaker 2: I know.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Just kidding.  Okay.
Speaker 2: We touched on some of that.
Speaker 1: This is out at the--this is out at New London Day [Connecticut], I believe.  And it's pretty much the same thing.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is a more recent one in Africa, in one of the villages that we stopped at.  That's Village "Koos Kos", I think it is.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's my mother, that's Marjorie J. Johnson [Brown, biological mother].
VIDEOGRAPHER:  We already did this one, didn't we?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We did this one.
Speaker 1: This one, yeah.
Speaker 2: We didn't do this one.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  We did that one?  No.  So-
Speaker 2: That's in 1997 in the Amazon in Brazil, and my first piranha catch.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's John Biggers and myself in front of his house in Houston [Texas].
Speaker 1: When was that?
Speaker 2: I think that was in 2000 or so.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: I was auctioned off for the Valley Corporation--sold for fifty-one thousand dollars, and was one of the fundraisers for the Valley Corporation.  It's a youth development group in Harlem, New York.  It's called Nubian Nation.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: The cover for the Alvin Ailey Group, and the Harlem Boys Choir.  And this particular--then they, what they did was put a blurb on me on the inside.  So, that's what you're looking at.  This particular piece here is called "Musical Thunder," and it's a group called Ola Dume, out of Brazil.  It's an all drumming group.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Did we get the bottom?  Did you get the headline of Alvin Ailey at the top of it?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: That's a piece done by Lou Jones, who's a noted photographer, international noted photographer.  And he was shooting a series of pieces on people who were recognized in the Boston [Massachusetts] area.  And here, he shot through glass.  And so, I was painting on the glass, and he was shooting through the glass.
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: This one here was--they gave me a day in New London [Connecticut].  (Laughter).  They finally, they gave me the key to the city.  And this is the group, the Kente Group.  It's called Kente something or another.  This is--I don't remember--this is Margo, that woman there.  She brought me in and made sure that they went well--set the whole thing up.  This woman here... it's a woman who's known me while... I can't... I don't even know who it is.  Who is it?
Speaker 1: That's okay.  Do you know the date?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was I think two years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Charles--oh, from right to left?  You want me to go this way? Left to right.
Speaker 1: Left to right.  That's my, that's me.  This is a representative of the arts.  I can't really remember his name... Kato.  This is William Toliver in the center, he just passed.  He was a highly recognized artist, did incredible things.  And Charles... Oh God, I can't remember Charles' last name.  Also, one of the notable Olympic art...  And we were signing our posters--prints, actually--posters at that time for the Olympics.
Speaker 2: What year, ninety-six [1996] did you say?
Speaker 1: Ninety-Six [1996].
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: And that's the Olympic piece.  The fellow on the right-
Speaker 2: Is he from the U.S. Olympic Committee or something?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He was the one that put that, the piece together.  And I can call in his name; I don't remember.
Speaker 2: Okay, that'll be good.
Speaker 1: Yeah, because he was very, very important.  And the woman on the right is Denise Da Costa.  I always remember the women's names.  (Laughter).  Denise Da Costa, yeah.  That's--she also, she was also instrumental in promoting the Olympics.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Myself and the notorious painting, 'Links and Lineage,' and Pat Hardiman Long, one of the Links organizers and the one who commissioned me to actually do the piece.
Speaker 2: Very good, next.
Speaker 1: That particular piece was shot for People Magazine in, I guess it was ninety-seven [1997].  That's my daughter and I in Franklin Park [Boston, Massachusetts], and I threw her away.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, next.  Okay, we're rolling.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That is the Chief, off to the right of me.  And the young boy in front of him is his guardian, who carries the shield--sort of the sword to protect him all the time.  And that's a sword of peace.  And beside him is one of the elders, myself, and another one of the elders.  And the woman off to the far right is Marian Langley, who also traveled with us, and a good friend of mine out of Atlanta [Georgia].
