Story_ID: 238259
Speaker 1: Thank you [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Robert] Goodwin, we're gonna begin with me saying that my name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton and I'm the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer and this interview is taking place in Washington, D.C. and today's date is Thursday, August 25th of 2004.  And if you would please for the record tell us our full name, including your middle name and spell it please.
Speaker 2: It's Robert Kerr Goodwin, K-E-R-R, Goodwin, G-O-O-D-W-I-N.
Speaker 1: And would you please tell us the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: November the 15th, 1948, in Tulsa, Oklahoma.
Story_ID: 238260
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Robert] Goodwin the next couple of questions are just some People magazine-ish type questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Just to help us get familiar with the process and also help us learn a little bit more about you.  So, for these questions I ask that you just give us short answers.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite snack food is potato chips.
Speaker 1: Okay, your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: The summer.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Sydney, Australia.
Speaker 1: And, your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I can't do everything, but I can do something.
Speaker 1: And your occupation, please?
Speaker 2: President and chief executive officer of the Points of Light Foundation [Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 238261
Speaker 1: If you would, [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Robert] Goodwin, let's begin talking a little bit about your mother [Jeanne Osby Goodwin].  Would you please share with us your mother's name, where your mother was born and where she grew up, that kinda thing.
Speaker 2: My mother celebrated her 101st birthday on July the sixth of this year.  She was born therefore in Springfield, Illinois in 1903.  She is very much the, not only mother figure for our family and extended family, but really for the City of Tulsa [Oklahoma] where she still is a, is a, living and alone, and she was a social worker and a school teacher she taught school for thirty-eight years.  Married my father [Edward Goodwin] when she was a cheerleader and he was a football player at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee].  Has lead a very fulfilled and meaningful life, worked for Ralph Bunch out of college, friends with W. Du-B--Du Bois' [W.E.B. Du Bois] daughter [Yolande Williams] and classmate.  Introduced Whitney Young's wife [Margaret Buckner Young] to him, been a hostess for world personalities traveling through Tulsa for different reasons, but quite a marvelous woman.
Speaker 1: Did your mother ever share any stories with you about what it was like growing up in Springfield?
Speaker 2: Yes, her father [James Osby] was a janitor who worked in the government offices and in different parts of his career for private individuals in Springfield.  We have for example a framed newspaper advertisement with an ad for [Abraham] Lincoln's law practice that we got because he, he was able--my grandfather was able to receive it as a gift from one of his heirs in Springfield.  She talked about living in segregated Illinois at a time when she and her family were admonished to try to do all that they could to take advantage of all of the educational opportunities made available to them.  What it was like to try to live up to those expectations both in school and in the community.  She left Springfield as a young woman to go to college in Nashville [Tennessee] and has not returned, but yes, I've heard many stories about her mother [Minnie Osby] and her father, her small family, and life in Springfield, Illinois.
Speaker 1: And how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: Elegant, gracious, self-effacing, humble, a woman of great faith and faithfulness.  Married to my father for fifty years before his death, but a woman who, I think embodies the idea of a, of a, graciousness and grace.
Story_ID: 238262
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your father now, starting with his name, where he was born, same thing.
Speaker 2: My father is--was--Edwin, but, later changed his name to Edward Lawrence Goodwin.  He was born also at the turn of the century in Water Valley, Mississippi.  He used to say that he left Water Valley as soon as he was old enough to walk.  His father [James Henri Goodwin] was a businessman in that community and then relocated to Oklahoma and he went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], there he met my mother [Jeanne Osby Goodwin].  He played football there; he was very much the debonair man about town.  His, his, nickname growing up, but in college was Sugar man.  He left Fisk with a degree in education, came back to Tulsa [Oklahoma], his proposal to and marriage to my mother was somewhat unorthodox but, say, perhaps a word in a moment, but, they decided he couldn't make any money teaching school and so he started a series of small businesses as an entrepreneur.  He had a haberdashery, a shop, and an ice cream parlor and a tavern all the sort of steady succession and (clears throat) got involved eventually in the numbers racket in Tulsa and became pretty good at it and became sort of known as the man in, in, in that community.  And there are a lot of colorful stories about his life there.  He had an opportunity to get in the newspaper business and again, through a series of events where he felt that he wanted to have his own vehicle to communicate with the community and he purchased a small tabloid publication [The Tulsa Star] that became a well-respected weekly newspaper [The Oklahoma Eagle] serving the black community in Tulsa.  And, as a matter of fact, during his career in the numbers racket he got into some financial difficulty at one point and he was very close to Senator Robert [S.] Kerr of Kerr-McGee Oil [Industries, Inc.], Bob Kerr was a very prominent and powerful senator and a mentor to L.B.J. [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] and my father used to basically take care of things for him in the black community.  So he gets into this financial difficulty and he goes to the senator and I don't know if it was $5000 or $50,000 but for a black man in Oklahoma in the 1940s it was a lot of money.  Senator Kerr hearing about his need reached for his checkbook and he said, "Ed, I've got one question for you" he said, "am I giving this to you or am I loaning it to you?" and my father said, "no, Senator, it's a loan," and so he wrote out the check, well, I came out Robert Kerr Goodwin, my, my--that's my middle name, in gratitude for the senator's involvement.  He later went to law school and helped to integrate the law school of The University of Tulsa [The University of Tulsa College of Law, Tulsa, Oklahoma].  He practiced law for twenty years before his, before his death in 1978.  So, he was a very hard driving, aggressive, community-oriented individual who left his own great legacy in, in our community.
Story_ID: 238263
Speaker 1: Can you share some of the stories with us?  You said there were lots of colorful stories about him [Goodwin's father, Edward Goodwin] and the numbers business.
Speaker 2: Well, there was one instance the instance involving the--his need for money and Senator [Robert S.] Kerr's involvement.  I think had something to do with arson, I think somebody came to him and wanted him to have--to burn down the Masonic Lodge in (laughter) Tulsa [Oklahoma], I suppose for insurance or who knows what.  And so they paid my father, who in turn paid somebody in the community to burn down this building.  The guy got caught and implicated my father and his responsibility in the whole matter, which is why he then had to come up with a lot of money.  But, you know, he was the kinda guy that--he used to carry a 357-magnum in his back pocket and people gave him wide berth in the black community and the white community because they figured he might use it.  And, so, he definitely knew how to relate to people of all--every echelon because, he was equally comfortable and had many occasions to work with the power brokers in the community who recognized his influence and who--and as he sort of left that life and went into law there was many instances where he was encouraged to run for public office or to take judgeships and things, which he always said he didn't want to do.  He was perfectly content to pursue his legal career and publish the newspaper [The Oklahoma Eagle] and to be involved at the community level.
Story_ID: 238264
Speaker 1: We often entertained celebrities and personalities that came through the city [Tulsa, Oklahoma] or--back during the days of the Chitlin Circuit.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: As a matter of fact Dinah Washington stayed with us on her time in Tulsa and taught me how to play chess when I was eight years old.  She was out on the bank of a pond adjacent to our home out--on the outskirts of Tulsa [Oklahoma] at that time.  And we were talking and I was sorta sitting up under her knee and she wanted to know if I knew how to play or wanted to play chess.  She sent her manager to go get her chess board and came back out.  We set it up there on the bank and she taught me how to play chess and she then told the story of her life, married eight times and she was joking about having wrapped a trombone around the head of her last husband.  And as I indicated we had many, many civil rights figures (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who, who were some others that come to mind?
Speaker 1: George Washington Carver stayed with us.  Stayed with my--this was before I was born obviously, but on his periodic trips to the--to the-Oklahoma we ended up being his hosts and have written communications from him expressing his gratitude for the hospitality.  I mentioned Roy Wilkins, Fannie Lou Hamer, Mahalia Jackson, there were--there was always--James Brown, people who were in what is a relatively small town of Tulsa, found their way to some level of interaction with my, with my family because of, because of their role in the community with the newspaper and as community leaders and the rest--
Story_ID: 238265
Speaker 1: So it, it was always something going on; always an emphasis about achieving your potential.  Always an emphasis doing the very best that, that you could do with--under the circumstances that you have to work with.  I, I remember, for example, before the schools were integrated in Little Rock [Arkansas] and subsequently in Tulsa [Oklahoma], because we lived outside the city, about fifteen miles away on the outskirts of a small community known as Alsuma [Oklahoma], a very stereotypical little town about five hundred people half black, half white divided by a railroad track and a two room schoolhouse.  My mother [Jeanne Osby Goodwin] taught three grades at the same time.  Each row of students was a class and she taught me in grades one and two and then when the schools were integrated we were all bussed up the street to a larger country consolidated school.  And I remember it as thought it was yesterday, as I was preparing to board the school bus to go to this new educational experience for the first time, my mother was tucking my shirt into my little denim jeans and she said, "Bob [HistoryMaker Robert Goodwin]," she said, "You, if you get one spanking at school you're going to get two at home."  Then she said, "You cannot settle for doing as well as your classmates you have to strive to do better than."  And those two admonitions have stayed with me all of my life.  First to understand that it's very easy to point a finger at what is someone else's responsibility for your life's circumstances and what she really was saying was you are responsible for your own achievement and for your own performance and your own behavior.  And secondly, and equal to that was the idea that because society may assume that we are less capable than whites or others in the community that we have to reach down deep and find within us the reserves to excel.  And I think that there are many people, particularly in my generation who have similar--have had similar admonitions from people who have come out of the Jim Crow and segregated circumstances and basically saying you, you make your way in life based on your individual commitment and discipline and persistence.
Story_ID: 238266
Speaker 1: You were gonna share a story with us about your father's [Edward Goodwin] proposal to your mother [Jeanne Osby Goodwin].
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  My--first of all my mother and father were polar opposites.  Again, my mother, for example has never had a cigarette to her lips, never had a glass of wine to her lips, only had one man all of her life.  If there was ever such a thing as a Victorian woman it is my mother.  My father, on the other hand, Sugar man, had quite a colorful life, early on.  You know, there was discussion about some of his romances and flings even in a--his college years, but he had a, he had a tremendous attraction to my mother who was a beautiful woman and, and, and who was so demure and respectful that I think that that was really appealing to that side of my father that knew that it may be one thing to run around but there's a certain image of a woman he wanted for a wife.  Well, my mother, being so demure and recognizing that this guy was really sort of a wild guy and outside of her experience, there was still this sort of attraction that she couldn't ignore.  And he did everything to try to impress her.  One point threatened to kill himself if she didn't--if he didn't respond to his, his courting, you know, he was gonna drink some--a bottle of ink and stab himself with a pen (laughter).  Quite a, quite a, a, a lot of histrionics, you know.  Well, they did date and at one point close to graduation, (clears throat) she was actually engaged by this time to a gentleman who later became a judge in Louisiana or something I believe, but for whatever reason accepted an opportunity to go to some event with my father.  I guess she thought it was going to be a very casual friendship sort of a exchange so, even though it might not have seemed proper she was with him though she was engaged to another guy.  And, he was bringing her home and this other gentleman was waiting for her on her porch and my father says to my mother, "I'll be damn if I'm gonna drop you off to that so-and-so."  And he proceeds to drive from Springfield, Illinois to Clayton, Missouri, a suburb of St. Louis [Missouri], takes her physically by the hand to the justice of the peace and marries her.  As they are going back to Springfield my mother says, "Ed, I'm gonna have it annulled, I'm gonna have it annulled this is, this is not what--the way that I envisioned my marriage," and so forth and my father's attitude was, "well you can do whatever you want to do now, I done married you!"  He takes her back to Springfield to her father's [James Osby] home.  Her father was none too thrilled about this, they spent their wedding night with him on the couch and his--her parents home and her in her bedroom.  And within the matter of the next day or so he goes back to Tulsa [Oklahoma], where he was then living with his family, his father [James Henri Goodwin], mother [Carlie Greer Goodwin].  And the assumption was that they would have the marriage annulled and that was it.  Some weeks later there was a tornado that was coming through Springfield and my mother was, and remains, deathly afraid of tornadoes.  And for whatever reason, either to escape the threat of the storm or because deep down she knew this was the guy for her despite all her protestations to the contrary to the fact she called him and said, "Ed, I'm gonna be on the such-and-such-a train."  She got on the train, he picked her up at the train station and as I say, they were together for fifty years there--thereafter.  So, and proceeded to have a large family and, and many community involvements, remaining in Tulsa until my father's death and as I said my mother's still there.
Story_ID: 238267
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your origin?  What do you know about your ancestors?
Speaker 2: I, I, I--a little bit.  Others in my family are a little bit more--paid a little bit more attention to this than I and actually have gone through the effort to document some of our ancestral beginnings.  But I know a little bit, I know that my, my mother's grandfather was from Madagascar and--but that we have a lot of mixture of the races in our background.  Someone--my mother's [Jeanne Osby Goodwin] very fair complected, my father's [Edward Goodwin] very dark complected and it was not unusual for people, non-blacks to say to my mother, "Tell me about your people," and she sai--sh--one of her favorite lines is, "Now which people do you mean, my grandfather that was a slave or my grandmother that was a, a, or my grandmother"--I'm sorry, "My grandmother that was a slave or my grandfather that was a Jewish slave owner that couldn't keep his hands off black women?"  Which people do you mean?  So there, there was a my mother's grandmother on the other side was a Irish woman, there's a little bit of many different races that are sort of merged in our, in our family.  So, I only knew my grandparents, actually my mother on my--my grandmother on my mother's side, my grandfather on my father's side.  My grandmother on my father, my grandfather on my mother, I never knew.  But, we do have brothers and sisters that are trying to delve a little bit more into the--some of our ancestral beginnings and hopefully will leave me with both some written as well as oral treatment about those histories.
Story_ID: 238268
Speaker 1: Well let's talk a little bit about your grandparents starting with your grandmother's name, who you knew and did you have an opportunity to spend time with her and that kinda thing?
Speaker 2: Not as much, I--first of all, there was such a, such an age differential.  My, my parents [Jeanne Osby Goodwin and Edward Goodwin] were forty-six when I was born and, you know, a lot of my contemporaries grandparents are as old as my parents.  On that note their first child was stillborn and doctors told them that they couldn't have any more kids and so they had one every three years for the next twenty-four years, I , I guess, out of spite.  So, my earliest recollection I have of my grandmother on my mother's side was going to Springfield [Illinois] to visit, which I was only able to do on a few occasions before she died.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Minnie Osby, O-S-B-Y, and, you know, she was a very kindly, gentle woman who ultimately who was living alone in Springfield.  Very well respected in the community, again, someone who was known as being a very family oriented, conscientious person, and she had four daughters and one son, actually had two sons.  One of the son--one of the boys was, was, was killed in a freak accident as a teenager.  So I, I had an opportunity to go see Nanny on just a few occasions and never by myself it was always with my mother when she in turn would go to check in on her.  But I have a lot of, of fond memories of prowling around in the tool shed in the back of her home and sitting at the table to all of the, of the home cooked meals that she was so capable of, of making.  She was very proud of her children, who in turn were all very devoted to her and three of her daughters remained in the Illinois area and were able to, to keep tabs on her.  My grandfather (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is your paternal grandfather?
Speaker 2: --my paternal grandfather was a very respected and influential business leader in Tulsa [Oklahoma].  At one point he owned a funeral home.  He had real estate interests.  He, he'd loan money to individuals for interest and he, he actually lived with us when I was growing up so I, I have many memories of Papa J. H., James Henri Goodwin was his name.  One of the things I remember was he went to the little one room church in the same community where the schoolhouse was, where I began my early religious training and interest.  And, when it would rain or the weather was otherwise inclement and we could not make it to this little church a few blocks away, my sisters and I would have Sunday school in his room--in his bedroom and he would be in his pajamas and his robe and we'd have Sunday school lesson and I remember he'd take the book, the Sunday school book and pass it, as like a collection plate, which was sometimes what we did actually in the church without the benefit of an actual collection plate.  We didn't--we never knew where that money went that he was taking up (laughter) for Sunday school.  Papa J. H. was (clears throat) remember one time (clears throat) because he too was very fair complected (clears throat) and often was thought to be white, when he was--I remember my father told me one time when he was traveling through the South, perhaps going back to Water Valley [Mississippi], they'd come upon a place where they knew blacks were not allowed to be served but he would go in and, you know, pass and would say, "Can my boy get a plate in the kitchen" or have my father to go in the back to--which used to tick my father off immensely.  My grandfather did it perhaps partially in jest and maybe partly out of necessity but he became, again, a very influential figure in, in our city.  He was involved in the reconstruction of Tulsa after the infamous race riots of 1921.  And there're several memorials to him that remain there for the leadership role he took in helping to rebuild the black community following those, those riots.  And I was thirteen when he passed; I remember his services, memory and the time leading up to his death quite, quite, quite well.
Story_ID: 238269
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Robert] Goodwin, what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: When I was one years old, my father [Edward Goodwin] decided that there were so many kids and that he wanted to sort of stretch out a bit, and we moved from our home place in Tulsa [Oklahoma] to, what was then thought of as the country.  It was actually about fifteen miles outside of the City of Tulsa.  And, on an acreage of property that at one time had been a farm, we had about 160 acres in what, I might add, later became the largest industrial track in Tulsa.  Unfortunately we sold it much too soon.  But we had ponds and a few cattle, we didn't farm it as such, but we kept a few of the, of the animals and had the expanse of the property and all that.  And, so my life was very idyllic, it was sorta like Tom Sawyer, I used to make rafts out of telephone poles and plywood to put onto the little ponds during the summer and would skate on the pond as it was frozen over during the winter and all the kids from the little community down the street would--this little village would come up to our place, was sort of a park and we'd play football in the winter and baseball in the summer in our yard.  One of the earliest memories--I have, I have two, two things I remember pretty vividly, and both, when I was probably about the same age, I must have been three or four years old.  One was, my two sisters and I, because we were all three years apart, my oldest sisters and brother were pretty much up and out when I was coming along.  But two sisters next to me in age and I sort of grew up as a set.
Story_ID: 238418
Speaker 1: So my two sisters, closest to me in age, and I were supposed to be taking some refuse out to the few hogs that we had at that time on the property.  And there's a big bucket of slop and all of us were, you know, we weren't five feet tall stacked on top of one another and we're struggling carrying this big pail out to where the facility where the hogs were kept.  And we'd have to carry it about four or five steps and it was so heavy we'd just put it down and then we'd pick it up after resting and take another few steps and on this journey as we had stopped and we're getting ready to again resume carrying the bucket, we looked down and there was a snake that had wrapped itself around my leg and of course my sisters went off flying, screaming and hollering.  And I'm standing there hollering at the top of my voice, but immobilized, I wouldn't move and some minutes later, however long it took for them to go and arouse my mother [Jeanne Osby Goodwin], she comes running around the corner with a hoe in her hand, ready, of course, to attack this snake, who had by that time had been long gone.  I suppose I had scared him off but I remember quite vividly my feeling and that whole experience.  The other thing I remember about that same time was being serenaded by a little girl who was a daughter of a friend of the family.  And she was pushing me on my tricycle singing 'Baby Face' (laughter).  And I remember that pretty vividly and I probably was about four, in both instances.  I also remember about that same period of time being out with family and friends from the community who were all swimming in the little tanks or ponds on our property and I had dug up a, a old inner tube.  As I was playing there on the, on the in the shallow end of the pond and had sufficient air in it to barely float itself and of course at my tender age I thought it could support my weight so I proceeded to get stride across it and it--found it carried me out into the deeper water, where upon it began to sink and I thought, of course, my, my, my life passed in front of my eyes, all four years of it at that point.  My father [Edward Goodwin] was on the bank and Howard [ph.] jumped in and rescued me, but those are three very distinct memories I have when I, I, must have been, again, no more than three or, or four years old--
Story_ID: 238419
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about what holidays and special occasions were like in your house growing up.
Speaker 2: Well, Christmas was at the top of the list.  I, I, I was--in my late adolescence, before I realized the truth about Santa Claus I remember for example that there was all that--this great anticipation about the gift-giving and all of that and our tradition was to open our presents on Christmas morning.  I know many families do that on Christmas Eve or perhaps even other times of the year or through Kwanzaa or other experiences but our tradition was, was Christmas morning.  And we knew that we couldn't do that until Christmas morning but there was always some question as to how early Christmas morning began.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And so there was always the great anticipation and, you know on Christmas Eve we generally watched 'It's a Wonderful Life' or one of the popular movies that were on the few channels that we had to enjoy at that point.  And, we'd go to bed, sometimes fully dressed just sort of waiting there just counting the hours.  But I remember one time my sister and I getting up what had to be two o'clock in the morning thinking we were gonna tiptoe down and see if Santa Claus had come already and we caught my older sister who was coming in the door ladened [ph.] with gifts because she was Santa that day and she was so upset that we caught her in the act and angrily chased us back to bed and I think that was the first time I began to realize the truth about, about Christmas at least in terms of the gift-giving.  But, continuing on the notion of Christmas it was always a time for family reunion and again, my oldest siblings by that time, you know, when I was a adolescent and certainly a teenager or had their own families, I have nieces and nephews that are only a couple a years younger than me.  On that note, I used to get gi--big kick out of dragging them through the mall makin' them call me Uncle Bob [HistoryMaker Robert Goodwin] and I'm eight and they're six and five and what not.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But, so, it was always a tremendous--tremendously exciting idea to have all of our family together again for the big occasions of the year.  And Christmas and or Thanksgiving were the time wherever people were anywhere in the country or in a couple of instances the world, we'd all be together and all the nieces and nephews and we'd have quite an extended brood gathered around the, the Sunday dinner table for those occasions.  Fourth of Julys, you know, we'd do the cookout thing and once again, typically not only have all of the immediate siblings but their friends and extended family so we could have a big crowd and my father [Edward Goodwin] would, you know, take great pride in grilling not just the traditional hot dogs and wieners or hamburgers but coon [raccoon] and possum and we'd never know where he came up with some of this stuff (laughter) and had to find, often excuses why we weren't gonna try his latest specialty (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --and en lieu of the things that we felt more comfortable with.  Big family, a lot of, of, of, gratitude for our many blessings all teasing and a lot of playfulness and rallying around our father and mother and the traditions that they helped to establish for us all--
Story_ID: 238420
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Robert] Goodwin could you please give all of your siblings' names and their birth order, including yourself?
Speaker 2: My oldest sister, now deceased, she passed last year, Edwina [ph.], who was, as I mentioned a, a, high school senior when I was born.  Edwina was a very accomplished person having been trained first in nursing administration, later went to law school when she was a grandmother, commuted 135 miles a day (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Whispers) Wow.
Speaker 2: --from Flint, Michigan to Detroit [Michigan].  Became the--one of the three members of the utility commission for the State of Michigan appointed by the Mich--the Michigan governor, and upon her retirement from that post became the general counsel for the light company in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania where she served for five years before her untimely death from cancer.  Jo Ann [ph.], followed her, Jo Ann was--is recently retired from the school system in Tulsa [Oklahoma] where she was a lifelong educator.  Ed Junior, Edward [Goodwin, Jr.] followed Jo Ann, went to school in journalism and worked for many years with my father [Edward Goodwin] in the administration of the family newspaper [The Oklahoma Eagle] and now is a small businessman and other areas, still in Tulsa.  Jim, James Osby Goodwin, followed him.  Jim was raised Catholic; my, my mother [Jeanne Osby Goodwin] had some problems in her early life with tuberculosis and anemia and there was a Catholic Church adjacent to our property and her feeling was that she might not be able to take us to church but wanted us to go to church and the priest who was a family friend and actually then helped both my older brother Ed and Jim to be introduced to the Catholic church. And Jim has remained; Ed stayed in the church for a while and then went to the Protestant denomination.  But Jim has remained so he went to Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana] and then went straight to law school, and he's been practicing law in Tulsa now for forty something years and actually runs the newspaper that I ran for a period of time after my father's retirement and death.  Jeannie [Jeanne Goodwin], got her degree in sociology and worked briefly for state legislator in Oklahoma.  Married her college sweetheart who is a physician and who has had a post as a city county health director, as a provost and faculty member most recently at Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], and now lives in Nashville [Tennessee].  Carly [ph.], who is now deceased as well, Carly was a Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] master degree graduate and in medical school when she died at thirty-six years old from a pulmonary aneurism.  She had a blood clot to form in her leg and it blocked--formed a blockage in her sleep and suffocated and died and so we lost Carly twenty years ago.  And then me, I have a, a, half-sister who is two years younger Susan [Jordan], who lives in Houston [Texas] and who is longtime employee first of Gulf Oil and whose husband is an entrepreneur there and she's a housewife in, in, in Houston.
Story_ID: 238421
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about what daily life was like for you.  So, you'd wake up in the morning--
Speaker 2: Well I, yeah I (laughter) you know, again I said earlier that my life was sort of--I had an idyllic childhood and again I'd make go-carts and fished and hunted bullfrogs, I used to kill bullfrogs every, every day during the summer and fry the legs and.  But I had chores, we had the immediate acreage around the home or which I was responsible for mowing everyday which was about five acres and I would start cutting--during the summer I'd cut the grass, I'd start on Saturday and I'd finish the following Friday and start over again.  And, I used to tease my mother [Jeanne Osby Goodwin] that, that they gave me a little red wagon when I was a kid so that I could haul fir--haul firewood during the winter and leaves and piles of grass during the summer.  But I would, during the summer months, you know, I was always making things and building tree houses and going on hikes a through the woods with my friends and playing Davey Crockett and Daniel Boone and riding bicycles.  We had horses, so I would ride and take care of the horses and my friends from the little village or from my--kids in town who, who I knew through my church and other community involvement would always gravitate to our home so it was always something going on it was always very fun filled and always where creativity and, and sort of entrepreneurship was, was valued.  The winter was about school and community activities.  I, I was always pretty studious.  I was elected to student government from the seventh grade, every year through my last year of college [Oral Roberts University, Tulsa, Oklahoma].  So I was always engaged in some sort of community service project or leadership role that went beyond my classroom experience.  I was very involved in my church.  I decided when I was nine years old I wanted to be a minister in the little one room church that I attended down in the community of Alsuma [Oklahoma].  I later started going to the larger Baptist church, the largest black church in Tulsa [Oklahoma] at that time, and would go for my youth meetings and Sundays were almost always spent in church so between school, extracurricular activities, church, community life, I had a paper route every Wednesday and I would go to my father's [Edward Goodwin] office and work at the newspaper [The Oklahoma Eagle] from the time I was a child until through college and through graduate school and to the point where I was finally asked to come back and run the paper, which I did for ten years.  So there was always somethin' going on and again, always with a high degree of community focus as a part of that expectation.  You asked for a, a favorite phrase earlier and actually as I think about it now, probably now my most favorite phrase was that, "To whom much is given, much is expected," and there was that sense of obligation to the community which was very much a part of my early experience.
Story_ID: 238422
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Robert] Goodwin, tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up.
Speaker 2: Weeping willow trees beside tranquil bodies of water, there were a few of those on a little pond there adjacent to our house and that brings to mind all those pleasant summer evenings spent on the bank watching the muskrats go across the water at dusk.  Similarly, the, the smell of freshly mowed grass, of which there was an abundance of and, and I remember even when I was barely old enough to hold a rake I had chores  And so my chore may have been nothing more but to rake the grass as my older brothers and father [Edward Goodwin] were cutting it.  And, and I remember my favorite television program during those early years was, 'The Little Rascals,' and I couldn't wait to get through raking the grass and getting it shoveled up into the little wagon and carting it off to where we were taking it so I could go in and watch my favorite show, 'The Little Rascals' and the sme--aroma of freshly mowed grass, is something that I have not had occasion to experience since then and certainly would be a, a, an early reminder.  And, sounds, did you say?
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: The sounds of laughter and, you know, the playful relationship of, of brothers and sisters who were, you know, talking about their respective activities and boyfriends and girlfriends and the chatter 'round the--around the dinner table of, of, of a big family--
Story_ID: 238423
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about the elementary school years.  Tell us the name of the first elementary school you went, that two-room school where your mother [Jeanne Osby Goodwin] taught.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was simply the Alsuma [Separate] School [Alsuma, Oklahoma].  That's all I knew it by, again it was a two-room schoolhouse, you know, and grades one through three were in one side of the school and grades four through six were on the other side and as I mentioned my mother taught grades one through three at the same time and each row of her students was a class.  I remember I was in the second grade the last year that she instructed me I would help to teach the first graders.  She'd put us in little circles to do reading or we'd go up to the blackboard to do our spelling test, we'd have to put your erasers sort of between you and your, your neighbor's side so that you couldn't see each other's words.  I remember the little room as a part of the school that was a cafeteria and Mrs. Gray [ph.], who was a wonderful cook and we'd have beans and cornbread or hot dogs or whatever the menu happened to be that day and all the kids from all six grades would gather 'round the cafeteria or go into the playground and, I remember one of the benefits of my mother being the teacher of the little school, which they later named in her honor and created a little park in that community in her honor, was that if ever our chickens or pigs or cows or horses, and we didn't have many, but we kept a few of each of those for many years during that early period while I was growing up, would ever get out of their pens or whatever, mother would turn out the entire school for us to go out and chase whatever animals had gotten out at that particular time.  Then we were bussed up the street as I mentioned to Union School [Alsuma, Oklahoma].  Union what was known (cough) excuse me, what was known as a consolidated school so it went from grades one through twelve.  It later became an entire school district, I think, with probably at least two high schools and several junior highs and several elementary schools because it was located in what became the fastest growing section of the Tulsa [Oklahoma] community.  By that time it was three buildings all on a small campus with the elementary, middle and high school being divided into three different buildings (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this was an integrated school?
Speaker 2: It be, it be--yes, it became integrated after 1956.  And all the black kids from the little village were bussed up the, up the way to attend.
Story_ID: 238424
Speaker 1: Do you remember if there were--if there was any resistance to integration taking place, do you have any memories of that or was it just kinda somethin' everyone went along with?
Speaker 2: It was, it was pretty tranquil.  The tensions around integration, frankly, were much more--were much stronger.   Well as I was an adult and there were efforts to desegregate schools in the City of Tulsa [Oklahoma], by which time I had become a publisher of the newspaper [The Oklahoma Eagle] and a community leader, or shortly before that, I was involved, just after college [Oral Roberts University, Tulsa, Oklahoma], in the community and subsequently in the leadership role for the newspaper.  But my earliest remembrance, remembrances of, of--were that there was a relatively high degree of acceptance.  I remember for example, that a number of my friends from the community were--became very important to the athletic teams.  I was not an athlete.  I played at, you know, sports casually up until I was a freshman or sophomore in high school [Bishop Kelley High School, Tulsa, Oklahoma] and realized I really wasn't very good at it.  But a number of my friends were quite good and they were the starters of the basketball and on the football and baseball teams.  And I remember more how the larger community embraced them and that role that they played.  I, I do remember, and again, this was later in my junior high years not my elementary years, but I remember the one instance of discrimination that I experienced and how proud I was for the reaction of my colleagues at that time.  I was a--I played a musical instrument, I played a trumpet starting from about the fourth or fifth grade and through my ninth or tenth grade--ninth grade, and I remember the band was on a--it's a recreational trip, we were all gonna go to a swimming pool that also had picnic tables and other family entertainment activities around the little area.  And me and my classmates were all frolicking in the water and havin' a good time when it dawned on the managers of the pool that they had a black boy in their swimming pool and I remember he came over (gesturing).  He motioned me (gesturing), I'm just havin' a good time out in the water, and he motioned me (gesturing) come over to the side of the pool and said, "You're gonna have to leave."  The band director, who observed what was going on intervened and said, "What's the problem?"  And when he found out that they--in their mind, made a mistake by letting me in the water to begin with, and when they found out they wanted me to leave he left and brought the rest of the entire band with him and said, "Well, if he can't stay, we can't stay."  And that was one of the very few overt instances of discrimination that I recall in those early years.
Story_ID: 238425
Speaker 1: What impact was it having on your mother [Jeanne Osby Goodwin] as a, as a teacher in the black school?  Did she move to Union [School, Tulsa, Oklahoma] to teach as well?
Speaker 2: No, no, although she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was she concerned about losing her job or?
Speaker 2: No, she continued teaching but she actually at that time started teaching in another far suburban area from Tulsa [Oklahoma].  A community called Bixby [Oklahoma], which again, by today's standards would be thought of as a bedroom community to Tulsa, probably less than thirty miles away, which had its own rural school setting.  So she sorta went from one little country school to another.  And she would commute those thirty or so miles to go teach there which she did for a number of years.  She ultimately taught within the Tulsa public school district and was one of the black teachers to be absorbed into the school district during those early days of integration.  So she taught off and on for thirty-eight years.  She would stop periodically, mostly because of her own health and her own needs and requirements less than of--for any pressures external to, to her.  And for her 100th birthday, last year, we had what started out to be a family celebration turned out to be a community wide celebration and a number of the people who came were students of hers from each of these settings over the course of her, of her career as a, as a teacher.
Story_ID: 238426
Speaker 1: What were some of your favorite subjects during elementary school [Alsuma Separate School, Alsuma, Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: I loved art.  I--the picture on the wall here in, in this office is something I did as a se--senior in high school [Bishop Kelley High School, Tulsa, Oklahoma].  I loved geography.  I sorta liked history, I had less interest in math and science, although I will say I, I, I enjoyed tinkering with things and so I had chemistry sets and erector sets and would make my own inventions and the rest that gave me some interest in science until, until later, later years.  I loved English and I've always loved to write and later speech where I developed an interest in and oratory and so English and speech were probably my favorite subjects.
Speaker 1: And what type of child were you at this particular point during elementary school years?
Speaker 2: A model child (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Say you.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).  I was--I think--you know, when you're the last of eight children, when you got five sisters most of whom, you know, kind of made a lot over you--I remember that they, they took great pride in, in sort of carrying me around and showing me off to their, their friends and so forth.  So I, I think I was probably a pretty well-mannered, pretty polite, pretty bright, inquisitive kid.  Because of my mother's [Jeanne Osby Goodwin] rather strict--and she was not forceful in a sense.  Mother was only, you know, spanked me a few times that I can recall.  My father [Edward Goodwin] only his me once in my life that I can recall, well I can tell you I would have recalled it if he had done it more than that.  But you knew there were certain expectations of standards for discipline and what not, so I think I was pretty well behaved, pretty inquisitive and as I say, getting interested in student leadership positions early on.  I was very much drawn to community service and the idea of, of giving back to the community and because of my early interest in the church.  You know, I can remember at nine years old drawing a picture of me standing behind a pulpit and being very, so much influenced by the pastor of this little one room church where I attended saying, "I want to be a preacher."  And so I became, you know, fascinated with and a student of the Bible.  That of course lead me to be a, a, pretty moralistic and some would say puritanical.  And I was the kinda kid that would have, you know, funerals for my dead pets and would go out of my way to deliver a bowl of soup to one of the people in the little village down the street who was sick or, or take up a collection for someone who was needing to visit a sick relative or whatever, I, I, I was a pretty good kid (laughter).
Story_ID: 238427
Speaker 1: So, did you stay at Union [School, Tulsa, Oklahoma] through the twelfth grade?
Speaker 2: No, I, I, went to a party in the, in the ninth grade.  I had, I had sort of a, at that point, two sets of friends.  My friends who lived in the little village down the street and my friends in Tulsa [Oklahoma] who were part of the Jack and Jill [of America, Inc.] and the church crowd, the, the--at that point in my life, so, you know, I, I gravitated back and forth between these two groups of friends.  And so I was with my Tulsa, in town friends one time, went to a party, met a girl who I was enthralled by who went to Bishop Kelley High School [Tulsa, Oklahoma], a co-educational parochial school in Tulsa and I all of a sudden decided I need a parochial education (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So I, I remember going back so excited and now trying to figure out how to con my mother [Jeanne Osby Goodwin], principally who was the one who I had to convince first that this was where I ought to go to school.  Unbeknownst to me, I think she and my father [Edward Goodwin] were thinking, well, parochial education at this point in my life probably would not be a bad thing, so I don't know who was selling who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --but I transferred from Union in the ninth grade to Bishop Kelley where I was--went in as a tenth grader.  And found it to be a, a new setting where I had to prove myself because, you know, in parochial schools it's not uncommon for kids to start out together in kindergarten or nursery school and go all the way through the entire system as a part of a whole, almost entire school just matriculates.  Well, here I was coming into a white institution; there were only a handful of black kids at the school at that time.  A non-Catholic and coming in at the point at the end of my secondary school career as opposed to those who had started together and so I was in some sense an oddity and I, I had to prove myself, which I immediately proved myself in the student government and ultimately was elected the student body president there which I think was--seemed to be quite a feat at that time because of the factors that I, I've, that I referenced.
Story_ID: 238280
Speaker 1: We were talking a little bit about Bishop Kelley [High School, Tulsa, Oklahoma] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and some of the activities; you were involved in, student government and what else?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, one of the stories I, I, I, again I, I'm grateful for my years of experience there and there was a great tradition not only of academic excellence at Bishop Kelley but also community involvement so I--my first year there I wasn't a part of the clique, you know, the guys that were the football jocks or the basketball jocks or who--again had grown up together through the various stages of their parochial training.  But I've always been a people person and I've always found that one way to be influential is to affirm the, what I call, the personhood of others, I think it's one of the greatest human needs is for affirmation.  And so I've been able to find in people, sometimes the less popular, the less attractive the people who are easily overlooked, things in them and in their being that deserve and merit acknowledgement and I found a group of those individuals in my first days at Bishop Kelley, who I could relate to and make friends with and from there establish myself with the larger community.  And as I think back on it, you know, I can sort of plot how I went from outsider to someone who sort of demanded respect and later acceptance and a leadership role.  So I started the chess club as a sophomore, then was elected to student officer position in my next year and it came time to run for the presidency of the student body--student council, which in those days was quite an honor today there's less emphasis it appears.  I think kids think that it's only the geeks and the nerds who do that sorta thing but then it was, I think it was a mark of leadership and perhaps of additional future success.  I was running against two individuals, one was the captain of the football team and whose father was a prominent doctor in town and who'd come up from elementary school through the parochial training and the other was the captain of the basketball team who was equally well thought of and had equally sort of entrenched in the cliques of the organization.  And then there was me this little black kid who fancied himself to compete.  Everyone thought there would be a runoff in the election between the two of them.  It came time for--and we did the campaigning and so I had the posters and the creative stuff being a play off the name Goodwin, "Good," "Win" (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --and all that.  Had my little group of campaign supporters, a lot of the less popular, less attractive, sort of the people who weren't in the popular cliques but who were rallying around.  And, came time for the campaign speeches and what was going to happen was that we would have an assembly, all three candidates would give their speech and then the following day there would be a polling, we had the assembly and we gave the speeches and the two of them did sort of the traditional, "If I'm elected I will--."  Well, I decided to do something creative.  And I did a speech that was sort of a takeoff on [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]'s, I Have a Dream.  And it was such a hit with the crowd, I think mostly because of its creativity, and then as fate would have it, for whatever reason, we were running early or I don't frankly recall why but the administration decided to have the voting immediately following the assembly rather than the next day.  Well, I had made such a impression with this unusual speech and frankly they're probably a lot less popular attractive kids in a school than there are those in the clique (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that were my people (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So we go to the polls and I won on the first ballot in a landslide over these two guys who were presumed to have been the leaders and so I became the first black president of the student body at Bishop Kelley and it was a very fulfilling experience.  Later became, you know, what they call Mr. Kelley.  They had voting for the most accomplished people in the school and it was just a great, great opportunity for--both a good education but also to hone my leadership skills and my service instincts.
Story_ID: 238281
Speaker 1: Did you work on the school paper [at Bishop Kelley High School, Tulsa, Oklahoma] at all?
Speaker 2: I did work on the paper and the yearbook.  Matter of fact, that probably was the most serious preparation that I had later to run the family newspaper [The Oklahoma Eagle] since I had no other formal academic training but I do remember working on both of those programs.
Speaker 1: And what were some of your thoughts about college when you were in high school around your senior year, did you know you were going to college?
Speaker 2: I knew I was going to college and the pastor of my church who, who late, later ordained me, I was licensed to preach in the Baptist church when I was fifteen and I was ordained at twenty-one by my pastor of my church and Oral Roberts [University, Tulsa, Oklahoma], who, who, who became something of a mentor for me, but my pastor had gone to Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio] and I felt from the time that, earliest I can remember, that I would go to school at Oberlin because of his influence and because he told me of their great tradition.  (Sirens in background) The greatest disappointment of my life, at that point, was getting a letter from Oberlin.  I was expecting that I would be not only admitted but I would get a scholarship.  I had a B+ average in school, again all these student leadership involvements, great referrals from community and school leaders and the letter I got back from Oberlin was, "[HistoryMaker] Mr. [Robert] Goodwin, we're certain that you would be a fine asset to any college community, however; we feel that you would be inclined to become too involved in extra-curricular activities and not give enough attention to your studies," and for that reason I was rejected.  I was floored I didn't know what to do.  My best friend at that point was going to Oklahoma University [sic. University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma], pre-med [pre-medicine], and I decided I'll go to OU [University of Oklahoma] and he and I will room together, you know, being a resident of the state, if you were in the upper three quarters of your graduating class they had to take you so I knew that I'd get in.  So I was accepted, I had my room designation set up, he was my roommate and in June, prior to my freshman year, I was invited to go to a seminar at this brand new Christian college in my town, Oral Roberts University.  I knew about Oral Roberts, I knew him and respected him as a religious leader because of my own interest in the ministry; he was someone that I looked up to, but I had no real prior knowledge of or interest in going to his university.  I went to this seminar and even going to the seminar one could think back as perhaps a matter of fate because I was supposed to be going, during that same period of time to another retreat out of state as a part of my church activity.  My father [Edward Goodwin] decided at the last minute I could not go and so I went to this youth retreat at ORU [Oral Roberts University] sort of--I said--as a fallback position and I was so impressed by the modernity of the campus, it was sort of a, like a, a very modernistic, very state of the art facility and by the emphasis on religious life and character development and the--an frankly meeting Oral Roberts and being intrigued with his leadership position.
Speaker 1: And did you meet him at that retreat?
Speaker 2: I did.  I did, I actually was selected to participate on a panel of, of other participants of a seminar to talk about our expectations for college life and religious life and whatnot and Oral was the moderator of the panel.  So yes, I met him and we established a rapport.  Well, not only was I accepted there, but they gave me a scholarship.  So I went from having--thinking I was gonna go to Oberlin and then OU, to going to Oral Roberts where I stayed and became a student leader and very involved in the ministry and traveled around the world with Oral Roberts, graduating from there in 1970 with a degree in, in sociology.
Story_ID: 238282
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from high school [Bishop Kelley High School, Tulsa, Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 1: So in 1970, so actually, let's back up just a little bit and--what were your parents [Jeanne Osby Goodwin and Edward Goodwin] thoughts when you said, "You know, I'm gonna--I'm gonna go to Oral Roberts University [Tulsa, Oklahoma],"?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that in some sense they were pleased that I had selected a, a school that was in town.  I mean I, I lived on the campus even though it was only about eight miles away.
Speaker 1: Was there any apprehension because this was a brand new school and like it really didn't have a track record yet?
Speaker 2: If they had it they didn't let me know it.  And once again, I think that, you know, I've always believed that you as the individual make the school, just like you make your career progress.  It's not the school that makes you, so, in hindsight, and knowing a--more about how the system works today than I did then, yeah, I could say that If I'd gone to, you know, an Ivy league institution or for that matter a Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] or a, a Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] or Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], then the historically black college [HBCU] community that there would be a prestige associated with that degree that in turn might have opened doors for me as a part of my career.  But in fact, I think that I took advantage of the opportunities that were placed in front of me.  I tried to do more than was ask of me and therefore to excel at whatever I was doing and I now recognize that I brought attention to myself and recommended myself--was--ended up being recommended for career opportunities because I, in the words of, "Images of Booker T. Washington", "I let my buckets down where they were."  As opposed to assuming that it would be only the pedigree from some other institution that would establish my value in the marketplace.  So if they were, and I think my parents felt the same way, if they were apprehensive, they certainly didn't show it.
Story_ID: 238283
Speaker 1: What were your experiences like at Oral Roberts University [Tulsa, Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: Well, once again I came in as a handful of black students at a white institution.
Speaker 1: About how big was the school when--then?
Speaker 2: When I, when I--in my freshman year, I, I was in the second graduating class, so there was only one class in front of me and it had less than probably 150 students in the whole class in it.  Then, then there may have been 300 or so students in my class, so to combine there may have been, you know, under 500 students by the time I got there.  By the time I graduated there were 1,000 students, so it was still a relatively very small institution.  A high degree of emphasis on character development and religious life, the boys wore ties to class.  There were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Every day?
Speaker 2: --every day.  There were--which we had done in parochial school as well, so that was not unusual for me.  There were prohibitions against PDA or public display of affection, so it was always a experience that when the guys would bring the girls to the dormitory for curfew every night, they'd be standing around doing as much as they could to get by with to express their affection for their girlfriends.  We had a high degree of emphasis on service, and so there were many student ministering groups that would go into the Tulsa [Oklahoma] community.  I remember you could go and work in the reservations, Tulsa being a center of the Creek Nation or at least northeastern Oklahoma, and Cherokee Indian [Native American] population.  There were reservations and places for you could go--the black community or poor parts of white community or the Indian community and serve and kids were all too anxious to go and do that.  There were chances for small numbers of kids to travel internationally as a part of student ministering teams and I was fortunate to be a part of those groups.  So, I traveled, literally, around the world while still a student, with Oral Roberts--
Story_ID: 238284
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) What was Oral Roberts like at that time?
Speaker 2: Oral was resolute in his faith.  You know, I had gotten into discussions--one of my friends--the guy that I was gonna room with at, at OU [University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma] who later became a prominent doctor in Los Angeles [California] used to tease me a lot.  They used to refer to us [Oral Roberts University, Tulsa, Oklahoma] as Oral and Anal (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --and, you know, I--while they were finger poppin' and you know drinkin' wine and, sneakin' in parties after the basketball games and things, I, I used to carry a little New Testament in my pocket around and, I mean, they kinda thought of me as the priest of, of the, of the, the my little social set and they--we'd get in these conversations from time to time about, you know, do you believe that, you know, Oral Roberts heals people and, and such and what I came to believe was that Oral was a man of such great faith and conviction and resolve that he commanded respect, even if you found yourself not able to accept his level of faith, you knew that he believed it and that it was not a rouse or it was not a game but it was a an element of his own personal relationship with God.
Speaker 1: Do you still believe that?
Speaker 2: Do I believe that about Oral?
Speaker 1: Yes?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes, now again, I got to be friends with him through him, my parents [Jeanne Osby Goodwin and Edward Goodwin] became friends with him.  My mother and his wife [Evelyn Roberts] continue to talk periodically and his son, Richard [Roberts], who now runs the university and I are the same age and the very first conversation I ever had with Oral was, "How do I reach my son?"  At that time his son was--didn't want anything to do with his father, and was embarrassed about his, his ministry and--so we had, had a number of points of intersection over our life, but I do believe and I've seen that he has had his own challenges, he had a son [Ronald Roberts] who committed suicide he had a daughter [Rebecca Nash] who was killed in a plane crash, another daughter he was estranged from for a period of time.  His biggest campaign of his ministry, beyond building the university was to build a medical complex in Tulsa [Oklahoma], which failed and which ended up being a severe financial drain on his ministry and on the university.  He was ridiculed during this period of time when he talked about having had a vision of a ninety foot Jesus who told him in a dream that if he didn't raise a certain amount of money for this hospital God was going to take him home.  And he ultimately left Tulsa and moved to California, I think in large part out of a broken heart.  And dealing with his own sense of failure that he was not able to fulfill what he believed was God's mandate for him to do.  But I believe that he still remains a man of great faith and he has become an important mentor in my, in my life.
Story_ID: 238285
Speaker 1: --How were your experience at Oral Roberts University [Tulsa, Oklahoma] kinda meshing with your religion--your, your own personal religious background?  I mean, were they meshing or were they kinda bumping heads?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a good question, they ultimately meshed, but I think it's safe to say that going from a rather staid traditional Protestant denomination, the Baptist church, which my church was affiliated with the National Baptist [Convention] and later the American Baptist church, into a, what is thought of an Evangelical environment was a bit of a shock.  I had never had as much instruction and emphasis on the, the role of the Holy Spirit in a Christian's walk as, as I did in, in Oral Roberts.  It wasn't simply as part of the emphasis from, from my earlier training and that took some, frankly learning.  I had to immerse myself in the study of the scriptures to find out about that, that expression of my religious and spiritual walk that had been neglected in my earlier life.  Ultimately I found great congruence and a way to see my spiritual walk as benefiting from the emphasis on the life of the spirit and as I say I became very active student leader and very active in the overall sort of student ministering core of the university.  And I went from Oral Roberts--I, I did a brief period of time of study in The University of Tulsa [Tulsa, Oklahoma] pursuing a master's degree, and had an experience where I was confronted with the prospect of becoming a leader of a, a paramilitary civil rights organization and deciding that wasn't what I wanted to do and seeing seminary as a reasonable alternative and ended up going to the San Francisco Theological Seminary [San Anselmo, California], which had most of its classes conducted as a part of a consortium [Graduate Theological Union] based in Berkeley [California].  So I went from Oral Roberts in 1970 to Berkeley in 1971 which was quite a radical shift (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But I, I deeply have appreciated both my--every phase of my educational life.  The period of time in the little one room schoolhouse [Alsuma Separate School, Alsuma, Oklahoma] I think gave me one level of preparation for how to communicate with people from every background.  My time at the larger consolidated school [Union School, Tulsa, Oklahoma] likewise was a chance to work with people who had largely been thought of from sort of a rural background where we used to ride our horses to school at the end of the school year to pick up our report cards to Bishop Kelly [High School, Tulsa, Oklahoma] where I then had exposure to a little bit more of the academic rigor and the discipline and the tradition of the parochial school to Oral Roberts where his emphasis and the emphasis of the institution was the education of the whole man, body mind and spirit.  And even into Berkeley where, you know, my afro got out to here (gestures) and my standard garb was a dashiki, a pair of brogans and jeans and my standard menu was omelet and a baked potato when I was doing my semi-vegetarian thing and where I spent all my time in the bookstores on Telegraph Avenue and coming out of the, you know, Berkeley in 1972 was sort of the downhill side of the great flower child Haight-Ashbury [San Francisco, California] era.  But there was enough of it there to, be influenced by it; I guess my point is it's quite a shift from Oral Roberts to Berkeley.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 238286
Speaker 1: Where do you think you, you fit in best, or did you fit in at Oral Roberts [University, Tulsa, Oklahoma] at that particular time and fit in at Berkeley [California] at that particular time or was there a place where you fit in best?
Speaker 2: No, I, I think I fit--fitted equally well in all of those settings.  And once again, you know, I, I tease members of my family and others from time to time to say that I'm bilingual, you know, I speak Ebonics when I ca--need to or want to and I speak, you know, more accepted forms of English.  Well, I feel comfortable when I'm dealin' with guys from the street or who are maybe not educated or who come from humble background as I feel comfortable in the White House [Washington, D.C.], where I have intermittent opportunities to visit or among corporate or government or non-profit leaders.  And I think part of that comes from an earlier point, number one, there's good and value in everybody.  I, I, I'm, I'm missing the exact rendition of a famous quote but having something to do about, "Even the dull and ignorant have their story,"  it comes, comes from 'Desiderata,' [Max Ehrmann] and I've known from my earliest memory that everybody has something of value and my job is to find it, or acknowledge it or celebrate it.  So, I found value in my experience of each along the way and tried to make the best of, of where I was.
Speaker 1: And so after you received your master's degree, what year was that?
Speaker 2: I did--I'd, I--my--I got my baccalaureate degree in 1970.  I then enrolled immediately at [The] University of Tulsa [Tulsa, Oklahoma] in an M.A. program; it was a two-year program, which I completed.  I'm sorry, it was a one year program which I completed and I took the course work and I took the exams but I didn't write the thesis, so I never got the M.A. at the University of Tulsa, just did the rest of the requirements.  And then immediately enrolled at the San Francisco Theological Seminary [San Anselmo, California], their actual home base is in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that was 1972?
Speaker 2: --actually enrolled in '71 [1971] in San Anselmo, California, but it was a part of what is known as the Graduate Theological Union [Berkeley, California], which is a consortium of at that time I think eight different seminaries that shared faculties and who most of the offerings were in Berkeley and I was there in a program where you do two years and you get the M.A. or the master of divinity depending on your choice and your course work and you do two more years to get the Ph.D.  I intended to get the Ph.D. and had begun my third semester of the program when I got a phone call from my father [Edward Goodwin] who wanted me to come home and assume the management of the family business and his words were, "Bob [HistoryMaker Robert Goodwin], come home or I'm a give it away."  I told him, "Daddy if you want me to come I'll (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the family business was the paper?
Speaker 2: Was the weekly newspaper serving the black community in Tulsa [Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: What--what's the name of the paper?
Speaker 2: The Oklahoma Eagle.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So I said, "Daddy if you want me to come I'll have my friends pack my things and I'll be on the next plane."  Because I had this profound sense of obligation, I had no interest in running the business, but I had every interest in, in fulfilling the expectations of my father.  I said, "If you can wait, however, I'd like you to wait at least until December, I'll finish the semester and I could imagine then perhaps through some sort of continuing education be able to finish the requirements for the degree later."  I say, "If you can really hold off, I'd like you to wait until June, because then I'll at least get the M.A. and think about the requirements for the balance of the course work for the Ph.D. later."  He said, "Well, if I know you're comin' I can wait."  Finished my degree got the M.A. in philosophy with an emphasis on Christian ethics, came home on something like the 15th or 16th day of June.
Speaker 1: In 1973?
Speaker 2: In 1973 after having participated in the graduation ceremonies at SFTS, San Francisco Theological Seminary.
Story_ID: 238287
Speaker 1: And I remember I, I went to bed early, my mother [Jeanne Osby Goodwin] got me up at the crack of, I mean, even before dawn, had to be five 'o clock in the morning, she had fixed this big country breakfast, grits and ham and eggs and all.  My father [Edward Goodwin] was the type that he believed at being at his business [The Oklahoma Eagle] with the crack of dawn and he'd be out on the front yard--front sidewalk sweeping the, the sidewalk and whatever.  Well, we went to his--to the office, he gave me a set of keys and showed me what door they opened, he gave me the combination to the safe in the wall in his office and he gave--and when the bank opened at nine o'clock we drove there and we signed the signature card so I can sign the checks and he said, "I'll see ya" (gestures waving good bye) and he went and started raising catfish on the tanks in our property outside of Tulsa [Oklahoma].  And I became, at twenty-three years old, never having had a course in business having (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or journalism.
Speaker 1: Well, I took one course--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --of journalism in high school [Bishop Kelley High School, Tulsa, Oklahoma] and worked on the school paper, and I became a publisher of the weekly newspaper.  And even though, you know, as I think back on it, you know, again, I've got these seven brothers and sisters, all of whom were older, all of whom were, in my view, perhaps better qualified to assume this business but I guess either they were all doin' their own thing, or for some reason he felt comfortable with my ability because of what I had achieved through my student career and I suppose because of a level of maturity that I had displayed, that I was capable of undertaking this responsibility.
Speaker 2: And how would you describe the paper, The Oklahoma Eagle?  Is it conservative paper, how would you describe the paper?
Speaker 1: No, it was known as the liberal rag (laughter), you know, there's a great tradition of black press that we were very part--proud part of, The Chicago Daily Defender [Chicago Defender], The Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], The Michigan Courier [sic.], The [Michigan] Chronicle, and The Oklahoma Eagle, now we were not as old as some of those publications and obviously not in as densely populate black community (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --one of the problems that we ever had with making money with the paper was that there were only forty thousand blacks in the whole town and that was not a sufficient circulation base to attract national advertising which the other papers I mentioned were able to attract.  So, it was never a major financial success, but my father didn't do it for the money and he, he wanted to have a voice in the community.  But it was very much a progressive voice and remains today a progressive voice in the community an (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the African American community?
Speaker 1: In the African American community and I think over the years has had a certain level of influence in the, the white community as well.  You know, the three most persistent, and perhaps important institutions in the black community have been the church, the school and the press and so it took its place in that leadership echelon and I was proud to run it for nearly ten years.
Story_ID: 238288
Speaker 1: So what were the years at the paper [The Oklahoma Eagle] like?  And what were some of the changes that--some of the significant changes you saw taking place at the paper?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that I, I, I mean I suppose again, looking back, that it was--I had a lot of hubris to think that I could come in at such a young age and with no prior background and to assume the management of what was one of the largest small businesses in the black community at that time.  I mean it was a small business, but don't make no mistake about it, even by today's terms we had fifteen employees and a payroll of $150,000 or something in 1972, you know, I suppose it was much more than what might be thought of today.  But I quickly realized that my father [Edward Goodwin], who was practicing law and had real estate interest and other side business ventures and had never really derived an income out of the newspaper, it was more of a political voice for him and in some sense a way to be of service to the community.  And who was a hard task master, you know, and who could extract and command a certain kind of respect and had my brother, who, you know, who--would--was probably seldom paid what he was worth and had other ways to extract value out of his people.  And here I come, this kid, didn't have my brother at that point to rely on was expecting to make a living out of the newspaper and I realized from the first day I walked in the office, he left with me an appreciable asset base, bank account and so forth, but from the first day I walked in the business I noticed my bank account going down.  So it didn't take me long to realize I had to compensate for the lack of assets and resources that I had to draw upon that were a part of his resource base.  And I started several other small businesses, I started editions of the newspaper in Muskogee [Oklahoma], you've heard of an 'Okie from Muskogee' a community about forty-five miles away.
Speaker 1: So you had like a bureau (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: --in Muskogee?
Speaker 2: But with a separate publication that was targeted to that market.  I created a program that specialized in getting support from businesses, not advertising per se, but around the concept of affirmative action and we created a publication that was an insert of the newspaper that attracted corporate support who wanted to be identified with supporting affirmative action and equal employment opportunity.  And I put divisions of that publication in two other communities in the state.  My father had bought a printing press, now bear in mind, we're in a community with forty thousand people a circulation of, at its maximum, thirteen thousand papers, which in a small town is not bad.  You could assume that with a pass around value it's sort of rule of thumb that every newspaper is read by four people, when you consider the family and friends.  And so we were virtually saturating the market for our population base, but he wanted to buy his own printing press, though it would have much more economic sense to pay another firm to print the paper rather than bearing the cost of what it would take to buy and maintain a big press.  But his attitude was, "I want to control what I print."  So, he spent a large amount of money to buy this press which was only--it would print fifteen thousand papers an hour, well, what do you do with the other thirty-nine hours of the week, right?  So I determined that we had to get this printing press busy.  And so I started selling the services of printing tabloids for variety stores and grocery chains, printing these separate publications in these other communities and generally trying to get increased utilization.  I also started other businesses, small businesses.  I put a quick copy type operation in the largest office building in the city under construction.  I started a consulting business working with businesses on equal employment opportunity and partnered with a influential labor attorney in the community.  All trying to circulate cash to keep this enterprise going and I did that for ten years and I watched, you know, I--when I came into the business we went from what's known as hot type to cold type the process where they used to use the linotype and hot molten lead to form the, you know, that's how the printing presses used to operate and then when the computers came in all of that was automated and put into--you know, did away with the linotype and all of that and I converted the paper from hot type to cold type--
Story_ID: 238289
Speaker 1: There was also, in the early '70s [1970s], a lot of fervent or, ferment rather about school desegregation and the paper [The Oklahoma Eagle] was a center of a focal point for advocacy regarding parity in the school system for, for African American kids.  And I was very much involved in the community life.
Speaker 2: So even, you know, ten years after desegregation there were still (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh very much so.  And again, as I say, I was very much involved--
Speaker 2: Was it more of a bussing issue or--
Speaker 1: Bussing.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Bussing was the issue.  And magnet schools, Tulsa [Oklahoma] had some of the earliest magnet schools in Tulsa--in the country.  As an alternative for, for the forced bussing and maintaining the traditions of, of the black schools.  Booker T. Washington, [George Washington] Carver and Marian Anderson schools, at a time even when in the midst of desegregation and when they were losing that tradition those struggles, I might add, continue in the year 2004 in Tulsa.  Which I--
Speaker 2: And throughout the country.
Speaker 1: --and throughout the country, but they're certainly true there as well.  So, I was dealing with entrepreneurial pursuits and expansion in the newspaper trying to diversify income.  I was working a tremendous number of hours, often times sleeping on the couch in my office.  And I learned to do everything from, from writing stories and editorials to selling ads to taking photographs to actually--I didn't work on the presses, but I did everything else in the business.
Story_ID: 238290
Speaker 1: What did you like the best, did you like the journalism aspect of the printing [of The Oklahoma Eagle]?
Speaker 2: I think I, I think I liked the business mostly.  I think I liked the entrepreneurial--the idea of creating something out of nothing.  The idea of taking limited resources and shaping them into something that is seen as valuable to others and selling a vision.  I wasn't always successful with it and in fact, finally reached a point where I felt like I had enjoyed that experience about as much as I could stand it and that it was time to do some other things with my life.  And at one point was so over burdened by the pressure of it all that I really knew that it was time to leave and do some other things.  But I, I must admit it was the, the, the excitement of the entrepreneurial involvements that were probably most attractive to me and which have benefited me in my current work.
Story_ID: 238291
Speaker 1: So you decided to leave the paper [The Oklahoma Eagle] in 1983?
Speaker 2: In '81 [1981], I actually left.  So I say ten years, actually short of that.  My brother [James Osby Goodwin], who as I mentioned, is an attorney and who I said, "Okay, I've had my turn, it's your turn."  And who--he assumed management of the paper, I went through a divorce, I was involved at that time in a multi-level marketing enterprise and had gotten pretty good at it, 'cause it revolved around a lot of motivational speaking and high sort of energy life that I was capable of and thought I would move to Texas, central part of the country where I could continue this multi-level marketing company where I had contacts scattered around the country.  Where my sister was living at that time and where I figured I could get a grip stake and where I could sort of go to the what I thought of as the back side of the mountain and find myself.  And I got to a--I got there I didn't--I left with the clothes in my car and with no place to go other than my sister's, my Mercedes [Benz] was ultimately repossessed, but that's another story, but I answered two ads in the paper.  One of which was as a head-hunter, I said, "I can do that," you know, but I quickly realized that you had to have a clientele, you had to be able to know people that were looking for work and you had to have contacts with the companies who were willing to hire people and that took time.  And I needed money then and the second ad I answered was to sell encyclopedias.  And I went and met the guy who had a distributorship operating out of his house and he was an old Jewish fellow that took an immediate liking to me and I said, "Well, let me try this."  And I loved the idea that you could sell a set of books on Monday and get paid on Wednesday.  I said, "That's what I'll do."  And I got to be pretty good at it and over (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you go door to door or how did you sell it?
Speaker 2: I, I, it was in home, not door to door, you--we made appointments.  He had a operation where it--had a lead system developed so we actually made appointments with people to go--but it was very much in home.  Well, I got good at it and I got to a point where not only was I selling several thousand dollars' worth of books a week, but I started training other sales people and developed a sales force and one month led to the next and the next year led to the next and five years later I was selling encyclopedias but I sold a million dollars' worth of encyclopedias myself in addition to the several million that I trained others to sell.  And, once again, felt like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you sold a million dollars' worth in five years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I think that works out to about $1,000 a day worth of encyclopedias is what I, sold and, but I'm grateful--
Speaker 1: Not bad.
Speaker 2: --I'm grateful for the experience 'cause it once again gave me the opportunity to hone my communication skills and my sales ability, which I use as we speak (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But, but certainly in my day to day involvements.  But after a time, by that point I had remarried and my wife was a little weary of that life and decided I needed to do something a little bit more respectable and I guess I had felt I had been on the back side of the mountain long enough and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You found yourself?
Speaker 2: Well, I was finding myself.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And, 'cause during that period my routine was--most of the couples that I would see in the home were in the evening, although there were sometimes people who worked different shifts or had time off and I'd see them at other times of the day, but typically I'd get up at ten o'clock in the morning, I'd fix myself breakfast, this was right--I was a bachelor and you know had a swingin' bachelor pad in Houston, Texas and I'd watch 'All My Children' and then I'd go to work (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --by getting on the phone and making these appointments and then I'd go out selling but sometimes till 11, 10, 12 o'clock at night and get up and go next--start over again.  And, again a very casual life style, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not a bad gig, according to some.
Speaker 2: Not a bad gig, according to some--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --but after a while I think it, it, it didn't seem to be fulfilling the potential that my mother [Jeanne Osby Goodwin] and father [Edward Goodwin] had expected of me.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 238292
Speaker 1: So my wife at that time encouraged me to get a little bit more respectable job and I called a friend of mine who actually had been my brother's roommate at [University of] Notre Dame [South Bend, Indiana], who by that time was the president of Prairie View A&M [University, Prairie View, Texas], and I said, "Do you have anything that I can do?"  Well, he graciously provided me a chance to serve as a consultant to convert their hot type printing operation to cold type, which I had some experience in doing.  You know, they had had a printing instruction facility that they also used to produce their own printing needs.  So I started there as a consultant, well that turned into an opportunity to become the public information director.
Speaker 2: And this was in 1986 when you started at Prairie View?
Speaker 1: Correct.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, so I started basically handling public information, which again, was rather natural for me coming from my newspaper and communications background.  Well, then I started lobbying in the state capital in Austin [Texas] for the state appropriation that land-grant institutions, and Prairie View specifically, were receiving.  And, a career changing event happened for me during that period.  The pattern for a lobbyist is for you to pound the pavement, so to speak, in the capital.  Up and down the hallways, cornering whoever you can among the elected officials or their staffs telling your story about why they should give you more money.  And I did that for a while, a year or so, and there were a core group of legislators that I knew were supportive of the mission of the historical black college [HBCU] and Prairie View specifically, and who were influential in the appropriations process and I would try to branch out beyond that core group where I could, but I got the idea that instead of me going to them and telling them about Prairie View I would bring them to the campus.  Now bear in mind the campus was about an hour and a half away and off the beaten path, literally out in the country, but I created a field trip and started selling this to the members of the legislature, we got several busses, we created a full day experience where we brought the community together from the surrounding areas, so the elected officials, corporate leaders from the surrounding area.  The administrators for The [Texas] A&M [University] System, developed a slide presentation had a musical res--presentations by groups had arranged for them to take tours of the research facilities and succeeded in bringing over half of the legislature from Texas to Prairie View, which had never been done before and which attracted the attention of the, of the, of the press, the Chronicle of Higher Education sent a reporter who rode the bus with the legislators and carried a front page article about this new found way to lobby and needless to say it created quite a stir.  Well the chancellor and the administrators at Texas A&M [University, College Station, Texas] said, "Who is this guy."  You know, an (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And was it successful in terms of getting more dollars?
Speaker 1: It, it was successful in building the support basis for the university and ultimately in getting more dollars as well.  But it certainly put a face to the name of an institution that most of the people who came had never physically seen.  And, it also created a great deal of pride for the campus, who got a chance to show their wares to the support and constituency.  But that, and I remember that the president of the university at that time, said to me, as the experience was unfolding, he says, "Bob [HistoryMaker Robert Goodwin], this is a career enhancing activity."  And I wasn't quite sure what he meant, I mean I knew that it would be--look good on my resume or whatever, but in hindsight, at--now knowing what he knew, that in fact it probably was the single most important event that I was associated with which in turn had a direct relationship on the balance of my career because the A&M officials said, "Well, let's get this guy to work for us"--
Story_ID: 238293
Speaker 1: --So I moved to College Station [Texas] and I started doing the same kind of thing for the, what I call sort of the big house, Prairie View [A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] was a part of The [Texas] A&M [University] System and I was there working for the chancellor.  And while there, I (cough) was encouraged to get involved in the candidacy of George [Herbert Walker] Bush, the father, for the presidency, well, I'd been a lifelong Democrat, I'd published this progressive liberal paper [The Oklahoma Eagle], thought of as the liberal rag, named after Senator Robert S. Kerr, who was a prominent democratic senator, as I mentioned mentored LBJ [President Lyndon Baines Johnson].  And had never had any interest in Republican Party or saw myself working with it, but one of my dear friends, who, black woman, older woman and who was very involved in the Republican Party, she used to say to me, "Bob [HistoryMaker Robert Goodwin], you need to get involved with the, the Republican because you'll stand out."  You know, and again, I think her rationale was pretty sound.  That, the Democratic Party is filled with black folk, who jostle for position for--if they're thinking about their own advancement.  You know, leave aside the question of the values of the party and what the party wants to accomplish, but thinking about the question of what your own ability to excel.  And, so Elaine's [ph.] thinking was you'll, you'll, you'll have fresh opportunities and have an opportunity to be equally influential as those opportunities unfold if you get involved with the Republican Party.  Well, she had been after me about this for years, Michael Dukakis was the Democratic nominee and I wasn't very excited about his candidacy, I liked what I knew about George Bush in terms of his compassion and approach and so I said, "Okay." And I became a part of a, what was known as the National Steering Committee of Democrats for Bush.  I wrote a couple of op-ed pieces, our family paper, the paper in College Station where Texas A&M [University, College Station, Texas] was.  I gave a couple of speeches on his behalf and this was very late in the campaign and the guy wins.  And when he wins, my friend who had been sort of my patron put my name into consideration for Schedule C or a political appointment.  And I can write the book on how to get a presidential appointment.  I didn't know George Bush at the time, but I knew a lot of people who knew him and there was one job in government I decided that I wanted, which was working with the historically black colleges and universities [HBCUs].  It was called the White House Initiative on Historically Black College[s and] Universities.  And because of my Prairie View experience and because of my involvement in the black church and the black press I felt that I had a unique perspective to contribute to that office.  So I spent eight months going after that job and finally, you know, and I got everyone that I could think of, everyone I knew or could get to, which included [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson and Coretta [Scott] King and Ben Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] and [HistoryMaker] Vernon [E.] Jordan [Jr.], who I had met along the--over the years in my, in my career who had been known to my family.  It included a lot of business people donors.
Speaker 2: Had you alienated anyone by your involvement with the Democrats for Bush, in terms of--'cause some of these names--had you alienated any of those (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no I don't think so--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I think they took the position, okay, let's get some of our people on the inside and could appreciate it from that standpoint and had a healthy appreciation for the two party system.  And who, each of those people I named, and many, many others wrote letters of endorsement for me.  I had one of the bishops from the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church and anybody I could think of who I thought would be influential within the people who were making the decision for Schedule C or political appointment.  Well, finally after eight months I'm sure that the head of presidential personnel said, who is this guy, you know, we gotta give this guy a job 'cause he's killin' too many trees (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And I got the call to come to Washington [D.C.] to run this important office.
Story_ID: 238294
Speaker 1: And, my claim to fame, if you will, subsequent to that was having been fired from that position [in the White House Initiative on Historically Black Colleges and Universities] because of a position of, of, of, I think integrity and value.  My office kept track of all of the federal dollars that were going to the nations historically black colleges universities [HBCUs] and we issued an annual report of what [U.S.] Department of Agriculture and [U.S.] Department of Defense and NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] and the big agencies who have research dollars or scholarship dollars or other forms of support that colleges depend on.  I also staffed a presidentially appointed advisory board that was supposed to give recommendations to the president of what he could do to strengthen this class of institutions.  And I was pursuing a program, many different aspects to it over the ensuing two years and there was a court case that was winding its way--that wound its way through the system and was being argued at the [U.S.] Supreme Court called the Ayers Case or Mabus or Mabus case [Ayers v. Mabus], Governor [Ray] Mabus of Mississippi was named after and it had to do with the desegregation of black colleges and universities, basic premise was that the government was taking the position that black colleges should have the same racial mix as the community they were in, which in effect would have meant the end of black colleges, state supported black colleges.  Well, it can be argued that philosophically that's correct, that it ought to be an open society and that white colleges ought to have as many blacks and other minorities as the general population and the same can be true for black colleges.  But in fact, I knew then and I believe now, that black colleges play a unique role in the preparation of our young people and that they--it's not time for them to go out of business.  And the board of this advisory board took the same position so we wanted to try to somehow cause the government to take a different position than it had in this case that was being argued at the Supreme Court.  And we built a fire under [President] George [Herbert Walker] Bush, we got to [HistoryMaker Dr.] Louis Sullivan, who was then the secretary of health and human services, Jim Cheek [HistoryMaker James Cheek] the former Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] president was the chairman of the board of this advisory group and I was staffing it.  Lou Sullivan agreed with our position, he called, then President Bush at Camp David [Catoctin Mountain Park, Maryland] and said, "Mr. President we're on the wrong side of this issue."  President did his own reconnaissance, agreed with us, called his general counsel who is, gentleman by the name of [C.] Boyden Gray and said I want us to change our position before the court, Boyden Gray said, "Yes sir."  Called none other than Ken Starr, who was the solicitor general, and said, "The pres--the boss wants us to change our position."  Well, this had only happened two or three other times in history, where the government changed course midstream, well, needless to say there were people close to the president who were not pleased.  And I was, about thirty days, later called into my boss who was the assistant secretary for higher education and given twenty-four hours to clean out my desk.  Unbeknownst to them, I had spent the previous five months being interviewed by and coming after the job at the Points of Light Foundation [Washington, D.C.].  So I was fired on Thursday and on that Saturday morning I was called and extended the job as chief operating officer of the Points of Light Foundation.  And frankly never missed a beat, and that was thirteen years ago.
Story_ID: 238295
Speaker 1: Was the firing painful because you knew you had done the right thing and the President [George Herbert Walker Bush] had done the right thing?
Speaker 2: Yes and no.  It was painful in one sense because I'd never been fired before.  I mean I'd only worked for anybody else, you know, very briefly 'cause I'd always been in my own business, but I'd never sort of considered that I would ever be fired and just like having been rejected for the college of my choice [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio] being fired from a high level position in government was a assault on my ego.  And that's just my normal, my first reaction, on the other hand, it was a badge of honor and I knew that it was something I could later be proud of and ultimately--and while I was concerned about what--what am I gonna do next, I really wasn't worried about it whether I was gonna miss any meals 'cause I was confident in my own ability and frankly, as it turns out, it probably helped me to get the job at Points of Light [Foundation, Washington, D.C.] because Points of Light is a non-partisan, bipartisan organization.  We're very proud of the fact that the George [Herbert Walker] Bush--the father was our founder, but it's been very important for us to operate with people from both sides of the aisle and we have.  We grew during the [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton years for example, and they wanted, the people who were searching for what was going to be the number two position and ultimately the top job here, wanted someone who was independent, who was not necessarily seen as captive of either political party and so I'm sure they figured, well, here's a guy who worked with the Republican administration but he's also fired by the Republican administration so he's gotta have some stroke of independence.
Speaker 1: Well did you want President Bush to stand up for you or did you want someone in the administration to stand up for you?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't feel like I needed it.  I felt like I'd make my own way, and, and again, there was such a short period of time.  Now if it had been a matter of weeks or months between my firing and my next job, maybe I would have said I need to be vindicated.  But it was only thirty-six hours between the time that I (laughter) got the axe and then I got the chance to come to the new job so I didn't feel the need.
Story_ID: 238296
Speaker 1: First, if you will [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Robert] Goodwin, just tell us a little bit about what the Points of Light Foundation [Washington, D.C.] is?
Speaker 2: [President] George [Herbert Walker] Bush uttered what many think--what's one of his more memorable phrases during his campaigning for the presidency about a thousand points of light.  Peggy Noonan, his speech writer helped to coin the phrase and we actually find that the dates goes back as fa--we're told as far as Jeffersonian days of the imagery.  But it is intended to connote how each individual can brighten their own corner of the world through their selfless acts of service.  A non-partisan, not-for-profit organization was established because of the very positive reaction to that phrase whose mission has been to help stimulate and support volunteering in this country.  And he invited, George Bush invited, the father, invited thirteen prominent Americans to Camp David [Catoctin Mountain Park, Maryland] and asked them to become the founding board of directors of this organization, and there were some of the top names in business an education, non-profit an government in that group.
Speaker 1: Can you rattle off a few?
Speaker 2: Sure, Roberto Goizueta, who was then the CEO of [The] Coca-Cola [Company, Atlanta, Georgia], John [F.] Akers, IBM, Dick Monroe, Time Warner [Inc.], Bob Wright, NBC, Lod Cook [Lodwrick M. Cook], ARCO, George [W.] Romney, the former governor of Michigan, Ray Chambers who was one of the most successful early leverage buy-out operators at that time and still today.  Norm Brown [Norman A. Brown], the president of the [W.K.] Kellogg Foundation, Monk Molloy, the president of Notre Dame University [sic. University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana] and a couple of community leaders, Johnnetta [B.] Cole from Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], Maggie Kuhn, who was the founder of the Gray Panthers, Jim Renier [James J. Renier], the president of Honeywell, Cynthia Myata, who was the head of the foundation from Dayton Hudson [Corporation], that was the early group.  Pretty marquee group of players, and they chartered and became the founding director for this organization--
Story_ID: 238297
Speaker 1: The mission of the Points of Light Foundation [Washington, D.C.] is--can be distilled to the notion of more and better volunteers.  And so we help to devise strategies, we work with partnerships, with organizations ranging from Salvation Army to Habitat for Humanity, the Big Brothers and Sisters [Big Brothers Big Sisters] and those sorts of organizations on how to be more effective in getting people to make themselves available for volunteering.  The second element of our mission has to do with the effectiveness of the volunteer service.  It's not imme--it's not enough just to show up, but you have to make an impact and so we have training and consultation and programs that are designed to work with the organizations who use volunteers to ensure that that experience is, is meaningful.  The best way, perhaps, to understand what we do is something of a hybrid between a operating foundation and a trade association.  As an operating foundation we conceptualize, develop and run programs.  Those programs serve a variety of demographics, seniors, young people, families, people in low income communities, children and all about how volunteering helps to improve the quality of life of those individuals.  As a trade association we provide services to members.  We have local non-profit members, our local affiliates, called volunteer centers, national non-profits like the organizations I've mentioned, corporations, a growing segment of the marketplace who are interested in getting their employees out into the community to serve.  And we have become perhaps the dominant resource for companies who want to start or expand workplace volunteer programs.  Today we operate with a budget of about twenty million peop--$20 million, about 130 people.  We have 350 local affiliates who have their own budgets and own staffs, I'm talking just about our headquarters operation.  We receive federal funding in addition to raising money from traditional sources and have a wide array of partnerships including; now even getting into e-commerce.  We have a business relationship with eBay, we have an online charity auction site to help non-profits raise money using the eBay metaph--meta--device and we manage eBay's charity auction site that they recently launched.  I, I love it because I'm--th- this is a place where all of my past experiences and training come together.  My entrepreneurial bent, my community emphasis, my ministry, you know I feel like that if I can help people to understand who their neighbor is and what their obligation is to their neighbor that it becomes a step closer to them understanding their responsibility to their creator.  My oratory, my public speaking, I give speeches all over the world an, and draw upon that.  My sale--my sales experience (laughter) because I'm raising money constantly and having to talk to funders and others and helping them to understand the vision of our work.  So, it has become--I feel very fortunate where my vocation and my avocation have collided very powerfully in the opportunity to help improve the quality of life in our communities through, through the selfless acts of service that we encourage people to pursue.
Story_ID: 238298
Speaker 1: What have you been most surprised about, or what have you learned about people and volunteering?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if I've been surprised.  I know that--you know we, we seek, seek to understand what it--what motivates people to volunteer.  You know, I often talk about what is it that will take someone from the comfort of their living room couch into the life of someone in need.  And people volunteer chiefly for two reasons; because they can see the change that they make in another person's life or, and because they feel good doing it.  And so, helping people to experience the satisfaction that they derive from their service is an important strategy for getting people to do more of it.  And thus we have many recognition programs and promotional activities designed to affirm people as a consequence of their willingness to be a volunteer.  And increasingly as there has been a growth in the service sector, you know, I've, I've seen tremendous changes during my tenure of nearly thirteen years here of how volunteering is being increasingly thought of as not nice but necessary.  And, as there has been this growth in the embracement--or embracing of service as a strategy to help address the country's serious social pathologies more and more attention is being focused on impact measures indicators to prove that things are different as a consequence of the work of the volunteer and we're spending a lot of time in helping to decipher what some of those impact measures ought to be.
Story_ID: 238299
Speaker 1: And have you noticed that the number of people and the level of volunteering has increased since September 11th [2001; 9/11]?
Speaker 2: Yes, there was an immediate surge, which frankly happens after every disaster.
Speaker 1: It's kinda like Thanksgiving where everyone goes to the soup kitchen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly.
Speaker 1: --but then after that--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --they don't have volunteers anymore.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  But, it's okay to experience spikes and surges.  I think it's normal.  What we want to do is to figure out how to capitalize on that instinct that people may have about service at those times and to extend that inclination on a more regular basis where people are volunteering habitually and not spasmodically.
Speaker 1: And some might argue, and I have heard this argument before, I don't know if it's true or not, that volunteerism isn't as great among African Americans as it is among whites, is that--would you agree with that or--?
Speaker 2: Yes and no.  And frankly this is an area where we have done a little bit of work.  We have some experience in phrasing the question, hearing the responses of others and working in programs which seek to prove a particular point of view.  One of the things that we have learned is that language is very important in this process.  Volunteering is a word that has a different meaning to people in the white community than the black community.  And there is sometimes associated this idea of sort of noblesse oblige, noble obligation which can be thought of as being paternalistic and a misplaced sense of charity in the minds of some.  What we found is that common expressions like, "helping out" and "being a good neighbor" are more familiar within the black community and more frequently practiced and so someone may say, black person may be asked, "Do you volunteer?" and they may say, "no."  But then when you probe and say, "Well have--do you take soup to Miss Nellie down the street when she's ill?"  "Well, yeah, I do that."  Or, "Will you look after Josephine's kids while they're gone outta--?"  "Oh yeah, I'll do that."  Or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And helping in the church and that kinda thing--
Speaker 2: --an that kinda thing.  And you go down that list and you find that there's a great deal more volunteering taken place then might have been captured in, in the surveys and things.
Speaker 1: But would you like to see it increase, particularly among African Americans?
Speaker 2: Very much so and we are working on programs with people like the [The] Annie E. Casey Foundation which is created by the UPS [United Parcel Service, Inc.] fortune just on that point.  And not just minority but in low income areas where we believe is that people who most often are thought of as the recipients of service have more to give than is commonly thought.  So whether that's people who are disabled or whether it's teenagers or seniors or families, non-traditional sources of volunteering or people who live in low income communities.  And we're doing work to discover some of the best practices and techniques that can be used to get non-traditional populations to be the providers of and not simply the recipients of service.  So we most definitely are working to a--see an increase in those populations.
Story_ID: 238300
Speaker 1: And, [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Robert] Goodwin, when you look back at your life, what stands out the most to you, and why?
Speaker 2: Training and upbringing.  The great sense of obligation to whom much is expected much is required, that whole emphasis.  Following that, my religious training, Oral Roberts, one of his mantras was the notion of seed planting.  Give as a seed you plant, you give and it will be given back to you and I think that my emphasis on service and the sense of obligation for giving back is ultimately a selfish value because I know how much of a sense of satisfaction and fulfillment I derive as a process.  And giving as a seed you plant knowing that you're going to receive something in return is a core value that undergirds much of who I am and what I've done in my life.  I've a favorite quotation, comes from an anonymous author that speaks to this sense of obligation an, and responsibility which I feel fortunate to now be working in a career that enables me to work on this every day.  It says, "Past the seeker as he prayed came the beggar and the broken and the beaten and seeing them the holy one went down in prayer and said, 'Great God, how is it that a kind and loving creator could see such things and do nothing about it?'  And out of the long silence God said, 'I did do something, I made you.'"
Story_ID: 238301
Speaker 1: Tell me, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: My greatest concern is that we will be beguiled by notions of entitlement.  And assume that our salvation resides within the power of another.  I think that the equally important other side of the equation of freedom is the responsibility and I think that people who have embraced a sense of responsibility for their own welfare and for the welfare of their community are the people that you can count on to succeed in life and those who believe that, that success is something that can be imparted to them by another are those who will constantly be on the outside looking in.  So my greatest hope is that we as a people will understand the importance of personal responsibility for our own communal health and wellbeing and I suppose that remains my greatest hope as well.
Story_ID: 238302
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as someone who took to heart his mother's [Jeanne Osby Goodwin] admonition that to whom much was given, much was expected and who delivered much as a payment for the many blessings of his life.  And that, again I think of the, the poem, I wish I could quote--I haven't recited it in years, but I remember Rudyard Kipling, "If you can sit with kings and queens and keep the common touch then you my son will be a man."  You'll have to look up the balance of that quotation, but the essence of that idea is what I'd like to be remembered.  Someone who was able to walk in any circumstance and to find the good in others that he dealt with and help them to feel important and good about themselves and who kept looking for ways to give back.
Story_ID: 238303
Speaker 1: And any regrets?
Speaker 2: I regret that I didn't take seriously piano lessons in the fourth grade.  I would love to be able to sit down and--I--it amazes me how people can just go--let their fingers glide across a keyboard and such beautiful things come out and I really wish I could do that and I regret I didn't take it more seriously.  I regret that I, I didn't take Spanish, the study of Spanish more seriously.  I was coming up at a time when I figured, let them learn English I don't need to learn Spanish, not having any idea about the shape that the global community and I know recognizing how many people from Europe and Africa and other places speak two and three and five languages and we barely speak one and, and, I regret I didn't--wasn't more serious.  I probably regret--you know, my mother [Jeanne Osby Goodwin] told me one time, she said, "Bob [HistoryMaker Robert Goodwin], you don't have to marry every girl you take to the grocery store (simultaneous)."
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And I'm a romantic and I think people get divorced today because they get married for the wrong reasons.  And, I've done that in my life, of, of being in love with the idea of love and the idea of being married more than perhaps having taken time to get to know the people that I married and I would--I probably regret that, that I wasn't a little more thoughtful be--before making what otherwise I believe should be a lifelong commitment.  But other than that, I think that every experience, even the failures along my path have only given me a better preparation for the next phase of my life and I celebrate not only my successes, and my joys but my failures and my sorrow because I know that they have provided depth and texture an, and perhaps some degree of complexity to what is otherwise a very fulfilled life.
Speaker 1: All right.  Is there anything that we haven't touched on that perhaps you'd like to add?
Speaker 2: Certainly not (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  Thank you so much for your time [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Robert] Goodwin.
