Story_ID: 93662
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: I'm Al-Tony Gilmore.  A-L, dash, capital T, O-N-Y, G-I-L-M-O-R-E.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born June 29, 1946 in Spartanburg, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a policy analyst with the National Education Association, senior policy analyst.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you are also a trained historian, right?
Speaker 2: I'm a trained historian, and I'm still a writer and historian, I guess you would say.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is November 21, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  And you don't have to give your address.
Speaker 2: We're in my home in Bethesda, Maryland, suburbs of Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 93663
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight "People Magazine"-ish type questions we always ask, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Alright.
Speaker 1: They only deserve a short answer.  (Laughter.)
Speaker 2: Alright, Larry.
Speaker 1: The first one is, Sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Seafood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Particularly, Maryland crabs.  If I've got a choice, that's number one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's running close and close with fried chicken, as well.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably navy blue.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Christmas.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Myrtle Beach [South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Alright.  And finally, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  "The guilty one knows who he is."
Story_ID: 93664
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about your family history.  I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  We'll start by asking you about your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Margaret Gilmore, M-A-R-G-A-R-E-T, Margaret Gilmore.  My mother was also born in Spartanburg, South Carolina in 1925.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We attended the same high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I can go back to my mother's grandparents.  My mother's grandparents were Wallace and Grace Woodruff, who were also born and raised in Spartanburg, South Carolina.  And I know that their parents were slaves.  My mother's grandparents' parents and my mother's grandparents were slaves.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I do know that.
Speaker 1: Did they tell stories about slavery, or talk about it at all?
Speaker 2: My grandmother [Willie Atchison] and her brother and sisters talked about the conversations that they had with their grandparents.  And they talked about what it was like during slavery.  And some of the stories of that were passed on to them, and to some extent, were passed on to me.  When I grew up, I lived in a community where quite a few of the older men came from families where they remembered their ancestors who were slaves, and they talked about it quite a bit.  So throughout my community, the older fellows who were unschooled but well-educated, it was almost like a ritual, that they would always tell you about what the world was like before.  And I'm almost certain, I'm almost positive that that's what pushed me into history.  I knew a couple of fellows on my street when I was a kid growing up in the late forties, early fifties.  These men would have been in their seventies and eighties at that time, to give you a sense of how old they were.  They remembered Booker T. Washington speaking at the Atlanta Exposition Address [Atlanta Cotton States and International Exposition Speech in 1895].  They remembered Jack Johnson beating Jim Jeffries [July 4, 1910].  They remembered blacks serving in World War I.  They remembered the Great Migration.  They remembered all of those things that were essential parts of history, and they talked about them.  They talked about great men who had lived in our town, accomplishments that blacks had made in our town.  They talked about family successes.  They talked about family members who had moved north, of segregation, and had had better lives.  So I always felt as a child growing up, a sense and a connection, if not with my own biological family, with my community.  In fact, where I grew up and where I lived, a thin line blurs between your biological family and your community family.  So, even now, the kids who grew up with me and their children who live here, we're not biologically connected but we always introduce ourselves as family members.  When we have a family reunion, it's called the Atchison family reunion.  In that reunion almost everyone who had some kinship, some kind of connection, some of common church, some kind of common job, some kind of common neighborhood, common experiences--all of those people who grew up for years and years in these neighborhoods.  I grew up in an area where my grandmother and her friends all lived on that street.  And they had children, and all of their children lived on that street.  And my mother comes along, and here me and my brothers are born.  And all of those other children we always, we grew up with.  So when we have a reunion, almost everyone who grew up in that environment comes to the reunions.  We have these reunions now; we've been having them since the mid 1950's.  We have them every other year.  I would say you can expect three to four to five hundred people to show up for the reunions.  But it's, it's, it's more than just a bloodline.  It's a line of community.  And almost everyone at that reunion has one thing in common--they all grew up in Spartanburg, South Carolina.  And they lived in some connection to either B Street, where I lived, or Stephen Grove's church [Stephen Grove A.M.E. Zion Church] where we all worshipped, and even to this day where my mother is a member of that church.
Speaker 1: Well, that's a unique thing nowadays to have that kind of connection--that you can still, you know, return to and to, you know, interact.
Story_ID: 93665
Speaker 1: But two things you said I want you to kind of follow up on.  One was the stories about slavery that were told.  Do you remember any of those specific stories about slavery that the men told?
Speaker 2: I remember them talking about the Emancipation Proclamation, which obviously would have been a day that would be embedded in a person's history, in a person's mind, and in a person's memory.  And I remember my grandmother [Willie Atchison] and my grandmother's sister talking about when they talked to their grandparents, how difficult it was during slavery; how hard the work was during slavery; how demanding slavery was.  And that's how my grandmother and her sisters would talk about it.  Now, my grandfather [Curtis Atchison] and Mr. Clarence Pickenpack [ph.] and Mr. Antly Floyd [ph.], and names like that... I just... mens whose intelligence far were ahead of the time.  Had they had opportunities, they would have been just successful in probably any field.  But their spin on it was different.  They talked about nothing but the horrors of slavery.  They talked about the advantages that white men took on black women during slavery, and they explained that to me.  When I was growing up like in the late 1940's, early 1950's, one thing you had to learn very early where I lived, and that is to abide by the rules of race relations, called segregation.  Because if you violated those rules, you could get in some serious trouble.  And the year I was born [1946], on my street, one of my relatives came home from World War II.  He came home that night, L.B. Broadus [ph.] was his name.  And he and his friends decided they would go out and socialize.  Whatever happened that night... he went to a house and he went to a house where a white woman was, and he fell asleep in her house.  And someone broke into the house and saw him and chased him out.  And he ran out almost without his clothes all the way back to the street where I lived.  This is the year that I was born.  They arrested him that night, and they sentenced him to life in prison.  I knew about this man all of my life.  I was born June 29, 1946.  It was around 1956 or '57' [1957] when I met this man when they finally released him from prison.  So, I had a sense of what this thing was about.  And I say this because this was a very important part of our lives.  And our parents had to teach young, black boys more than anybody else, that you could get killed if you violated these codes and these regulations around segregation.
Speaker 1: So, he got life in prison for being--
Speaker 2: He got life.
Speaker 1: --found asleep in a white woman's house.
Speaker 2: Found asleep in a white woman's house--L.B. Broadus, a very good friend of mine, a very nice gentleman.  His life was practically destroyed because of that.  He, in many real ways, he never recovered.  I say this because that was just a no, no.  That was something that you did not do.  Now, in this community where I lived, all of the streets surrounding my street were white neighborhoods.  And these were poor white people, for the most part.  And these people had also had several generations of growing up in this environment, with my grandmother, with my mother, with me.  These people, for some reason or another--maybe because they had been in that community so long; maybe because we knew each so well; maybe because I could go in their home and they could come in my home, and I could eat in their home and they could eat in our homes.  We were sort of isolated, so we had to play ball together all the time.  We'd pick teams, and every now and then we would say, "Hey, let's do something different.  Let's let the whites play the blacks."  And we'd really get fired up for that.  But we were fundamentally on one accord.  We saw each other as living in the same part of town, loving each other, liking each other, but understanding race relations.
Story_ID: 93666
Speaker 1: I remember when I was a little boy, one of these white women who grew up on the street right behind us with my mother [Margaret Gilmore]... they were very good friends.  She worked in a shoe store called Wright's Rugs, okay.  At Wright's Rugs there was a section far in the back where blacks had to sit, okay.  And there were certain kind of shoes blacks could not even try on.  And I remember I went in that store with my mother once.  She was in the back and she told my mother, and I heard her.  She said, "You know, I'm sorry that we have to treat you this way.  But these are the rules and these are the regulations, and my job requires it."  And my mother says, "I do understand."  And we went in the back and tried our shoes on.  They boxed them up, and we left.  But I remember that.  Because in my neighborhood, I can't say that that... those are the Darby [ph.] families.  I can't say that they saw us any different than human beings.  And even to this day... even to this day, when a member of my family dies, a member of my community dies--wherever they are in this world right now, wherever they are in this country right now--when the word gets to them, they're going to call that family, they're going to come by that home, and they're going to show their respect.  And I was home recently, and one of the guys I grew up with had died.  And I went out there, and I hadn't been there since the 19... early 1960's with that family.  And I told my wife [Beryl S. Gilmore], I said, "I want you to drive me by there.  A friend of mine I grew up with died, and I want to pay my respects to the family."  Now, I left there in 1964.  I hadn't been on that street and in that house since 1964.  My wife pulled up, and she said, "Are you sure you know these white people here?"  I said, "I know them very well."  I got out of the car.  I said, "Hello, y'all know who I am?"  They said, "You sound like Margaret Gilmore's son.  Come on over here."  And we sat down and we talked.  I mean, that's the nature of the community I grew up in.  But once I left that community and went on the other side of town, I passed all the other neighborhoods I had to go through to get to school, past the other schools.  We'd get up in the morning, we'd go to school.  The black kids would go; we'd stop by the white kids... we'd go.  We'd cross railroad tracks.  We'd go by one school, and they would go to their school.  And we'd keep going by there, and go on to the next school.  And some of them would go to that school.  Then we'd go on down to our school.  We'd come back.  We'd go to school and come to school together, making those stops.  And the interesting part about it, even though I think they saw us as human beings, both of the schools we walked by--one thing I found out very early was how mean and vicious this world was.  I couldn't understand why a kid my age had to pass that many schools to get to my school.  I genuinely, as a first grader, had to walk more than three miles to school, as a first grader.  Two schools that I walked by with my brothers and our friends as we stopped by neighborhoods,  picking up more and more along the way--and along the way starting out with the whites going over there.  One thing that was a common everyday occurrence, was when we walked by those schools, you could rest assured somebody would come to the fence and say, "Hey, niggers."  Now, that was every day.  Every day, "Hey, niggers.  Hey, niggers."  This went on for years and years.  And I do remember the day that it stopped.  One day when we were about, I must have been about seventh or eighth grade, and my brother and his friends were about the tenth or eleventh grade.  And we walked by the school, and this white guy said "Hey, nigger."  And for some reason, my buddy, Willie Mack Brown, he had gotten some size.  And he grabbed this white guy and genuinely kicked his butt.  Never again did we walk by that school did anybody call us any names.  I just... some things you just remember.  I don't think I could ever forget that incident.  Willie Mack had stood up.  And even now when I go home--and Willie Mack is retired now.  And he'll come by my mother's house if he knows I'm in town.  And we always talk about that incident, you know.  I, I, think I learned something from that--that at some point you have to resist, and a strong show of resistance can bring about change.
Story_ID: 93667
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell me about your father's side of the family, as much as you know about your father's side.  If there's more about your mother's side--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is there any more about your mother's side that you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's various stories on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Because we kind of diverged off, but it's alright.
Speaker 2: My mother raised us as a single mother.  But let me say something about my father's side of the family.
Speaker 1: What was your father's full name?
Speaker 2: David Cureton, C-U-R-E-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when was he born, do you remember?
Speaker 2: He was born around 1917 or 1918.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you don't know the exact day?
Speaker 2: I can't remember the exact day.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was he born in Spartanburg, too?
Speaker 2: He was born in Union, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was also raised by a single mother who had at least six to seven kids.  She did day work for people, worked for white people in their homes.  She raised her family by herself.  She had boys and girls who were smart.  My father was a great high school athlete.  He went to Benedict College [Columbia, South Carolina] and became one of their greatest athletes.  In fact, it's interesting how things shape your future.  Even though my father didn't play a major part in raising me, he was concerned about me getting a good education when it came time to go to college.  And when he was in college, Benedict College was just a tremendous football team.  And the two best players on that football team were David Cureton and LeRoy T. Walker.  Now, LeRoy T. Walker, when I became a high school senior, was the track coach at North Carolina College, which is now North Carolina Central University [Durham, North Carolina].  And they had been great friends.  And so I sort of had a connection, because I was a pretty good high school athlete.  And my high school coach, Wydell Pearson, they had a state meet at South Carolina State College.  He said, "I think you really can compete in track at the major level."  And he said, "North Carolina Central University is just an unusual track team."  And he says, "LeRoy T. Walker's down there, and I'm going to go down this weekend and tell him about you."  And he believed in me, and he believed in my older brother, and he sent us all to college.  He went and he talked to Dr. Walker.  And Dr. Walker said "Well, based on his times, and based on his distances as a broad jumper..."  I was like State champ in the broad jump, but my distance was nothing compared to what they were doing at North Carolina Central.  It wasn't raising any eyebrows.  But my coach said, "He's a special kind of guy, though, now.  I just don't think he's nowhere near the peak he's going to be."  And he felt that I really could compete.  And then he said, "By the way, LeRoy, you might want to know this.  That's Dave Cureton's son."  And even though my name is Al-Tony Gilmore, when my coach heard that, he said, "Well, if he's anything like his dad, I'm going to take him."  So, that's how I got a scholarship to go to North Carolina Central University.  And I think that's an interesting story, don't you? It is, it is, it is.
Speaker 1: Yeah, very interesting.
Speaker 2: So, so you--
Speaker 1: And my dad died in 1966, my sophomore year in college.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But you knew him but you weren't... he didn't really play a great role in raising you?
Speaker 1: Not a major role.
Story_ID: 93668
Speaker 1: The major person who raised my three brothers and I were, was my mother [Margaret Gilmore].  My mother was just an unusual woman.  Growing up on a street where very few people had ever been to college, I don't think there was ever a day in our minds that we were not going to go to college.  My single mother was the president of the PTA [Parent and Teacher Association] at most schools where I attended.  My single parent mother thought it was just nothing unusual that we should make the honor roll every time... that we should excel academically.
Speaker 2: Now, did she have a chance to go to school when she was coming up?
Speaker 1: She did not have a chance to go to college.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: She was supported by her mother, my grandmother [Willie Atchison] and my grandfather [Curtis Atchison], and my grandmother's and grandfather's sisters and brothers who had gone, moved north and got fairly decent jobs--jobs that did not require college degrees, but jobs where they were able to demonstrate their skills and were able to advance.  So, we lived in a very decent home.  We were never hungry.  I would think... in our neighborhood, our home was probably the best home in the area, including those of whites.  The family was just closely-knit like that.  And I must have had about six or seven fathers on the street, older men, who just cared about me and cared about all the kids in the neighborhood, and cared about the women in the neighborhood, and knew something about manhood and about respect.  I remember on some Saturday nights, there was... we used to call this guy Uncle Bill.  And it's just to show you something about the sense of respect for women and the sense of respect for family and community.  Uncle Bill would drink a lot of whiskey.  And he would get so drunk, he would come stumbling down the street.  You could just see him on a Saturday evening.  But there were several houses in that neighborhood where the quote unquote "churchwomen" lived, okay.  Miss Eloise Jones was a churchwoman.  Miss Mae Ann was a churchwoman.  Miss Monisene Atchison [ph.] was a churchwoman.  My grandmother was a churchwoman.  Miss Mary Pickenpack was a churchwoman.  When you went... when he got by those houses, it was amazing how he could straighten up and walk straight.  And as soon as he got by, he'd go back into it again until he got to the next house.  That just says something about that culture, and the values that were passed on in that culture.  So, that sense of respect for older people--
Speaker 2: Internalized.
Speaker 1: --that sense of respect for church--that was something that was part and parcel of growing up in my neighborhood.
Story_ID: 93669
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, any more about your father [Davis Cureton]?  Now your father had a chance to go college, and he was an athlete, and--
Speaker 2: He was an athlete.  He, he came back to my high school and he was a football coach.  He's legendary for what he accomplished in football.  Even today when I go home--and a lot of the guys are dying now, they're getting older.  I was held in very high esteem by a lot of guys--Jimbo Porter, Rick Porter, his brother; John Anderson; Vincent Cleveland.  These are very famous names in my home town.  Because these guys went on to college to become great football players, and came back to be teachers, and came back to be high level professionals in all areas and walks of life.  They were coached by my father.  And I do not remember him being a coach, because I was very young then.  But he must have been extraordinarily good, because they still talk about how good he was.  Now--
Speaker 1: So, he wasn't coaching by the time you got to high school?
Speaker 2: No, in the early fifties.  He was also very smart.  He'd gotten a master's degree from Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And they made him the principal of a high school in Spartanburg [South Carolina], but not the high school where he had been the football coach.  So, he was fairly well-known in the community, and his name still means a lot to a lot of people.
Story_ID: 93670
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents met?  Did they ever tell you about how they met, or--
Speaker 2: My mother [Margaret Gilmore] met my father [David Cureton]... my father was a football coach at Carver High School in Spartanburg [South Carolina].  My mother was Miss Carver High, and it goes from there.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So, there was a little age gap there?
Speaker 2: Not a big age gap, but an age gap.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Yeah, not a huge age gap.
Speaker 1: He was still a young man.
Speaker 2: He was still, he was a very young guy just coming out of college, and taking on the job as the head football coach at the high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, is a story behind your name?  It's an interesting name.  When people see it, they say, well, you know, "Al-Tony."  You know, what is--?
Speaker 2: You know, I'm asked that a heck of a lot.  And I just asked my mother about it, and she just said there was no particular reason.  My oldest brother is named Curtis Tyrone Gilmore; I'm Al-Tony Gilmore.  I had younger brothers who were twins, Eddie Gilmore and Freddie Gilmore.  Eddie and Freddie never had middle names.  Tyrone's name, Curtis, is the name of my grandfather, Curtis [Atchison].  How Al and how Tony... I do not know.  My father had a guy on his coaching staff.  And the guy on his coaching staff became my high school coach.  His name was Albert Bud Campbell [Albert "Doc" Campbell], and he was one of my dad's best friends.  And Doc Campbell passed away, but his wife is still alive.  And she's convinced that Al had something to do with her husband's name.  She just says, "I just have a feeling that... your name is unusual."  She said, "But your father was so close to Bud Campbell that I believe he had something to do with that being a part of your name."  That could be apocryphal, I don't know, but she always mentions that to me.
Story_ID: 93671
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you knew your... I guess, from some things you said, I take it you knew your father's mother fairly... I mean, your grandmother?
Speaker 2: My father [David Cureton], my father's mother, I didn't know anything about her.  I learned about her more so from members of his family, his sisters, and those who knew him.  My mother's best friend married my father's first cousin, who was the principal of my junior high school.  So, even when I was in junior high school, the principal there, Mr. Emerson B. Coleman, was my father's first cousin.  Mr. Coleman took quite a liking to me.  And I knew I was bloodline connected with him.  And he told me about their upbringing.  And all I know is that he would always say--and I don't even remember her name, my father's mother's name.  But he said that she was a humble woman, she was not educated, and that when all of her children went off--and all of her children finished college-and they wanted to buy her a better home and do some better things for her--I understand that she was very comfortable where she was.  She did not want to move, she wanted to stay as she was.  And to show you, you know, how that family achieved, because of the strength of this woman, in going to black colleges in South Carolina and then going on and on...  When I got to the University of Toledo [Toledo, Ohio] to study for my Ph.D., I knew that my father had a sister, and she lived in Detroit [Michigan].  And I was told to call her, by my cousin, Mr. Emerson B. Coleman, to let her know I was in the area.  So, I took the first step of calling her.  And I said, "Hey, I am Al-Tony Gilmore, Dave Cureton's son."  And she said, "Oh, I'm just so delighted, I've heard so much about you.  I heard about you when you were in high school, I knew about you when you were in college.  And your father talked about you, and your uncles and your family talked about you.  And I'm just delighted that you've not forgotten us."  She was married to Dr. Alvin Rose, who was the chair of the sociology department of Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan].  So, there was a sense of academic achievement on his side of the family, and it demonstrated itself quite well.  I'm certain that all of his brothers and sisters were college trained, that I do know.
Story_ID: 93672
Speaker 1: What are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights and sounds and smells of growing up.  Lots of black people, lots of black people.  Lots of black people... enjoying the culture, enjoying the music, enjoying dancing, enjoying eating, enjoying cooking, enjoying family, enjoying friends.  That's the sights and the sounds of growing up.  But there's also a soundtrack that goes with along with that, for me, growing up that said, "You're black, America's white, and segregation is the law of the land."
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: And so, I, that insular world that I'm so comfortable in, I'm so very aware that if I cross the perimeters of that boundary, I'm dealing with something totally different altogether.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: So, you learn to be cautious and protective and guarded when you get outside of that community.
Speaker 1: Now, South Carolina--I just want to interject this.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: South Carolina was one of the states in the Union a long time ago that had a higher black population than the white one, and Mississippi being the other one, I believe.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, that's right.
Speaker 1: Did you live in an area where the black population was significantly higher than the white population?
Speaker 2: Being an historian, one thing you do know.  The amount of repression in the old South was in direct relation to the extent and the population of blacks over whites, okay.  When you think of South Carolina, you are talking about a state with significantly huge numbers of black people--so much so that you had to nullify them politically, or we would have been a powerful political force to deal with if we could have voted.  I lived in Spartanburg, South Carolina, which is in the northwest corner of the state.  That is not where the large majorities of blacks who lived in South Carolina during slavery and in Reconstruction and after, lived.  When you think of heavily-populated black areas of South Carolina, the least populated area of black people is the town where I grew up in, and I'm saying that for a reason.  When you're in small numbers, you don't tend to pose to be the same kind of a threat.  We were never a threat politically; we were never a threat socially; we were never a threat economically.  So we lived in our worlds, and we had our black doctors, and we had our black clinics, and we had our black hospitals, and our black funeral homes, and our black lawyers, and our black churches, and our black recreation centers, and our black junior high schools, high schools, elementary schools on each side of town.  So, when you grow up in that world, in South Carolina that I grew up in, the experience that I had in Spartanburg would be completely different than the experiences of someone that grew up in Columbia, South Carolina or Charleston, South Carolina or some of the other areas where there were descendants coming from the larger plantations in the state.  That was not a part of where I was from.
Story_ID: 93673
Speaker 1: And because of that, of that insular world where we lived, a world within a world, of all these high level black professionals--obviously the best opportunity for employment would have been in public schools as teachers.  So, by me growing up in the fifties and the early sixties, I grew up in a town where probably some of the smartest people--the best that they could realistically aspire to be--a disproportionate number of them were classroom teachers.  And in Spartanburg because for a number of reasons--maybe because we didn't pose a threat...  And even though we had to walk by all these high schools that were superior to ours, we did have good schools in terms of the physical sense of the word, and in terms of the quality of the personnel.  I would even go so far as to say that the teachers that I had probably would have exceeded in qualifications of those teachers who taught in the white schools.  In fact, on that I am almost certain.  The track record would show that.  Also, we've got to remember, in 1954, I was in like the third or fourth grade.  So, in 1954, of course Strom Thurmond... of course, none of the politicians of the South... the Southern Manifesto... were about to budge with integrating schools.  Brown v. Board [of Education], 1954... I finished high school in 1964.  When I finished high school there was not a single black student in the state of South Carolina that attends a white school, okay.  But South Carolina, where I lived, decided to deal with it in a more practical way.  Rather than talk about integrating the schools, they truly talked about upgrading the quality of the black schools.  So, they started building, went on a building campaign.  A great physical place, I mean, just modern physical facilities.  It was a political maneuver, but we got the best out of it.  And the reason I showed you that high school picture of mine, that high school picture, that class reunion picture, was no different than probably the twenty classes that preceded me.  And the largest percentage of kids where I went to school, went to college.  Most of us went to historically black colleges, but we went to college.  Most of us got exceptionally good educations.  A good number of us went on to become Ph.D.'s, lawyers, doctors, dentists, scientists, what have you.  And a lot of us out of my generation went to extraordinary heights, because I also went to college when the black power movement and the dismantling of segregation genuinely started taking place in American society.  Everybody in my high school class who went to college and became a professional, and became the first to do whatever they did--everybody in my college graduating class, wherever they went to work, wherever they went to graduate school were generally the first to do whatever they had done.  The doors were finally being dismantled.  When I went to college [North Carolina Central University in Durham, North Carolina], I went to college "Negro," "colored."  When I left college, I'm "black," "African-American."  When I went to college, I went to college for one purpose--to get a degree to come back to my high school to coach.  When I graduated from college, I went to get a master's, then a Ph.D. as did all my other colleagues and classmates.  Because that world that we as freshmen thought we were going back to--that world had changed completely, absolutely completely.  And I was in college when all of that took place.  When I went to college, you would ask anybody on my campus, "What is your race?"  I'm going to guarantee you ninety percent would have said "Negro."  This is 1964.  In 1968, my senior year, there's not a single person on that campus who would have identified themselves by that word, "Negro..." '64' [1964], '68' [1968]... black power movement.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I was there when Stokely Carmichael came to the campus.  I was there when the Poor Peoples Movement came to the campus.  I was there when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] came to our campus.  I saw all of that take place.  And I saw a cultural revolution take place.
Story_ID: 93674
Speaker 1: Now, we're going to go back to that.  But I wanted to take you... still to childhood.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: We want to talk about grade school and so forth.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Now, what kind of a little boy were you in school?  What did you like to do?  And did you like school?  And--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I liked school very much.  I always did well in school.  I didn't do a lot of studying, I really didn't, because I liked sports a lot.  I was as much into sports as I was into my classwork.  I didn't study.  I made very good grades.  At some point in fourth or fifth grade, some test was administered, and I scored probably higher than anybody in that part of the state.  I do know that happened once.  People tell me about that.  I don't really quite remember taking the test, to be honest with you.  But everybody tells me how well I had scored on the test.  But it, it, didn't mean a heck of a lot to me.  I thought it was, school was fun.  But I was really more interested in sports at that time.  I was certain that I was going to college.  I was certain that I was going to participate in sports in college.  And I was almost just as certain that I was going to return to my high school, to be a coach.  That's all that I had seen.  That's all that I wanted to do.  And I thought that was high expectations, to be honest with you, at that time.  That's how I saw it.
Story_ID: 93675
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who were some of your teachers in grade school that you remember?
Speaker 2: The teachers that I remember in grade school are teachers I can never forget.  I wonder, I ask my children sometimes who their important teachers were.  I remember every teacher I had, for every course that I had, from kindergarten through high school.  These were not just teachers.  And even though not a single teacher that I ever had attended my church--where you tend to identify as family--every teacher that I had, I kind of saw them as extended family.  I've gone back to my hometown over the years to their funerals.  I've gone back to their churches to speak, to their social clubs to speak.  And they see me as something special, and I see them as something special.  And when I speak, I always talk about them.  I talk about Miss Hattie Bell Penland [ph.], my first grade teacher, who was also my brother's, my oldest brother's [Curtis Tyrone Gilmore], first grade teacher, who was also my youngest brothers' [Freddie Gilmore and Eddie Gilmore] first grade teacher.  When my children were born, I opened the mailbox one day, and there were two savings bonds.  It said, "From Dad's first grade teacher, Miss Hattie Bell Penland."  My brother who is three years older than me went back to my hometown, and became the superintendent of public schools.  One of our neighbors who went to college with my brother came back to my hometown, and became the Mayor of Spartanburg, South Carolina.  One of my high school teachers who taught my brother, who was also one of my best high school teachers who encouraged my brother to join Omega Psi Phi Fraternity, must have felt good when my brother became Grand Basileus.  That's the top position of Omega Psi Phi Fraternity.  And he's listed in Ebony year after year as one of the 100 most important black people in America.  They all were just extraordinarily good teachers--Miss Hattie Bell Penland was an extraordinary teacher.  Mr. Stewart was an extraordinary coach.  Miss Gray, Miss Thorpe, Miss Barksdale, the list goes on and on and on.  They were just truly outstanding teachers who demanded academic excellence, and who got it.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your school, your grade school?
Speaker 2: I went to Cumming Street Elementary School.  I started there in the first grade, alright.  First grade at Cumming Street Elementary School.  When I get to the sixth grade, they make Cumming Street a junior high school.  So, I now I go to Cumming Street Junior High School, from seventh to the ninth.  And then in the tenth grade, I went to Carver High School, the high school where my father had been the football coach, and my mother had been Miss Carver High during her senior year in high school, and where my brother had been a great football star about three years ahead of me, and had also attended college on an athletic scholarship.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Cummings Street School, Cummings Street Junior High School, and Carver High School.
Story_ID: 93676
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you were in junior high school [Cumming Street Junior High School], did you, were you thinking about a career at that point, or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --thinking about what you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: I was just having fun.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My life was rather routine, sort of an assembly line sameness to it.  The seasons determined what you do.  You play basketball in basketball season.  You play football in football season.  You run track in track season.  You go to the parties, you go to the high school hops.  You try to date the cutest girls in town.  And every summer, we would make... an annual ritual.  Every summer around June, my mother [Margaret Gilmore] would pack all of her boys up.  She would call Mr. Woodard, who ran the funeral home, and she would rent one of his cars and his drivers, and they would drive us to Youngstown, Ohio.  And we did that every summer.  That's where my grandparents [Willie Atchison and Curtis Atchison] lived, which was a completely different world.  It's a steel mill town, and it's integrated.  Blacks and whites go to the same parks, the same movie theaters.  Blacks and whites date each other.  Blacks and whites live next door in the same neighborhoods, a completely different contrast.
Speaker 1: Now, you described something I've never heard before.  You'd go to the undertaker, and he would provide, he had someone who could provide you transportation from--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Spartanburg and Youngstown.
Speaker 2: Well, when you're growing up with fairly modest means... and people... everybody in my hometown had somebody who lived up north.  You know the expression, "Everybody in Mississippi has a cousin in Chicago [Illinois]."
Speaker 1: Oh, that's true.
Speaker 2: I know that's true, okay.  Well, everybody in Spartanburg [South Carolina] has a cousin in Youngstown, Ohio, and that's a fact.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The same story.  One person goes up and gets a job, okay.  He gets a job and he gets a place.  Then he sends for his wife.  Then he sends for his brother.  Then they send for somebody else.  Well, in Spartanburg, when I got to Youngstown, everybody that I knew... every home that I went to... the people were from Spartanburg.  So, I would go from house to house to house, and that's what we did in Youngstown.  There must have been nine or ten houses that we regularly went to.  Only two or three of those homes were biologically connected to me, but all of them were community connected to me.  I even still go to Youngstown, Ohio.  The family and the community is diminishing somewhat.  They're into like the next generation.  But all of those people that I once knew, when they're sick, I try to acknowledge and recognize that.  When they're celebrating, I try to be a part of that.  And of course, when they die, I have to go to be a part of that.
Story_ID: 93677
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, well, tell us more about Youngstown [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Youngstown was located in the northeast corner of Ohio, near the Pennsylvania line.  Most black people went there during World War II, because of the steel mills.  It was considered one of the nation's... like Gary, Indiana.  It was a major steel mill.  Every steel industry was located in Youngstown.  Black men who didn't have college educations, black men who didn't mind working very hard, would go to Youngstown.  You go to Youngstown, you can get a job if you're from Spartanburg.  You go to Youngstown, you can get a job if you were from the South.  And you know why?  The word was out.  You're going to pay me a decent wage.  You're going to give me a vacation.  You're going to give me health benefits.  You're going to let me be part of a union, and have union and labor rights protections.  Well, I'm going to show you how I can work.  They must have known that they were getting their money's worth.  These guys come from jobs that were much more difficult than the steel mill.  And even though in the steel mill, they had the most difficult jobs in those mills.  But the kind of money that they were making, they were able now to buy homes, to buy cars.  And they even finance their kids to go off to have a better life by going on to higher education.  And that was happening all throughout Youngstown, but not as much as was happening in Spartanburg.  What's disappointing about my family in Youngstown as opposed to my family in Spartanburg, almost everyone in Spartanburg in my generation eventually went on to college.  Well, in Youngstown, if you got out of high school and you went right into the mill, you were making money much more--probably as much as a public high school teacher in Spartanburg.  I remember when that was happening.  So, not even having one generation of college graduates in your family, and not understanding the quantitative of life of being educated, much of my family in Youngstown just took the good dollar and they ran with it.  Very few went to college.  Only one, as I can recall.  And you can see the differences in my children and their children when we meet at family reunions.  It's like they're from two different worlds, from two different worlds.
Speaker 1: And those mills are not hidden the way they used to be.  They're declined, right--
Speaker 2: And the successes that I had, and the successes that my cousins had, who were my generation, we still communicate very well.  But we don't live the same whatsoever.  I went to college.  My brothers went to college.  We married college women.  We all went to graduate school.  Our wives went... my wife [Beryl S. Gilmore] is a judge.  We all became successful, and we all valued education, and learning, and reading, and thinking.  And I think that part of life was missing in Youngstown.
Speaker 1: And now, the millwork has diminished quite a bit, right?
Speaker 2: Youngstown looks like a ghost town.  I went to Youngstown to a funeral a few months ago.  My wife went with me.  And I rode by the house where my grandmother lived, and it's boarded up.  And I went through the neighborhoods where I used to play as a kid in the summer.  And I went through those places, and never in my life have I seen anywhere that many houses boarded up, block after block after block after block.  Youngstown is a disaster, an absolute disaster.  It is painful to sit in those yards, and see what has happened since I was there every summer as a kid.  To see those thriving men, who I remember as very important men, drug addicts.
Story_ID: 93678
Speaker 1: If you came to one of my family reunions, right off the bat, you could go through the crowd and you would know who grew up in Spartanburg [South Carolina] and who grew up in Youngstown [Ohio].  Not just those who are my age, but you would know whose children are the children of those who grew up in Spartanburg and whose children are those who grew up in Youngstown.  Guys in Youngstown had processes.  I do not think I would have lived.  (Laughter).  I would have died at an early age if I put that stuff in my hair.  My mother [Margaret Gilmore] didn't play that.  Youngstown, man, we could stay out until one and two and three o'clock in the morning running around.  You couldn't... my mother would never allow that in Spartanburg.  Youngstown, you could go to church, but you didn't have to go to church.  That's a ritual of my life when I grew up.  You, you had to go to school.  And no one could relegate you to taking shop, or auto mechanics.  There's nothing wrong with shop.  There was nothing wrong with auto mechanics.  But for my family, my mother's children, they were not going to do that.  Once one of my teachers--and I think he had a good idea--because I can't even drive a nail straight.  He had a good idea once.  He said, "You know, we're getting so much into this liberal arts education, we're training black men who can't do anything around their homes, they have no fallback."  He said, "I'm a college man, but I can still do plumbing.  Mr. Allen's a college man, he does auto mechanics.  [Albert] "Doc" Campbell is a college man.  Mr. Allen's a college man, but he's still a great bricklayer."  He said, "Gilmore, you guys can't do anything."  So, he started to initiate a program that would have allowed us to take a trade, which made good sense.  My mother wouldn't buy into that, which is why I probably have to pay somebody to even drive a nail.  I can't lay a brick, I can't install a carpet, I can't fix a toaster.  I can't do any of that.  I have no mechanical skills.  So that's the shortcoming of it, I guess.
Speaker 2: But that's an interesting split, though, it really is, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But you used to stay there in the summertime, right?  You used to stay all summer?
Speaker 1: I stayed there in the summertime.
Story_ID: 93679
Speaker 1: But the better part about that Youngstown experience probably defines who I am... probably defines exactly who I am.  I am genuinely much more comfortable around regular down-to-earth intelligent black people who may not have college training, than I am around what I oftentimes find to be confused African-American people who have college training, and are constantly in search of something that I don't know what it is.  It ain't that complicated for me.  It ain't that complicated to me at all.  I live here in Bethesda, Maryland, right outside of Washington, D.C.  I am truly out of my element and out of my world, but I found my world here.  When I go places, people ask me, "Well, where did you go to school, and what do you do?"  That's a violation of everything that I grew up in.  You judge people by who they are, not by the fortune or the misfortune of what they happen to do.  The two most important things in life that none of us have any say-so about--and they're the most important determinants of who we're going to be--who your parents are and where you go to school.  Who your parents are, where you're born, and where you go to school.  We have no influence on any of that.  And it affects our life's chances to a great extent.  So, how in the heck am I going to go around identifying myself?  Something is artificial and something is wrong when you come in my house and you see me around my friends and all of them happen to have Ph.D.'s, all of them happen to write books.  No, I don't want a world like that.  I don't never want to be a part of a world like that.  No, I think the vibrancy of black life is much, much more.  I have a Ph.D. in American History.  I think I know about as much as that as anybody going.  But you know, some people with a degree in American History, or a degree in chemistry, or a degree in anything in college, thinks it makes them damn near intellectually omnipotent.  So, because they got a degree, and the guy who doesn't have a degree--everything that they say is of more value than the person over here.  I don't have a degree in everything.  My degree says History, that's all it says.  And I'm supposed to know a little bit more about that than most people.  But now, I cannot know as much about who's in first place in the NBA.  I may not know about who's running for political office across town just because I have that degree.  But I, I, think that we equate too much with degrees.  And I'm not ready to make that transition yet...  I'm not ready to make that transition yet.  I came up in a time that I can't forget, and I know what life's chances are.  And I know how lucky and how fortunate I've been.  And I know how unlucky... and the misfortunes that far too many others have had.  So, for me to separate myself from my people, it's just absurd and ridiculous.  I don't ever want to be in any environment where the vibrancy of real black folks...  Real black folks, what is that?  It's like class.  It's hard to define, but you know it when you see it.  It's like the problem with social sciences.  We know all the important things that we cannot measure.  And therefore, we make those things that we can measure much more important than they are.  We talk about what it takes to be a quality teacher.  And we talk about passing this test and passing that test.  That's the problem with social science.  I could name about six or seven things that you have to have to be a good teacher.  But they don't measure them when they assess who's going to go into the classroom.  How do you measure compassion?  How do you measure patience?  How do you measure persistence?  How do you measure courage?  How do you measure tenacity?  I could on and on.  I don't want anybody teaching my children... I don't want anybody around that does not have these traits.  But in the intellectual world, they mean absolutely nothing.  You can become a medical doctor and be one of the most nasty, dispirited human beings on the planet.
Story_ID: 93680
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's, we'll try to...  We'll talk about these professors when we get you to college.  But let's get you to high school.  Now, you attended Carver High School.
Speaker 2: Carver High School [in Spartanburg, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: George Washington Carver, I guess?
Speaker 2: It was named after George Washington Carver, certainly was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, so you had like... your father [David Cureton] and your brother [Curtis Tyrone Gilmore] already had been athletes there.  And I guess most people knew your brother, who had just immediately--
Speaker 2: Everybody knew my brother at Carver.  And everybody knew that I was coming to Carver, because I had been pretty good in junior high school [Cumming Street Junior High School].  But I didn't play junior high school football, I played junior high school basketball.  And I knew that when I got to Carver that they would be waiting for me to get there.  I knew that.  I lived on the other side of town, and Carver was not very hospitable to people from my side of town.  But I just kind of felt that when I got there, I was going to be okay in basketball.  I didn't know about football, because I didn't play junior high school football.  We didn't have junior high school football until I became, until I got to high school.  That's when they instituted the junior high school football program.  And my brothers [Freddie Gilmore and Eddie Gilmore] were dominating that.  So, when I was in high school, everybody knew that they were coming behind me.  But we played football in sandlots.  Now, I can go to Spartanburg right now.  I'm going to Spartanburg, in fact, Wednesday morning for Thanksgiving.  When I get there Wednesday morning, I'm going to see my friends.  And I'm going to say, "Where's the game?"  They're going to say, "Oh, Tony, you know they don't play the game anymore."  Because that was the game where you made your... that was the game where you made your reputation as to whether you were going to be a football player.  They played it every Thanksgiving from, since I was down to here [pointing downward] until I left.  It was played on the black side of town on Thompson Street.  And it was called "The nigger bowl."
Speaker 1: Really? (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes sir, buddy.  If you could survive playing in the nigger bowl, going to Carver [High School] was a piece of cake.  That's what we called it.
Speaker 1: So, who played in it?
Speaker 2: Veterans, grown men.  Guys who dropped out of school who generally were the better athletes, the guys who dropped out of school.  They generally were the better athletes by far, okay, back then.  You had to compete with those guys, and guys who had finished high school.  And you picked teams, and you hoped that you could get picked by one of those teams.  That was a brutal kind of football--no helmets, no pads.
Speaker 1: Tackle?
Speaker 2: Tackle, absolutely.  No such thing as touch football... real football.  I couldn't count the legs, the arms, the injuries, that were sustained during those games.  I think they would... they would even have an ambulance just sitting there, just waiting, man.  Well, I never was a star in the "nigger bowl," I never was.  But I grew up admiring the guys.  I never had the size, at that point in time.  When I got to high school, I went out for quarterback in the tenth grade.  And I was small, but I did make the team.  The team was one of the best teams in the state.  But I got, I started getting size by my junior and senior year, so I became pretty good.  But I could never even get picked to play on a team in that bowl over there on Thompson Street.
Story_ID: 94142
Speaker 1: Did you play football in high school [Carver High School]?
Speaker 2: I played football in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I played football in high school.  I played basketball in high school, and I ran track in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My brother [Curtis Tyrone Gilmore], my brother didn't play high school basketball, but he had always, he had been very good in high school football and track.  And he was in college, at Livingstone College [Salisbury, North Carolina] at that time, and he was a star football player and track athlete there as well.  In fact, probably the whole Livingstone football team was from Spartanburg [South Carolina], from my high school.  Just a very few guys on my high school team didn't go to college to play football.
Speaker 1: Now, is Livingstone near Spartanburg?
Speaker 2: It's in Salisbury, North Carolina, probably about a hundred and twenty-five, thirty miles from Spartanburg.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Something like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  Now, how was high school?  I mean, did you--I know you excelled in athletics.  Did you set any records in athletics in high school?
Speaker 2: My high school football team, when I got there, had won maybe about thirty-five straight games, had won three or four State championships.  And they won big when I was there.  I would think probably my high school senior year we finished 6-- 7 and 3, and I was the quarterback of that team.  That was the worst record my school had had probably in fifteen years.  And after I left, my team continued to win nine, ten games a year and win state championships.  So, I probably played on what would be considered maybe the weakest of the teams.  We were a pretty good team, but I'm just saying 7 and 3 is not bad.  And the games we lost, they were very close games.  But it was expected that you would win.  The entire town came out to see you win.  I can't think of anything that I've had greater satisfaction in my life, in my entire life, than making my high school football team and starting as a quarterback in the twelfth grade.  I made my high school basketball team as a sophomore.  And I started, and I was real good.  But basketball wasn't nearly, in my hometown, of the same stature and held in the same esteem as was football.  Track was even held in less regard.  But that football team, even today, it means a lot to say that you played for the Carver Tigers.  My high school coach, two of them are still alive.  They still call me, they still check on me, because I played football.  Now, when I went to college, I became pretty good in track.  And we would... integration was taking place, and I was traveling to meets against the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina], Furman [University in Greenville, South Carolina], Clemson [University in Clemson, South Carolina].  So, when I would go back to my home, all the coaches would come out to show support for me.
Story_ID: 94143
Speaker 1: Now, you were a long jumper, right?
Speaker 2: I was a long jumper.  I was a high school... I broke my high school record.  I think I jumped about twenty-two feet or something in high school.  That was the record at that time.  And at the state meet I jumped like 22'7"/22'8".  I think I finished second.  But I remember on the team bus coming back to Spartanburg from Columbia... coming from Orangeburg back to... at South Carolina State College, the black college where the state high school track meet would be--I remember my coach saying that at that... that was the point that he knew that I could probably compete in major college competition.  He said because when it was on the line, I had jumped... my greatest jump ever, I jumped like six or seven inches longer than I'd ever jumped.  And he just thought that that said something.  He still talks about that.  Even to this day, he said that meant something to him.  He said because there was another guy on my track team who was supposed to have jumped better than me that day.  He didn't jump at all.  And he just... my coach thought that the element of pressure did not affect me, you know.
Speaker 1: That's almost like a [HM Robert] Bob Beamon jump there, when you--
Speaker 2: No, but I have some interesting Bob Beamon side bars.  (Laughter).   When I was at North Carolina Central University [Durham, North Carolina], when I got there [1964], there were two guys on the track team who had just come back from the Olympics--Norman Tate, and Edwin Roberts.  Norman in the triple jump--and even though Norman could broad jump 25 feet, that didn't qualify for the Olympic team, but it qualified as a triple jump; and Edwin Roberts in the 200 meters, okay.  North Carolina A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University in Greensboro, North Carolina] had Bob Beamon.  And Bob Beamon had jumped 25 feet in high school.  Bob Beamon was the highlight of the conference.  So, I was a year ahead of Bob Beamon.  But when Bob... when the broad jump event would be announced for any of the meets, everybody would assemble around the broad jump pit.  Well, the most I ever jumped in college was 24 feet, 6 inches.  Bob Beamon was jumping 25 and 26 feet, okay.  So, it was a foregone conclusion that nobody could compete with Bob Beamon in this event.  At the end of the second year at A and T, he transferred to Texas Western [Texas Western College of the University of Texas, now University of Texas at El Paso in El Paso, Texas] from A and T.  And from there, he went to the Olympics and made the mightiest broad jump of all time, the 29 feet, in Mexico City [Mexico], yeah.  So, we traveled on the same bus--North Carolina College, North Carolina A and T, and Winston-Salem [State University in Winston-Salem, North Carolina], and Johnson C. Smith [University in Charlotte, North Carolina].  Vinnie Matthews also participated in the Olympics in the 400 meters in 1968 and '72' [1972] was from Johnson C. Smith.  We were on that same, on that same bus.  Also, the shot putter on that bus, Elvin Bethea, who was from A and T who played for Houston [Oilers]-
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --was recently inducted into the Football Hall of Fame.  Leon Coleman, who became one of the hurdlers on the United States Olympic team in '68' [1968] and '72' [1972] was at Winston-Salem.  So, it was a time when the quality of athletes in the CIAA [Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association] was just tremendous.
Speaker 1: Now did you play basketball, too, in college?
Speaker 2: I didn't play basketball in college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 94144
Speaker 1: Let's, let's, let's, let's talk about high school [Carver High School in Spartanburg, South Carolina] teachers for a minute.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Like, what about the academics in high school, and who were some the teachers there that you admired?
Speaker 2: One of my teachers was named Mr. Bobby Leach.  I mention him for a reason.  Bobby Leach was probably the most demanding teacher that I ever had.  And I didn't do well in Bobby Leach's class, and I didn't like Bobby Leach.  And I'm not so sure Bobby Leach liked me, to be very honest with you.  But Bobby Leach was almost like a genius.  And I gotta tell the story.  Bobby Leach told my aunt that I didn't have the discipline to go to college, that I should consider a career in the military.  He told my aunt that on my senior trip.  That upset me quite a bit.  You know, sometimes somebody says you can't do something and you decide you're going to do something.  I was determined that I was going to show Bobby Leach that I could succeed in anything I wanted to do academically.  But I really couldn't do that well in his math classes, his algebra classes.  My mind was somewhere else.  But I had concentrated, I think I could have.  But his demeanor and his posture, it just didn't resonate well with me.  And I didn't like Bobby Leach.  I went to college and I just excelled so quickly... I excelled real good.  I finished undergraduate school in three years, no summer school.  I had a master's by the time I was like 21.  I had a Ph.D. by 24.  To make a long story short, I'm teaching at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And they invite me to go over to lecture to Morgan State [University in Baltimore, Maryland], to a summer institute.  In that class at the summer institute was Bobby Leach, attempting to get his master's degree.  And he and I had a long talk.  But you know, I had to look at myself.  I was as culpable as was Bobby Leach, and I never held that against him.  And he asked me if I would recommend him for a Ph.D. program, and I told him I'd be more than pleased to do that.  And I recommended him for a Ph.D. program.  He eventually became the vice-president of Southern Methodist University, and then became the vice-president of the University of Florida.  No, not the University of Florida, Florida State University in Gainesville.  He recently died.  But I thought that was a good story, because Bobby Leach was very, very smart.  Now, aside from Bobby Leach, my other teachers liked me.  They knew my mother [Margaret Gilmore], they knew my brother [Curtis Tyrone Gilmore], they knew my father [David Cureton], and they nurtured me.  Miss Luvenia Barksdale [ph.] was probably my favorite.  Miss Ellen Watson was also a good teacher.  Miss Lola Taggert was an outstanding teacher.  Mr. Miller Cunningham was extraordinarily prepared; I still tell him that.  And he always reminds me, he says, "Al-Tony, I always think of you."  He says, "Not necessarily academically.  But you came in my door one day and said, 'Mr. Cunningham, they killed the president in Dallas.'" [the assassination of President John F. Kennedy in Dallas, Texas in 1963] And he remembered that, because those things are embedded in your memory.  And he says my name always comes up in conversations, because he tells everybody that I'm the guy that knocked on his classroom door, and I said, "Did you hear about the president?"
Speaker 1: What did he teach?
Speaker 2: He taught psychology.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and civics.  He was real smart, he was really smart.  All of my high school teachers were smart.  This was right before the walls of desegregation started to tumble; when employment outside of public education became a reality and a possibility.  All of these guys... Bobby Leach was teaching at my high school.  It was some years later, after I get a Ph.D. that Bobby Leach sees the doors breaking down.  So, he goes back and gets his Ph.D. and goes into higher ed [education] and makes a name for himself.  And a lot of guys who taught, and a lot of the women who taught in my high school who were the younger ones, they went back to school and became lawyers; some went to medical school, some went to dental school.  Because the opportunities were finally opening, and government loans were available to finance higher ed, graduate schools and things like that.
Story_ID: 94145
Speaker 1: So, my high school experience [Carver High School in Spartanburg, South Carolina], I remember I was in sports.  My high school coach called a meeting one day.  And I'm a junior, and he has all the football team in the gymnasium.  And we were sitting on the bleachers, and he's down talking.  And he's concerned that we need to think about the next level.  It was at this meeting when he talked about that concept of trades for some of us.  And he talked about academic performance, and the importance of us to get our grades together.  He just looked up and he just said, "Is there anybody on my football team with B average?"  Alright, and I said... just like that--quick like that...  And I looked around, and I was the only guy in the room on the football team with a B average.  (Laughter).  I was the only one in there.  I was so dog-gone embarrassed, I didn't know what to do.  I made the National Honor Society and you had to learn Rudyard Kipling poem "If-," you know, "If you can keep your head when all about you is losing theirs and blaming it on you.  If you can trust yourself when all men doubt you, but make allowance for their doubting too."  And I read that thing, and that thing was too feminine for me.  I, I, I, I, I, didn't want to learn...  I don't play any instruments, because I thought playing in the band was not masculine.  Guys on my side of town didn't play in the band.  Okay, that's for the other kind of guys.  But the guys in the band, though, man, they were the head of the chemistry club, the biology club, the math club, the science club.  They were just generally the smart guys, okay.  And, but I didn't, I didn't hang with those guys.  I didn't want to be with those guys.  My mind was about going out to the "nigger bowl," that's where I wanted to be.  I wanted to be with that crowd, because that was my sense of masculinity, being a man.  Playing instruments, that was too feminine for me.  And, and that was, that's my world view.  That's how I saw the world then.  And for some reason my mother [Margaret Gilmore] never challenged that, I was just following my older brother [Curtis Tyrone Gilmore].  And he just said, "Now we're not playing in no band around here, man.  We ain't going to be in no band, no sir."  So, I was in high school, and I think I started hanging with the wrong crowd.  I think I was hanging with the wrong crowd, I think I really did.  And--
Speaker 2: What were they doing?  What kinds of activities were they engaged in?
Speaker 1: Breaking the law, a lot of them... shoplifting.  One night I came home from a basketball game.  And we had played a team, and the team's bus was riding up the street.  We had beaten them, and their team bus was going back to Greenville [South Carolina].  I saw Arthur Jones lean over and pick a brick up, and throw the brick right through the bus.  It hit a kid in the head, and the kid went to the hospital.  It was bad, and it was all on the news and everywhere.  And I'm at home.  And you know what?  They don't know who threw the brick.  I was right there and saw him throw the brick.  I made up my mind I wasn't going to tell anybody.  I didn't even tell my mother.  I told my brother, I said, "I know who threw that brick."  Well, about a day or two later somebody else found out that Arthur Jones had thrown the brick, and they arrested Arthur Jones.  Arthur Jones eventually went to college and became a great football player, and became a great public schoolteacher in South Carolina.  And now, I understand he's retired.  But that's the crowd that I wanted to be with.  I wanted to be with Lester Donaldson [ph.].  Lester Donaldson was shoplifting.  Lester Donaldson eventually went to Maryland State College [University of Maryland Eastern Shore in Princess Anne, Maryland] and became one of their greatest football players.  He's the head of the State Parole Board in the State of Virginia now.  He's a good friend of mine.  But Lester was going for bad, and I didn't have the guts to be bad, but I was more interested in being around them than I was being around the academic type.  And, and, and I regret that, because that same thing happened to me when I went to college.
Story_ID: 94146
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how did you decided on which college to attend?
Speaker 2: Well, my brother [Curtis Tyrone Gilmore] was a star at Livingstone [University in Salisbury, North Carolina]. And everybody on Livingstone's football team and basketball... football team in particular, were from my hometown [Spartanburg, South Carolina].  And so they starting recruiting me, and everybody thought that I was going to Livingstone.  Shaw University in Raleigh [North Carolina] wanted me to come play football.  Davidson College in [Davidson] North Carolina was a basketball school, and their coach was [Charles Grice] "Lefty" Driesell.  And Lefty was interested in looking for a black player, okay.
Speaker 1: His biggest star was Fred Hetzel, I think.
Speaker 2: Fred Hetzel.  Boy, you've got a good... right.  I mean, Lefty put Davidson on the map, okay.  And I have a long story about Lefty Driesell.  Anyway, some of my coaches wrote Lefty Driesell, and they really thought that I could play at that level.  Well, the white high school [Spartanburg High School] coach--of course, you had to be validated by a white man--Wally Dean.  Some people thought that Wally Dean should see me before anybody could reference me to Lefty.  So, Wally Dean came to see me play a game.  And Wally Dean, I understand, gave a thumbs up and said "I think this kid can play at that level."  So, the season was over... my senior year.  And Lefty had not seen me play, and there was no film of me playing.  But there was also a kid in North Carolina named Henry Logan, okay, who was the first to integrate Western Carolina College [sic, Western Carolina University in Cullowhee, North Carolina] in North Carolina, the first black to play integrated ball in the State of North Carolina.  He played for Stephens-Lee High School in Asheville, North Carolina.  They arranged a basketball game one week after the season, between my high school and Stephens-Lee, to play up there.  Lefty came to that game.  I didn't play well at all.  And after that game, I never heard anything from Lefty or anybody else about me playing basketball at Davidson College.  And that had been a big story around my high school about that game.  The fellow who played on the other team, Henry Logan, was a player that Lefty did want, but didn't academically have the background to succeed at Davidson.  Davidson is almost like a, it's of an Ivy League sort of stature in terms of its selectivity and its academic programs.  It's like Wofford College [Spartanburg, South Carolina] and schools like that, it's very high.  And they didn't think he would have been the right kind of a kid.  They thought academically I would have been the right kind of kid, I just didn't have a good game.  And I never heard anything else about that.  Well, then a number of other smaller black colleges started writing and calling me, and people started asking me what I was going to do.  A team that I played against out of Barr Street, their high school coach had taken the job as the head football coach at Maryland State College at Eastern Shore [in Princess Anne, Maryland].  And I had a lot of my homeboys who were playing football up there.  So, he wrote and said, "Al-Tony, would you like to come to Maryland State to play football?"  I probably would have gone to Maryland State, but he took his high school quarterback with him to Maryland State, [Jim] "Butch" Duncan, who would eventually play defensive back for the Baltimore Colts, okay.  He took Butch there.  And Butch and I were good friends.  But I knew if I went there that I could never beat Butch out, because Butch was his player, alright.  So, Mr. Pearson, my high school football and track coach, came to me and he said, "Well, what are you going to do?"  He said, "You're looking pretty good in this track."  And that's when Mr. Pearson said, "Well, you know, they're going to have the South Carolina Invitational Track Meet in Orangeburg this weekend."  And all of the black colleges on the East Coast would go there and run.  He said "And LeRoy T. Walker..." who was probably one of the most outstanding, the most dynamic black track coaches in America... "He's going to be down there with his team, and all these Olympians."  He said, "And I'm going to tell him about you."  He said, "I'm going to tell him about you."  So, he went down there, and he came back.  And the story about when he met the guy, he told Dr. Walker who I was.  And Dr. Walker wasn't overwhelmed with my records and my times or anything like that at all.  But when he found out who my father [David Cureton] was--and Dr. Walker had played college football with my father and they were very good friends--he said, "If he's anything like his father, I'm going to give him a break, I'm going to give him a scholarship."  So, that's how I went to North Carolina College in Durham, North Carolina.  I, I, I received that track scholarship around March or April of 1964.  A lot of the men's clubs and social groups in my hometown gave me scholarships, as they would do always--an awards thing.  So, I got a good little sum of money.  I went to Atlantic City [New Jersey] to work that summer, not Youngstown [Ohio], I went to Atlantic City.  My brother said, "It's time to make some money."  So I went to Atlantic City where the big boys hang out, and I started...  I was a bellman in a hotel, and I learned all the little games around that.  And everybody else there was from college.
Story_ID: 94147
Speaker 1: And I went to North Carolina College in September of 1964.  I caught a Greyhound Bus in Spartanburg, South Carolina.  Everything I had, I put it in a foot locker.  We used to call them trunks; I put them in there.  I had never been to Durham, North Carolina.  I had never met Dr. LeRoy T. Walker.  There was nobody at North Carolina College that was from my hometown, nobody there.  I went there and I was like, "Man, did I make a mistake or what?"
Speaker 2: Because what you've said about the cultural connections in your town... that is a big deal.
Speaker 1: It was a major, major deal.  I met Dr. Walker, and he greeted me and he told me about the program, told me to go get my track equipment.  It's September, okay.  He tells the football coach who I am, whose son I am.  And he also knows I played high school football.  The football coach really wants me to play football.  He calls me in and says, "Man, I've got to take a look at you."  I just didn't want to do it.  I just made up some story.  I said, "Look, man, I'm not going to play football because my mother didn't want me to play football, and that's just that."  So, I backed away.  But here I am, man, and it's September, and this guy's talking about it's time to start practicing track.  In high school, track was something you did in the spring, alright.  Now, I didn't like this at all.  I didn't like this at all.  I said, "Oh, man, this is just not my cup of tea here at all."  And the guys on the track team, with the exception of one or two, their personalities were not like mine.  They were just different kind of guys, I guess.  They just were like cross country people, and I wasn't a cross country kind of guy.  If anything I was going to run, it was going to be sprints.  That's what I was going to do.  Okay, now, I get up and I go to my classes.  And here, again, my dream is to go home.  So, they test you at North Carolina Central University, which was then North Carolina College, to decide what levels of placement they're going to place you in your class.  And I'm not, I'm kind of shamed to say that this is where my mind was at the time.  I had taken four years of high school French, okay.  And I wanted to enjoy myself in college.  So, when they gave me the French test to see how good my French was, I deliberately tried to not answer any of the questions.  Because I said if they put me in this first year French, I don't even have to study.  (Laughter).  So what I did was, I took the test.  And they said, "You certainly need three semesters of French," and they put me in the beginning class.  And then they found out how well I was doing on the examination, and they put me in the advanced stuff.  But that was my mind; that was my frame of mind, because I wanted time.  And I said, "Well, I can get an A in French and I don't have to study for it that hard," alright.  And at that particular time, I was going to major in sociology.  But I'd had so much trouble with Bobby Leach, alright, that [Joseph Sandy] Joe Himes--the world-renowned sociologist out of Cleveland, Ohio and Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio], the brother of Chester Himes--he was the head of the sociology department.  Dr. Himes said "Gilmore, I think you will enjoy sociology, I think it will be a good field for you."  He said, "But I should be frank with you.  What kind of math background do you have?"  And I couldn't understand that.  They had a course called Social Statistics, and I thought of Bobby Leach.  Uh, uh... uh uh. And that's the reason I didn't major in sociology.  In the history department--and I'd always had a sense of history growing up in my community--I just knew a lot of history.  That was just a part of who I was.  I collected baseball cards as a kid.  I knew who had won the World Series every year that it ever was played, and every player who played on every team.  I was just good in the knowledge of sport, and that was going to play a very important part in my life.  I didn't know how much it was going to play.  Because the idea that I would one day write sport history was just something that wasn't even on the landscape, not even, as I say, on the radar screen.
Story_ID: 94148
Speaker 1: So I majored in history, and I met probably the most important, influential people in my life.  Because at North Carolina College [now North Carolina Central University in Durham, North Carolina], almost every professor in the history department had a Ph.D.  Dr. Earl E. Thorpe impressed me so much, because not only did he have a Ph.D., he was just so down-to-earth.  And after class I could talk sports with him, I could talk about life with him, I could talk about my music with him, you know.  And--
Speaker 2: You have to hold this for one second.  Because Earl Thorpe--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --is the, he's a historiographer, too.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: He writes the biographies of other historians, the black historians.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: His major work is--
Speaker 1: "Black historians in the U.S.A" [sic, "Negro Historians in the United States"].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: That's right, he was the first guy to do that.  He had, he had graduated from North Carolina College.  He had been a student of [HM] John Hope Franklin, who had taught there, and Helen G. Edmonds-"Negro and Fusion Politics in North Carolina."  John Hope had finished Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts], and Helen Edmonds, North Carolina [sic, Ohio State University in Columbus, Ohio].  Then they had a Dr. [Joseph] Taylor, he had finished at the University of Southern Cal [sic, University of California].  Then they had Arnold Taylor, who taught international and diplomatic history.  He had finished at Catholic University [the Catholic University of America in Washington, D.C.], and had been a student of John Hope Franklin when John taught at Howard [University in Washington, D.C.].  So, there was a strong, strong, history department... real, real strong history department.  And then we had a guy, he didn't have a Ph.D., but he was the most famous teacher on the campus.  His name was Caulbert Jones.  He was not a published historian, but he knew Ancient History and African History.  And he could teach it in such a way that if you didn't get to his class early, you couldn't get a seat.  They would even be outside of his classroom door.  And he loved to give you a show, and he was great.  And I'm thinking... we also had Dr. James Brewer, Dr. James Brewer, who also was very important to me.  Because Dr. James Brewer had a Ph.D. from the University of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  He wrote the book called "The Confederate Negro: the Negro and the Confederate Forces during the Civil War," [sic, "The Confederate Negro: Virginia's Craftsmen and Military Laborers, 1861-1865"] James Brewer.  He would also have been an all-American football player at Virginia State College [sic, Virginia State University] in Petersburg [Virginia].  Dr. Brewer took a liking to me.  Dr. Brewer had a son named Willie [ph.].  And for some reason, he would never call me Al-Tony, he called me Willie.  I think he thought I was his son, he really liked me.  I didn't like Dr. Brewer, I liked Earl Thorpe.  The best teacher down there, I thought was Arnold Taylor.  And Arnold Taylor told me that I had potential to be a good student, he really told me that.  Helen G. Edmonds was the most legendary professor on the campus.  She was developing a master's degree program.  Now, she started liking me when she started hearing about me on the campus, and just knowing about me in the classroom.  And I guess some people saying "Al-Tony is a pretty good student."  But she also knew my wife's family.  When I was a senior, which was actually my junior year, my wife [Beryl S. Gilmore] came there to go to law school.  Now, here I am from Spartanburg, South Carolina on the track team on an athletic scholarship, majoring in history.  My wife comes out of Hampton [Hampton University in Hampton, Virginia], and she enrolls in law school.  Now, if you know anything about Durham, North Carolina, Durham is probably the epitome of black success. Probably very few southern cities would ever have the number of black people who have been as successful historically as Durham.  All the black banks there--or all the black banks that are run by blacks--Mechanics and Farmers Banks; North Carolina [Mutual] Life Insurance Company is there; Mutual Federal Savings and Loan is there.  So I started dating my wife, and at that time I had no idea that my wife's grandfather [sic, great-grandfather], maternal and fraternal [John Merrick and Dr. Aaron McDuffy Moore], had founded the North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company and was running the company.  I had no idea that her family had founded the Mechanics and Farmers Bank, and her father [James Joseph Sansom, Jr.] was the president of the bank.  Okay, so when she came there, everybody knew her.  And I think that's how I came to the attention of Helen Edmonds, to be very honest with you.  And I think that's how I came to the attention of Dr. Brewer, because they were part of that middle class establishment part of Durham, and Brewer's family was a part of that.  And all of their kids had grown up in Jack and Jill, and all their kids had gone to the summer camps, and all their kids came from these prominent homes.  And all of them had, all of them were fourth and fifth generation college graduates.
Story_ID: 93322
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now we were talking about meeting your wife [Beryl S. Gilmore].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I met my wife.  And I mention that because I think that probably brought me to the attention of Helen [G.] Edmonds.  And as I started getting close to my wife, and the barriers of desegregation started breaking down, and I saw the possibility of doing graduate work, that whole notion about going back to Spartanburg [South Carolina] to coach and to teach in my high school [Carver High School] started to fade.  It was fading in the lives of a lot of other people whose dreams and whose ambitions have been broadened by the changes that were taking place in America.  So, after a while my wife and I were getting pretty close.  So, I said while she's going to law school, I probably need to do something just to--I really, I thought about it, just like that.  I said I probably need to do something just a little bit more than just go back to being a coach, and I think I can do something a little bit more than going back to be a coach.  And I started thinking about Earl Thorpe and his personality.  Because I didn't ever think that Ph.D.'s would be people I would want to be like.  Earl Thorpe was just so down to earth with it, that I could relate and I could identify with him.  And then I started reading about guys like Gerald McWhorter [Abdul Alkalimat] and [HistoryMaker] Dr. Nathan Hare, who were at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And I said, "Boy, look at his style.  He sounds like Muhammad Ali, he doesn't sound like a college professor."  You know, he was just--man, these guys were bright, they were quick and they were sharp.  And [HistoryMaker] Harry Edwards out at Berkeley was the leader of the Olympic protest movement of 1968.  And I said, I can relate to this, I really can relate to this.  So I enrolled--I finished undergraduate [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] in three years.  And I'd become pretty good on the track team.  I was more than just a long jumper, I was running the sprints, the relays.  I was the captain of the team, I was going to a lot of invitational meets.  I had really kind of made a name for myself.  But for some reason, in my soul, I didn't identify with the track team, and I didn't identify with track people at all.  That was just not it.  When I was in college, I hung around with the guys on the football team and the basketball team.  Those are still my lifelong friends.  So, Helen Edmonds said "We can get you a scholarship."  Because I didn't have any money.  She said, "We can get you a scholarship to go to graduate school right here at NCC [North Carolina College].  You can get a master's."  She said, "I'll recommend you go to graduate school anywhere you want to go, just do well here."  So, I come back for what is to be my senior year--what my track coach thinks is my senior year.  He had no idea that I have graduated.  I had not marched, but I had completed all of the requirements for graduation.  So I told him, I said, "Look, man, I've-- that's it."  He said, "That's it?"  I said, "Yeah, that's it."  And I left just like that.  I had no doubt in my mind that--it's like Ralph Ellison leaving Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]--or [Henry David] Thoreau on Walden's Pond.  You said, "Why did you leave that?"  "Well, I left there for the same reason I went there, I want to try something different.  So it's time for me to move on."  I feel there were a lot of things I wanted to do in my life, and I didn't want to do that anymore.  I knew that for sure.  I didn't know where I was going, but I knew what I was not going to do anymore.  So, I left that world completely behind, and I never looked back.
Story_ID: 93323
Speaker 1: I got in the master's program [at North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], and I did real good.  And a lot of people were sending me around.  Almost every week I was flying somewhere to different schools- different--at that time, the world was changing; everybody wanted black graduate students.  Everybody wanted blacks to work here and work there.  It was just the first.  So, being black was a hot property, okay.  I wrote a master's thesis on the "The Historiography on Radical Reconstruction in South Carolina," okay.  It was my master's thesis, and it was a pretty good thesis.
Speaker 2: That's a, that's a deep--
Speaker 1: "The Historiography on Radical Reconstruction in South Carolina."
Speaker 2: That's really a rich story.
Speaker 1: It is a very rich story, and I learned about Jonathan Jasper Wright to William Elliott.  I learned about all of these fascinating Reconstruction personalities.  In my home state, here I am, I grew up in South Carolina, lived there all of my life.  And never once, never once did anybody talk about the Reconstruction period in any way that I could identify with.  The Reconstruction period as they had it listed in our public school textbook--and our teachers for some reason didn't emphasize it.  It was no different than D.W. Griffin.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: "The Birth of a Nation."  It was a blackout of honest government.  That's exactly how they saw it.  So, rather than tell me it was not like that, my teachers simply ignored it.  So, I had a void there.  They wasn't going to teach me like it was a blackout of honest government.  But they also didn't know enough about it to tell me all of the political machinations that went around displacing this body of people who were an essential part of the state government of South Carolina, and indeed throughout the South and the entire United States Congress, and that entire part of the reconstructed South from 1865 to 1877--the Corrupt Bargain of 1876, Rutherford B. Hayes. That's when they removed the military troops from the South.  That's what really changed it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So that kind of opened my eyes, it opened my eyes.  And Helen Edmonds starting recommending me to different schools.  And I didn't have any money.  And the University of Toledo [Ohio] offered me more money than anybody else.  Not only were they going to pay all of my bills.  They said, "When you come here, we would like for you to teach Introductory Courses to African American History, and we'll pay you for it."  And that's how I went there.
Story_ID: 93324
Speaker 1: Now, I get there [University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio] in the fall of 1970--no, the fall of 1969.  And I was the first black student to be enrolled in that Ph.D. program.  There was a black guy before me who had been enrolled in the master's program, and for various reasons he decided to drop out.  He was a good friend of mine, Leon Black was his name.  I think he eventually went to Rutgers [University, New Brunswick, New Jersey], but he didn't finish there.  And Leon went back and he taught, I think, at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] for a year, and then we went elsewhere.  I haven't been able to keep track of him.  But I was there.  Now, I was probably there--this is the first time--you got to remember, now.  I go to Carver High School [Spartanburg, South Carolina], coming out of Cummings Street [Junior High] School.  I go to North Carolina Central University [Durham, North Carolina] undergraduate and get a master's from North Carolina Central University.  So, this is the first time in my life that I'm in a classroom where all the students are white and the professors are white, the first time in my life.  But I never felt intimidated by them.  I didn't feel intimidated by them at all.  And we would prepare for examinations; we would take courses together.  And it occurred to me kind of early on that I could probably hang with most of them, if not do better.  So, when we would take the examinations, they would never tell me what their grades were.  And I was getting pretty good grades.  They would never tell me.  But at the end of one semester, you'd see some of them drop out of the program, and you wouldn't know why.  The end of the first year, a lot of them didn't come back.  You would never know why.  But I knew I was still there.  And I genuinely felt, year after year, as my confidence grew, that I was going to be pretty good.  I had a professor named Dr. W. Gene Holland.  He taught Western History, and that was his field.  And I didn't want that, but I liked Dr. Holland as a man, and he liked me as a person.  He had a meeting with [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin one day, and he called me over.  And the first time I met John Hope Franklin was in Dr. Holland's office.  And he told Dr. Holland he felt that I was going to be somebody that was going to be pretty good.  He said, "But I don't know why this guy came to Toledo.  I think this guy could have made it anywhere."  And I remember him saying that, and I told him why--as naive as I was about it.  But Dr. Franklin didn't forget my name.  The most important thing about it, he did not forget my name, and he did not forget meeting me.  And that's going to be very important in what happened to me.
Story_ID: 93325
Speaker 1: So, at the end of my first year, a fellow in the law school [University of Toledo College of Law, Toledo, Ohio] by the name of Roosevelt Cox from Cleveland, Ohio--he was about the only one in the law school, and I was the only one in the Ph.D. program.  So, my thinking was that the University of Toledo was so disconnected from black people in Toledo, Ohio--to just being absurd and unexplainable.  So, I started getting with some community groups, the Black Panthers in particular, and starting talking about let's make some changes out here at this university.  It started in my barber shop.  The guy said, "What are you doing up here?"  I said, "I'm at the University." "You at Toledo?  You're out there?"  I said, "Yeah, I'm out there, man, yeah."  So, I started going to these community groups and started listening to these community speakers.  And I started saying, "Well, listen, what we need to do is encourage the University of Toledo to be much more aggressive in seeking black graduate students in all the departments."
Speaker 2: Now, is the University of Toledo a publicly funded school, or is a--
Speaker 1: State funded school.
Speaker 2: State funded school.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, state funded school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Almost lily white, 24- 25,000 students there, and just a handful of blacks.  This is 1969, man, this is unbelievable, unbelievable.  So, one thing led to another.  One day I came to school and they shot some white kids at Kent State University [Kent, Ohio].
Speaker 2: And that's not too far away from there, right.
Speaker 1: The president of the school decided that they were going to shut the school down, a day of recognition of this tragedy that occurred at Kent State.  A couple of weeks later, the policemen shoot kids at South Carolina State College [South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] and at Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi].  The University didn't even recognize it, things went on as normal.  So I went to a community recreation center and I said, "Look here, let's get together Cox, this is wrong."  I said- and I called my mother [Margaret Gilmore].  And I said, "Look here, they're going to probably put me out of here.  But I'm telling you now this is something that I am not going to tolerate.  I'm going to make my statement now."  And there was a professor there, Joe Scott, a black guy in the sociology department at Toledo.  He was getting ready to leave to go to [University of] Notre Dame [South Bend, Indiana].  And I had only had one year of my Ph.D. program.  He said, "I can take you to Notre Dame and you can finish over there."  So, that was really my backup, I did have a backup.  So we met in a church that night, and we decided that we were going to shut the University down.  We were going to the main university building and we were going to put chains on all the doors, and we were going to have a meeting with the president [William S. Carlson] and have a list of demands that we wanted to be met.  Man, that thing started breaking down and I was talking and talking.  And as I started getting people, I said, "Will you be on this one, and that one?"  And that thing started breaking down, breaking down, breaking down, breaking down.  And I could see that a lot of them in there didn't have the guts.  I could genuinely see that.  And at that particular time, I had it.  And there was another guy, named Roosevelt Cox, he had it even more so than I had it.  And Cox stood up, he said, "Well, I'll tell you what.  We've been talking too long.  Y'all just go on home and cut your TV on in the morning.  Because Tony Gilmore and I, we're going to shut it down ourselves.  We will be there.  We'll shut it down.  We're going to show you something."  Well, that next morning about forty or fifty of us showed up with us out there.  We got out there about six o'clock in the morning.  We left some windows open to get in there, and we shut it down.  And that's the article I was showing you.  And I feel that was a very important contribution I made because--because of that, within a matter of several weeks--one of the parts of the negotiation was to start a Black Studies program--to have an aggressive affirmative action program for hiring black professors but to recruit black graduate students, and they put me in charge of it.  This is like in the spring.  By the fall, I had found--they sent me to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], Grambling [State University, Grambling, Louisiana], Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], NCC [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina].  They sent me to probably about twenty-five to thirty schools.  This is like March, April [sic. May 19, 1970].  By September, I had found about twenty-one, twenty-two students who met all the requirements for entry into the graduate programs in political science, history, every field.  M.B.A. programs, you name it.  I went out and recruited those students by myself.  I'm still a student there.  LeRoy Williams, I recruited him.  He had gone to the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff [Pine Bluff, Arkansas].  He's now a professor at the University of Arkansas [Fayetteville, Arkansas], okay.  He was my real close friend, because he and I were in the same department.  I was just one year ahead of him, and we became lifelong friends.  That was important to me.
Story_ID: 93326
Speaker 1: Now, so I go back, and at the end of my second year [at the University of Toledo in Ohio], I indicate I'm ready to take my oral and my preliminary examination, my written examination for the Ph.D., and they asked me did I think I was ready, it was a little early.  I said, "I'm pretty sure I'm ready."  So, they had four areas I was tested in.  I passed my Russian History exam.  I passed my U.S. History to 1865 exam, and U.S. History Since 1865, and my special area, African American Social History.  I took all of those exams, okay.  I get home that night.  I said, "Beryl [Beryl S. Gilmore], I don't feel real good about this.  I said I think I did well on the test," okay.  I said, "I think I did well on the test."  I said, "But I don't think they were ready for me, they were ready for me to take the examinations," alright.  I said, "Now, the area that was my strongest was U.S. History Since 1865."  I said, "Now I know I aced that."  I said, "Every question they asked was the way I thought they would be coming from."  I said, "But the other ones, I feel good, but I don't feel great."  I said, "But I feel good."  I said, "It's nothing I didn't understand, but I hope I told them in the way that they wanted to understand it, okay--who were the most important historians and why, and what were they interpreting, and what was the impact of their interpretation?  I thought I had the right track.  Well, they sent me a letter about three or four weeks later, and they said I passed all of them with flying colors except "Since 1865."  I knew they were lying then, I knew it was a game.  Because that was the one I knew I'd done the best on.  I lost my confidence in the system to be honest then.  I knew that they were trying to tell me something.  But I also was convinced that they were never going to fail me on that exam again, because it was my strongest area, I really knew that area.  I took the exam the next time, and answered in the very same way.  They said I passed with flying colors.
Story_ID: 93327
Speaker 1: Alright, now comes the time to write a doctoral dissertation.  And I'm thinking I want to write something that's going to be a little bit different.  I want to write something to try to get somebody's attention.  Because I'm at [University of] Toledo [Toledo, Ohio], I'm not at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I'm not at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], and I'm not at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey].  I want to start getting people's attention.  So when I was a little boy, a man on my street named Mr. Andy Floyd, all he ever talked about was July 4, 1910, when Jack Johnson beat Jim Jeffries in Reno, Nevada.  I knew that.  And right along that time, you see, Jack Johnson was in the public mind because the Great White Hope was such a successful Broadway play.  And they made the movie at that point in time.  So, I just decided I would do something on Jack Johnson.  And I wrote my-- Dr. Earl E. Thorpe, and he said, "Do a reactionary study on what he meant for his time and his period.  I think you can find a great story there."  So, I started researching and researching and researching, I really got into it.  And I would get up in the morning and I would start researching, and I would go to bed at night.  I would put in fourteen, fifteen hour days, and it wasn't even fatiguing me.  I just knew I had a great, great, story, alright.  I knew I had a great story.  And people would ask me to come to their colleges and universities and their historical societies to read portions of it.  The University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] invited me over and offered me a faculty position there.  That was interesting, very interesting.  Illinois State University [Normal, Illinois], Florida State University [Tallahassee, Florida].
Story_ID: 93328
Speaker 1: I wrote to about fifty colleges to indicate that I was interested in being considered for a faculty position--that I was going to receive my Ph.D.  About at least twenty of them wrote me back and asked me to come for interviews.  I didn't even, I never asked the question "Do you have a faculty vacancy?"  The demand for black historians was so hot then, most smart college presidents would find a slot if they had a black with a Ph.D.  So, I had all of my connections. My wife [Beryl S. Gilmore] had finished law school, and we thought that this would be a good place to come to start our careers, since she had passed the bar in Ohio.  So, I wanted to come to Washington [D.C.].  So I wrote to Georgetown University [Washington, D.C.], okay.  Of all the places I'd written, they wrote me the oddest reply I'd ever had.  Not, "We'd like to interview you next week."  They said, "On your next trip to Washington, D.C., stop by and let's have a conversation."  That's all I got from them.  I said, "Wow, that's not encouraging at all."  Well, my wife's mother [Vivian Merrick Sansom] and father [Joseph Merrick Sansom] knew the secretary to the president of Howard University [Washington, D.C.], [HistoryMaker] James Cheek.  Well, James Cheek had come from Shaw University in Raleigh [North Carolina].  And they had pretty much financed him and carried him through to make him pretty much of what he was in North Carolina, to the extent that he became popular enough to become the president of Shaw--I mean Howard University, replacing Mordecai Johnson.  He was young, and the black movement was on, and he was in tune with that.  And the general assumption was when they shut down Howard University in the late sixties was that Mordecai Johnson was out of step and out of tune, and that he enabled that crowd to be out of step and out of tune with the times.  So, he was a good candidate to bring to Howard.  His secretary just happened to have known my wife's family, and my wife's family happened to have known James Cheek.  So, over Christmas break of my last year on my doctoral degree, she just said, "Send me your resume, I'd like to share it."  So I sent her my resume, and she took it to the history department and they called me down.  And when I got there for my interview, Rayford Logan said that [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin and others thought high of me.  Rayford Logan was on my interview team, the great Rayford Whittingham Logan.  I was just so awed by him sitting there, and I thought I was doing well with my interview.  And he asked me something about Jack Johnson.  And he asked me did I know about this source.  He asked me did I know about an incident in Jack Johnson's life, and I told him I did.  Then he asked me "What was the source of that information?"  And I told him a graduate student at Howard University in 1954 had written a master's thesis, and one section of a chapter in that thesis dealt with that issue of Jack Johnson.  He was floored, because he had directed that master's thesis at Howard.  And when the interview was over, I knew I had Rayford Logan.  Before I could even get off of the floor, they had offered me a position, but wanting me to assure that I would come.  I left there and went straight to Scurlock's, where they send all the hired professors when they hire you, to take the great Scurlock picture.  Well, I knew when I was finally at Scurlock that I was going to get me an offer in the mail real soon.  So, I was excited about coming to Howard University.  WHUR, that's the soundtrack to that whole era.  That was a sound and that was a time when things were happening at Howard that wasn't happening anywhere else in the world.  Blackness was being celebrated and appreciated and explored at a level at no time since the Harlem Renaissance was it that popular as it was at Howard.  You had all these young, new vibrant people--George Lattner and Bernice Regan Johnson [sic. HM Bernice Johnson Reagon] was students there.  I couldn't begin to name all the great people that were there.  Donald Byrd was in the music department.  I mean, a lot was happening.  And the old school, a lot of them were even still there.  Rayford Whittingham Logan was there, Frank Snowden was there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Oh man, I mean--
Speaker 2: Sterling Brown.
Speaker 1: Sterling Brown was there.  I closed by Jack Johnson book with a quote from Sterling.  I met Sterling Brown, man.  Sterling Brown and I became good friends, I mean real good friends.  I mean, we just became real tight.  Because Sterling Brown is a man among men.  And even though Sterling Brown was in literature, when you go by Sterling Brown's house, he liked to tell dirty, nasty, grimy jokes.  And I was real good at that.  I was, still am real good at that.
Story_ID: 93329
Speaker 1: [HM Reverend Dr.] Wyatt Tee Walker, Wyatt Tee Walker introduced me to Sterling Brown, and we had lots of good times together.  And I really enjoyed being at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  My, at the end of my first year at Howard University, the book, I call the book, "The National Impact of Jack Johnson" okay.  His publisher tells me, "That's a good title."  He says, "But man, you got a good book.  Anybody can read that."  He says, call it "Bad Nigger."  And the only reason I agreed with that was because sociologically there's a term associated with the word "bad nigger," and I talked about that in my first chapter.  And William Wiggins, a folklorist out of Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] had first brought that to my attention, that I should capture Johnson in that framework of "bad nigger," sociologically speaking.  A black that defies convention in society, challenges the perimeter of our expected behavior, you know.  Others identify through him through his exploits and his feats, through things that they cannot do.  So, when it came out "Bad Nigger," I thought it might hurt me.  Because I said, you know, I'm, not- I'm writing a book. I need to get tenure.  I'm writing an academic book, that sounds like something popular and pulp, you know.  But it came out.  And Hollie West, a good friend of mine who I'd introduced to John [Wesley] Blassingame and told him about the "Slave Community" and how important that book was--Hollie West, when it came out he got a copy of it.  And he said, "I want to write a story about you and this."  So he wrote a major story in the Washington Post with me about that.  And that kind of made me something of a short celebrity at Howard.
Story_ID: 93330
Speaker 1: And then after that, I started writing book reviews regularly for the Washington Post.  Now, this is 1972, '73 [1973], '74 [1974], and I started writing book reviews regularly for The Washington Post.  And the editor's name was William McPherson; that was his name back then.  And I talked to McPherson about that.  He told me, he said "Al-Tony, any books you see that you can't review, let me know and I will review them."  And then from time to time, important books would come out and he would ask me to review them, and he would select them.  But I had pretty much an open entree to bring to his attention books that I thought were worthy of greater review.  But what disappointed me so much about that, was it was 1972 in Washington, D.C.  And prior to that review that I wrote on Gladys-Marie Fry's book, 'Night Riders,' I wrote that around about 1973, '74 [1974].  Prior to that, hadn't a black person written a review in the Washington Post in like--since E. Franklin Frazier, since E. Franklin Frazier, which was absolutely absurd and ridiculous.  I just--and you're not just limited to the intellectual acumen of Howard University [Washington, D.C.] intellectual crowd.  If you're the Washington Post, you've got access to scholars throughout the United States of America.  They never asked [HistoryMaker] John [Hope] Franklin to write a book review, or Lorenzo Greene, or Charles Wesley, or Nathan Huggins.  You could on and on and on, and I thought that was just a huge gap.  I am pleased now that you can pick up the Washington Post now and not only do you see--The Washington Post reviewed books by African Americans, but they would never review them by black scholars.  It was something about the sanctioning of it, I thought.  Because if you wrote a favorable review for a book in the Washington Post, it meant a lot to that scholar, and it meant a lot to that publisher.  But the idea that the referee, who was the reviewer, would be black--or somebody black writing a book, I just think they didn't like the idea of that.  Because you could really make somebody, real big time.  So, what I liked about that was that my relationship with McPherson was such that he had a good sense of what I thought was some real good scholarly work going on in African American history-- 'Black Odyssey' by Nathan Huggins, 'The Harlem Renaissance' by Nathan Huggins.  Just- Lawrence Levine, 'Black Culture and Black Consciousness.'  Books like that I thought were very important.  And [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Gilliam who also wrote for the Washington Post, she had a column, and she became a good friend of mine.  When Paul Robeson died, they had a symposium for him at Howard University, and she and I were on that symposium.  And so, she also--and she and Hollie West and I became--who was also writing--who I think was one of the better cultural writers ever for the Washington Post.  Why, after a period of time they decided they didn't want Hollie to write anymore.  When I moved here, the major stories on black culture were being written by Hollie West and [HistoryMaker] Jacqueline [Jackie] Trescott.
Story_ID: 93331
Speaker 1: Howard [University in Washington, D.C.] was just a good, vibrant, place to be.  And I enjoyed teaching there, and had an enormous body of just good students, real good students.  I had Bernice Reagon Johnson [sic. HM Bernice Johnson Reagon] in my class, and she was writing about the songs of the Civil Rights Movement.  And during the song celebration she did a performance on the civil rights songs--and I heard her sing--which would eventually become the background for-- the foundation for Sweet Honey in the Rock.  And I knew she was a good student, but not nearly the student as she was the personality, with her music and her presentation.  I was just astounded that she was so good, and so quick.  So, the first time I saw her I knew she was going to be something special.  When she started studying for her doctoral examination--I mean her oral--her written examination--I gave her some books.  I don't think she ever gave me my books back, in fact.  But I gave her some books so she could study and prepare for those examinations.  She and I'd been good very friends.  And over time, when she went to the Smithsonian [Institution in Washington, D.C.] and she had a major grant for a study of the participants in the Civil Rights Movement, I was sitting on the refereeing board for the National Endowment for the Humanities that funded that.  So, I felt that I helped her a little bit along those lines.  But I had a fellow named Gerald Gill in my class.  Gerald Gill teaches at Tufts University [Boston, Massachusetts].  Gerald Gill was just real, real good.  Gerald Early was in my class.  I had, I just had a lot of--George Reed, one of my former classmates at NCC [North Carolina Central University in Durham, North Carolina] was also- who became the president of Kentucky State University [Frankfort, Kentucky], was also not only my friend, but also one of my students at Howard University.  It was a real good experience.  Howard had a different perspective.  Howard had always been the capstone of black education, as they saw it.  They always had the best faculty members, they had always had the better resources.  They had also had, because of segregation and other reasons, a better crop of students.  So, it was a great place.  When we were writing history at Howard University, all of our commitment was to a group that was known as the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History [Association for the Study of Afro-American Life and History], the group founded by Carter G. Woodson in 1916 and eventually became Black History Month in the 1920s.  And the core of scholarly pursuit of African American history probably started, not with W. [E.] B. DuBois--because W. [E.] B. DuBois actually did a major study at [Clark] Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia] on Negro Life, as they called it then.  But the Journal of Negro History was a systematic, scholarly approach to recording the black experience, and to a lesser extent, the popularizing of the Negro History Bulletin, which was the companion piece that went out to public schools.  And with the Black History Month--the Black History Week movement--that became Black History Month in the 1970s.  Black History had taken on a different tone.
Story_ID: 93332
Speaker 1: Now, back that time, you had a lot of black historians.  Most of them were identified with black universities.  You name a black university, they always had just one good black historian.  Very few were at white schools.  One of the major stories occurred around 1954, '55 [1955] [sic. 1956] when [HistoryMaker] John [Hope] Franklin left Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  Not to go the University of Chicago.  John became a full professor at Brooklyn College [Brooklyn, New York].  He had written 'From Slavery to Freedom.'  He had also published 'The Free Negro in North Carolina.'  He had not written 'The Militant South' and some of the others, and 'Blacks During Reconstruction' [sic. 'Reconstruction: after the Civil War'] and some of the other studies he would eventually write to make him world-renowned.  But that was a major story, Brooklyn College over Howard University.  But it was a black professor going there.  Just as [Kenneth] Kenny Clark had been appointed up to City College in New York.  Those are early--Abe Harris [Abram Lincoln Harris] is the first African American to ever receive an appointment at a major institution when he left Howard's economic department in the late 1930s [sic. 1945] and joined the faculty at the University of Chicago.  Let's make no mistake about that.  Okay, the great Abe Harris, economist from Howard University was there with Ralph Bunche, Alain Locke, Sterling Brown, Ernest E. Just, E. Franklin Frazier, that core--Charles Houston, okay.  (Laughter).  I mean, we're talking about some serious, serious scholars--[William] Bill Hastie, people like that, alright.  So, I was attracted to--I was fascinated that the most popular selling historians were two white guys--one historian and one sociologist--August Meier and Elliott Rudwick, who had come out of black colleges, but had gone to Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio] when the black history movement started taking off.  They were whites who had been at black colleges teaching black stuff, who went to Kent State, and set up like a factory.  And they knew that they had to have I guess their quota quote, unquote.  So, they had a black guy named John Bracey.  And every week you look up, it was something coming out.  And two guys out of [Clark] Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia], one named Alex Willingham and the other one's name was Mack Jones.  They wrote a piece in the Social Science Quarterly called 'August Meier and Elliott Rudwick, Custodians of the Black Experience' [sic. 'The White Custodians of the Black Experience: A Reply to Rudwick and Meier'].  And they talk about perspective.  They played down, they played down cultural nationalism, thematically--that they didn't have a thematic framework that adequately explained African American history, and that there was some dimensions of African American protests that they genuinely did not appreciate or understand in their writings.  So, Howard University was a place where you could say that, and you could be applauded for it.  And I was glad and proud to be there.
Story_ID: 93333
Speaker 1: So after my book on Jack Johnson ['Bad Nigger: The National Impact of Jack Johnson'] came out, and then I got a contract to do a book on the history of the Amos and Andy radio and television programs, my name started circulating, and I started getting active with the Association of the Study of African American Life and History.  That was a very important group for me.  Dr. J. Rupert Picott brought me into that group.  And they put me on the board of directors, and then I came on the editorial board for the Journal of Negro History.  And then one year in Chicago [Illinois], they made the program chair.
Speaker 2: Now, now, you were there when the name was changed from the Association of the Study of Negro Life in History to the Association for the Study--
Speaker 1: I was in Cincinnati [Ohio].
Speaker 2: --of, yeah--
Speaker 1: I read my first paper.  And my first paper I read in Cincinnati was called 'Jack Johnson and White Women.'
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It, it, it, that's what I wanted to write about.  And I knew that regardless of how it sounded, I had a good scholarly foundation, and I knew I was going to be okay.  Because Augustus Low was the editor of the Journal of Negro History [Journal of African American History].  And he had accepted the piece for publication, but it had not yet come out, okay.  And he was on the program committee in Cincinnati.  And that was my first time attending an Association meeting.  When I went there and I looked in the room where I was to do my presentation, I knew that I had a good topic.  That's all it meant to me, because I saw the size of the room.  Everybody else was in these little small rooms.  They had me in something like an auditorium.  And the thing started filling up real early.  And Rayford Logan came and sat on the front row, and I said, "Oh, this is going to be real good.  I'm really going to enjoy this."  And Dr. [James] Brewer and some of my former college professors were there.  It was the first time I was doing the paper.  And because what you write for publication may not be how you want it delivered in terms of style and emphasis, I had taken it and I had started marking it up.  And when Dr. Brewer saw that I had marked it up--and he's looked at it before I gave the presentation, about twenty minutes before the meeting.  He was very disappointed.  He said, "Now, why would you do this?  I want you to read it from the first sentence to the last sentence, and that's the way it's going to be."  I said, "Well, I can't get- I can't do it like that."  I said, "I can't do it like that.  I'm not going to compromise it, but I've got ways and inflections the way I speak, and I can't do it like that.  I've just got a different way I'm going to present this."  So, I presented it, and it became kind of, it was, they liked it.  The audience liked it.  And they really brought me into the Association, and I enjoyed that work more than any other work that I've ever done.  I was close to all of the major black historians, the guys that I'd been reading about all my life; they were helpful, J. Reuben Sheeler.  I would go to the meetings, and they were just glad that a young guy twenty-five years of age had committed himself to this in a scholarly way.  And they knew I was talking about something important, and I was talking about something that had never been done.  I even asked [HistoryMaker] John [Hope] Franklin once.  I said, "John, you know, I'm writing something about Jack Johnson, and I'm thinking about doing something on Amos and Andy.  And I want to do some things on Joe Louis as well.  What do you think?"  He said, "Well, look, if you approach it right, you'll be okay."  And I eventually wrote some pieces on Joe Louis in the South Atlantic Quarterly at Duke University Publications [sic. Duke University Press].  People started really seeing that something was to be said about these heroes, these household names in African American life, and there was something meaningful about their lives and how they changed the country and how people reacted to them.  Joe Louis and race relations--when he meant during the Great Depression, what he meant during World War II.  What Jack Johnson meant during an age of white supremacy.  How he challenged Charles Darwin's theories, how he challenged white supremacy; what his symbolism meant by living the life he lived, the way he wanted to live it, okay, and how whites reacted to him in terms of passing legislation and regulations, and how dangerous it was for anybody to emulate a personality like Jack Johnson.  And the extent to which, as my student, [HistoryMaker] Walter Hill [Jr.] at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] was able to discover much later--when I wrote the book I didn't know it--the extent to which the federal government went to lock Jack Johnson up.  This was a deliberate attempt, only because they didn't want a black man to wear that crown of the heavyweight championship of America, the icon of masculinity and supremacy of strength in this country.  That's all it was about.
Speaker 2: I think that there were quite a few revelations in these, in the Association of the Study of African American Life and History conferences about that sort of thing.  I remember Tony Martin discovered--
Speaker 1: Tony.
Speaker 2: --similar attacks against--
Speaker 1: On Marcus Garvey.
Speaker 2: --Marcus Garvey.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: The U.S. government--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --attacking him, not for committing a crime, but just to get him down.
Speaker 1: Clearly a conspiracy to bring him down through any means necessary.
Speaker 2: C.L.R. James and John Henrik Clarke talked about the attacks against Paul Robeson in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: Orchestrated and calculated, Paul Robeson, tragically, no doubt about it.  Those are three good examples of the extent to which the system would go to sit a black down and put him in his place--Jack Johnson, Marcus Garvey, Paul Robeson, and there are a host of others.
Speaker 2: And when--someone else I interviewed last week, and I can't remember who it was, was talking about the chill the one feels when you see the documentation of that time.
Speaker 1: That's what [HistoryMaker] Walter Hill [Jr.]--
Speaker 2: It's one thing to hear about it.  But when you see the documentation.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Walter Hill said the very same thing to me.  He said, it's disturbing that people would go that far.
Story_ID: 93334
Speaker 1: After I'd been at Howard [University in Washington, D.C.] from '72 [1972] to about '76 [1976], Mary Frances Berry, who had been at Howard University was now the provost [at the University of Maryland in College Park, Maryland].  Black was- to be black was to be in vogue academically during that time.  And she asked me would I come out to be the director of the African American Studies Program and associate professor in the Department of History.  And I accepted that, and I went to the University of Maryland.  And the University of Maryland allowed me to develop this course that I had wanted to do, and I think I was probably the first in the country to do it.  I developed a course called 'The History and Politics of the Black Athlete in America.'  And, and, and back then my biggest challenge was to convince the provost and the deans and the other faculty members that this was going to be a scholarly effort--that we weren't going to talk about who threw the best pass and who could kick a football the farthest, or who hit a baseball the farthest, or who's the hardest tackler, or who won the most championships.  It wasn't going to be about that at all.  We were going to look at this thing in a social, political context, the history and politics of black athletes in America.  And it became a real popular course.  And around that time, sports was becoming a legitimate field of study in sociology with [HistoryMaker] Harry Edwards.  But it was also becoming a legitimate field of study in history departments, in terms of not a field of study, but a topic worthy, topics worthy of consideration.  A fellow at the University of Maryland wrote a doctoral dissertation on 'The Slave Athlete.'  And, and, and, and what he was talking about--and he wrote a very good story, a very good dissertation.  It was about plantations who would have slaves who had certain levels of physical prowess, and they would compete with slaves from the other plantations.  And, and, and I asked him once, "How is it possible that this whole thing could have started?"  And it was classic in its simplicity.  He says, "Slave athletes started just simply by one white man saying to another, 'I bet my nigger can beat your nigger.'"  Just that simple.  "Okay, well, you bring him over to this plantation, and we'll put them in a ring and we'll see who wins."  "I bet my nigger can run faster than your nigger."  "Bring him up here, and we'll see who can run the fastest."  "I bet my nigger can outswim your nigger."  "Bring him down and we'll see."  "I bet my nigger can ride a horse faster than your nigger."  "Put him on." It's just that simple.  But what he was able to discover was that there were some plantations and some slaves whose principal source of value to the master was their ability to compete athletically.  So, when twenty-five white men get in the room and his nigger's fighting his nigger, it's that money that's going to be made about who's going to win, or who's going to run the farthest, or jump the farthest, or swim the fastest, or jump the highest.  So, that's, that was a dimension that was very new to me.  And I--and so, my source of understanding this thing then was changed, because I knew that to understand the history and politics of black athletes in America, I would have to start during slavery.  And when I would open up--my first couple of weeks looking at the slave athlete experience, you know.  And I called them professional athletes.  They said, "Why do you call them professional athletes?"  "Well, when that is your value, your principal value to your master, then that determines the value of your worth and your value as a commodity.  And that is what you do for a living, essentially, then that is what you are.  So, if you're doing it for a living, you're doing it professionally.  So, when I use that term slave athletes, that's exactly what I mean.  So, that was a good period for me.  Subsequent to that--
Speaker 2: Now, what, what time period are we talking about?  Now, when you leave Howard and go to--
Speaker 1: Nineteen--
Speaker 2: --the University of Maryland?
Speaker 1: Nineteen Seventy Six [1976], till about 1984 [sic. 1982].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1984 [sic. 1982].
Story_ID: 93335
Speaker 1: Now, you find out something about being an historian, if it's in your blood.  You find out pretty early on that in spite of all the work that it takes to write a good scholarly piece--in spite of all the effort that it takes to write a good scholarly book--that your audience is incredibly small, incredibly small.  It's just amazing still how few people at any gathering can talk intelligently about Martin Delany; talk intelligently about Ralph Ellison; talk intelligently about these scholars who were at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]; talk intelligently about the scholars-- the studies that [W.E.B.] DuBois did, the [Clark] Atlanta University [Georgia] Negro Life studies; talk intelligently about the Great Migration, the Harlem Renaissance, Kenneth Clark, [HistoryMaker] John [Hope] Franklin, Abe Harris [Abram Lincoln Harris], E. Franklin Frazier; talk intelligently about these people, about these movements, about these times.  And you go to a scholarly meeting and you've got 25-30 people in the room, and your reputation was made in large part about those people, and to some lesser extent, to the extent that they talk about you were their students.  But the impact is just so small.  And embarrassingly to say, I believe the compensation is much too small.  When you get to the point that you're an historian, and you can't afford the tuition for your son to go to Morehouse [College in Atlanta, Georgia], or your daughter to go to Hampton [University in Hampton, Virginia], something's wrong.  Something is really wrong.  When I was at Maryland, the only thing I had going for me was the fact that I was also an administrator.  And it's very clear to me when you stop administrating, this percentage of your salary will be reduced.  So, you've got the smart people on the campus with Ph.D.'s in history and in sociology and political science, and they're teaching.  And you've got some guys with some educational doctorates in all kind of other fields, and they're running the university--making salaries that are incredible--who have no name in the scholar literature, but they are administrators.  And you want to be--I thought, well, maybe the smartest people on the campus, in my opinion, ought to make the most money.  I, I, I, I, I couldn't understand why all these smart people are not the deans, all these smart people are not the provosts.  So, I, I, I've always felt that in colleges and universities, you've got to really love your discipline, okay.  And almost like public school teachers, to be a scholar and to say that you have an interest in living decent, or that you think you should want fair compensation, is almost like heresy, like blasphemy.  You can't supposed to do that, that's bad.  And far too--and we're at the point now where we have to--I call it the point of the critical mass.  Can we continue to attract the best black minds into history, political science, literature?  If you want to know where they're going, write to any university and ask how many black kids applied for the doctoral programs in history last year.  Write how many applied to the political science department to get a Ph.D. in political science or in economics?  But at the same time, you write those same schools, "How many blacks applied to your law school?"  Ask them how many blacks applied to the M.B.A. program.  Ask them how many blacks applied to the [medical] med school or the dental schools, or the other professional schools.  And you will see that there's a gap that's widening-- a gap that's really, really widening.  I'm going go so far as to say thirty-five years ago, you had more top ranked black historians teaching in universities in research and writing than you have today.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: And that's bad.  There are, there a few real good young black historians.  I mean, they're real good.  But it ain't enough of them.  There's not enough of them around.  Most universities do not have a black person with a Ph.D. in their history department.  I would say less than probably ten percent of all black universities in the country--of all the universities in the country, have a black Ph.D. on their history faculty or a black Ph.D. on their political science faculty.  And that, I think that's something we ought to explore.
Story_ID: 93336
Speaker 1: Well, I thought that I would try something different.  I went to the National Education Association.  I knew nothing about working for a labor union.  I had a sister-in-law who had been very active with the NEA.  I knew that [HistoryMaker] Mary Hatwood Futrell was a black woman had been elected the president of NEA [in 1983].  I did not know the NEA had two point something odd million members, and that in public policy NEA was like E.F. Hutton--when they spoke, people had to listen.  I had never as an historian been asked to testify on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] on any bill or any legislation.  I never had to analyze the assets or the liabilities of a political candidate or a political party.  I had not understood the process of endorsing candidates.  I didn't understand all these people walking in the NEA building who were running for President of the United States, who were running for Senate, who were running for the House of Representatives--who were running for anything, coming in that building because they wanted that endorsement and that support.  I didn't recognize that I could go to a place and make a speech on some form of public policy around public education, and every newspaper in the country would pick it up and run it.  So, it was a different world.  But when I worked at the NEA, I was researching black issues and black topics.  And nobody else at the NEA was doing that, okay:  The impact of Brown v. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] on black teachers in the South; the studying and making research reports to show that 30,000 black teachers lost their job when they finally did desegregate the schools in the South.  Because when they desegregated the schools, which came over time with genuine deliberate speed, they never integrated the faculties, okay, that's for sure.  So, we had a lot of black teachers lose their job, issues like that.  The widening student achievement gap--a major report had come out in 1983 which would change the course of politics around public education.  Since 1983, public education is the number one issue for any politician in this country.  Because the Secretary of Education, Terrence Bell [sic. Terrel Howard (T.H.) Bell], in 1983 published a report called 'A Nation at Risk.'  And what it said basically was that there was rising tide of mediocrity taking place in our country, and it is going to threaten America as a world power.  Because the kids in Russia, the kids in Asia, the kids in China, the kids in Europe--they're testing better than our kids--the rising tide of mediocrity.  Well, I like that little phrase, but I understood what it meant, too.  That's a nice way of saying a rising tide of people in our schools that look like me.  That's exactly what it meant.  It meant our public schools are being populated by folks who look just like this.  The majority is becoming the majority population in our public schools, and they're not doing real good.  So, that, that sort of was exciting to me.
Story_ID: 93337
Speaker 1: Also, I still, to this day, I've not gotten accustomed--I've gotten accustomed to working at the NEA [National Education Association] and to making a salary that's large.  And I'm sure this will not be run until well after I'm gone from NEA.  But I never thought people would pay that much for what I do, to be very honest with you.  Because I don't think I'm doing nearly as much, and not working nearly as hard as I did when I was teaching history and writing history, I'll tell you that right now, alright.  Make that for the record.  When I was at the university, even at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland], to go to read a paper at a scholarly meeting, you had such a small fund.  You almost had to pay some of it yourself.  I remember all my friends and I bunking up at these hotels at the Association [Association for the Study of Afro-American Life and History] meetings and trying to round up the money.  Now, Howard University [Washington, D.C.] was a little bit different.  We had a Ford Foundation grant, and that was to make sure that we could compete with the whites.  Howard is not like any other place, forget that; not like anywhere else.  So at Howard, more so than any other black school, I could travel.  I could do research, I could get grants.  I could go to California to read a scholarly paper, were I invited and my paper accepted.  And I was encouraged to do that.  And we all developed outstanding resumes.  [HistoryMaker] Thomas [C.] Holt in my department, he and I started out together.  Thomas Holt is now the chairman of the history department at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], okay.  So he and I were friends, I mean, but we took advantage of that, and that was good.  But at NEA, the cost is never a factor with me doing my work.  If I need to go to California tomorrow and speak to the State legislature, or to speak to the California Teachers Association, or to become involved in the political campaigns--just simply wanting to do it.  But I also had never been involved in the labor union, and understanding the power of organized labor.  And, and I wondered why, even to this day.  I think that the reason that college professors do not make the money they should make is because they are reluctant to join what you would call unions.  In universities there is still three different worlds--four different worlds.  There is the world of the administrators, there is the world of the tenured full professors, and there is the world of the un-tenured assistant professors.  To say that you're in a history department at a major university, or any university, and you're an assistant professor--and because your office is next door to the full professor--if you think that you guys live on the same planet, you'd better study again the treatment that you're going to get on that campus.  Full professors oftentimes don't even recognize or speak to assistant professors, because they know in four or five years they're going to come up for tenure, and they're going to have to make a decision.  And if the scholarly writings and the scholarly publications are not up to par, you're out.  So that's, that, that, that, I think that has really hurt a lot of the attractiveness of going through that process.  Man, to get a Ph.D. in history or political science is a lot of work.  And when you do all of that work, you go to a campus and you got to start all over again, because you got a clock ticking.  They're going to give you the undergraduate courses with the largest number of students, the most assigned students, the largest number of courses to teach, and expect you to write and publish at a pace where after four or five years they can legitimately look at you and say, "Well, we want to invite you to stay here with us, we're going to give you tenure."  And once you get tenure, well, that says a lot, because you're pretty much locked in for life.  That's good and it's bad.  It's bad because you can go out to pasture once you get tenure, if you like.  You can stop writing.  You can stop your scholarly publications.  You can chill out for a while, if you will, because you've gotten what you needed.  So, I, I think that whole, that whole process and--
Story_ID: 93338
Speaker 1: I've, I thought about it.  People ask me, they say "Well, when you finally leave the NEA [National Education Association], will you go back to the classroom?"  I'm almost certain that I will.  But I'm almost certain that I'm going to do it for the reason that you should be there in the first place.  And that's just for the sheer joy of teaching young folks.  If I go back, I will certainly want to teach freshmen and sophomores, and try to excite some people and turn some people on.  People who've gone to graduate school, they've already been turned on, they've decided what they want to do.  But that would be extremely exciting for me.  But I don't think that nothing that you can do in a history class can even rival the impact of what you can do if you're in a senior policy position at the National Education Association.  You can just do so much.  When you speak, they have to listen.  The No Child Left Behind Act (ESCA) [Elementary and Secondary Education Act], that's the biggest, that's the centerpiece of [President] George [W.] Bush's educational program.  We're challenging that at NEA, and we're going to be heard.  Vouchers in public education.  You know, maybe it was just me; I don't know, I don't know.  But when I was a history professor, my world was just so small.  My world was just so narrow.  I really knew history, and I really love history.  But what was going on in the larger world, I knew nothing about it.  I wonder right now, would I have known- would I have known right now about the battles around the privatization of public education--vouchers in our public schools?  Would I have known those political issues?  I don't know.  So many health care issues.  Historians hardly ever talk about that kind of stuff.
Story_ID: 93339
Speaker 1: --About the Association for the Study of African American Life and History.  Now, [Carter G.] Woodson really meant for it to mean life and history, and how beginning from the mid-fifties on when it became an association of historians, mainly black historians and white historians who wrote on the black experience.  And when I came into the Association, I sort of thought that black political scientists and black sociologists who are forming their own splinter groups because of lack of recognition with the Association--the Journal of Negro History [now the Journal of African American History], see, is the organ for the Association, and it does publish the work of historians.  So, I can see why more historians would be more attracted.  And sociologists recognized that I'm not going to get my work published in the Journal of Negro History, okay.  I, I, understand how that happened, okay.  So the black political science, and black sociologists and the black educators, quote unquote, would start coming to the meetings.  And we would give them workshops, and they would have their own crowd and their following, but we never really integrated them into the Association.  And they started a group like the Association of Black Political Scientists.  I know in 1972, '73' [1973], '74' [1974], I always reserved space for them at the Association meetings, and I insisted that they have space on the program, and they got it.  After a while, they started doing their own thing and starting their own conferences.  I was invited to speak at one of their conferences, maybe some Fannie Lou Hamer conference they gave, maybe some eight or nine years later.  And they had several thousand people, and the Association crowd had diminished down to about 250, 300 for a national meeting, okay.  That concerned me.  I had a friend named Charles Moody at the University of Michigan, he's retired now.  He started a group called the National Alliance of Black School Educators, a group of people who educate black children and all the issues around black children, alright.  He invites me to come to his conference, and I invited him to come to the Association conference.  The Association has 350, 400 people.  One year we had 400 or 500 people.  I go to his conference, he has six or seven thousand.  And then it occurred to me, oh, I understand.  Why didn't I see this in the first place?  They had a hell of a lot more people interested in the academic achievement of African American children than they are in the Constitution of 1850, or the Fugitive Slave Act, or the Missouri Compromise.  This stuff is important stuff, okay.  But to think that you're going to attract to a room...  Now, I'm saying ain't nothing wrong with the Constitution of 1850, or the Missouri Compromise, or the Dred Scott Decision, the Reconstruction Acts, Booker T. Washington, the Atlanta Exposition Address, The Great Migration, the Harlem Renaissance, the Great Depression, blacks in World War II, blacks in the Civil War, blacks in the Revolutionary War, blacks in states, counties and local histories, biographies and autobiographies.  I say ain't nothing wrong with that.  But you have to balance it.  You get too much sessions on the Constitution of 1850, too many sessions on the Missouri Compromise... are very important.  But to connect between the Missouri Compromise and living in Baltimore, Maryland in 2003 is a lot harder to connect than our session on blacks running for political offices in major cities.  You have to connect with the communities.  And I'm saying historians not only have to start broadening, broadening their programs to make them attractive to draw larger numbers of people, they also need to start exploring other topics to research and write on.  When I was coming through, if I had said I wanted to write a doctoral dissertation on African Americans in the [President] Lyndon Baines Johnson administration, African Americans in the [President] John Kennedy administrations, my advisors would have said, "That's too close.  You don't have perspective on that."  In other words (laughter) a political scientist might write a dissertation on [HM] Marion Barry's third campaign in Washington, D.C., (laughter) how recent that was.  Historians, they're thinking thirty, forty, fifty years before you can even think about writing anything.  Because, do you have the records?  I mean, and I do believe that the better histories are written when all the records are complete.  But to discourage students from dealing with topics that have immediacy and relevancy for now, I think it's not good, and I think it's hurt.  And I'm just disappointed that we have not attracted quote, unquote, "our share" of the younger bright scholars to history.
Story_ID: 93340
Speaker 1: Now, you were asking me the question about how this relates to my children and my family.  I have a set of twins, a boy and a girl, and they're twenty-four years old.  When they were very small, I sent them to a school down near Howard University [Washington, D.C.], sort of like a lab school.  But it was all black and the standards were extremely high, and they did pretty well.  Then I put them into the public schools of Montgomery County [Maryland].  When they got to high school, they went to St. John's College High School here in Washington, D.C.  My son was up there playing sports, and my daughter was a cheerleader there.  But they had also just started admitting women for the very first time, so that's where they went.  So now they graduate from high school, and they're well-grounded in their blackness, because that's all they've ever known.  That's all they've ever seen Daddy do and talk about.  And my friends, we're just--well, grounded in this blackness; we love it, we embrace it.  So, my kids knew that.  And I guess it started when they were children, you know, their images of Dad.  It was always around something black.  Anything black, they would go, "Oh, what would Dad say?"  And I felt good, because I knew that subtly they were getting my message that this blackness is extremely important; being connected to all of your people is extremely important.  But when they decided it was time to go to college, I thought I would be something of a referee.  I said I'll be a referee, okay.  So I said, "Alright, where do you want to go to school?"  My daughter said she wanted to go to a black school.  She said, "That's for sure."  She applied to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and Hampton Institute, Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia] now.  And she decided to go to Hampton.  My son applied to Howard University, and he was accepted there.  The University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia], he got there.  But Morehouse [College in Atlanta, Georgia] was where he applied and was accepted, and where we all agreed would be the best place for him to go.  And that's where he went.  My daughter finished American University--I mean Hampton--and pursued a master in public communications from American University [Washington, D.C.] and finished that up one year out.  And my son is in law school in North Carolina, North Carolina Central University [School of Law in Durham, North Carolina], the black law school where my wife [Beryl S. Gilmore] went to college and where my wife's father [James Joseph Sansom, Jr.] also taught on the law school faculty there once, and where he also graduated from that law school.  And prior to that, he was a Morehouse man as well.  So, the black college thing was important to me.  But, for me, because I don't believe in compromising academic excellence--I think you can get a good education... It's best to go to any school than to no school.  But I certainly felt then, and feel now, that if you want to get your children well-grounded in blackness and yet not compromise anything academically, you ought to be looking at Howard, Spelman [College in Atlanta, Georgia], Morehouse, Hampton, and even now Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University in Tallahassee, Florida].  That's where you might want to start looking.  In the old days, you might want to look at Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee], you may have wanted to look at Lincoln University in [Oxford] Pennsylvania, you may have wanted to look at Wilberforce [University in Wilberforce, Ohio], even before that, which was a crackerjack school, you know.  Schools sometime have outstanding reputations, and over a period of time those reputations fade.  If we were sitting in this room in the year 1900, we would be talking about only Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina], and Fisk University, and [Clark] Atlanta University [Georgia], and Howard University, and Straight University [now Straight College in New Orleans, Louisiana], and Talladega University [sic, Talladega College in Alabama], and Wilberforce University, and Lincoln University, okay.  But over time, for the long haul...  And Tuskegee [University in Alabama], we would have talked about that as well.  In the long haul, man, you know, in terms of excellence, Howard University has had an extraordinarily long run.  Hampton has had an extraordinarily long run.  Fisk had a run and it faded.  And Now Fisk is scuffling just for mere survival.  Spelman has had a long run.  So, there are cycles.
Story_ID: 93341
Speaker 1: But I, I do believe that a black college experience is good.  But I will say this, and I want to make this very clear.  Unlike, when I went to school... you can go now to the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland], and you can go now to the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] and the University of North Carolina [Chapel Hill, North Carolina], and you'll find more black kids there than you may have enrolled at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  In other words, those schools have substantial black enrollments now, and fortunately--unfortunately, not nearly as many blacks in administrative and key administrative university positions.  But see, what you learn when you go to Hampton [University in Hampton, Virginia], what you learn when you go to Morehouse [College in Atlanta, Georgia], what you learn when you go to Howard, is not only can you be a good student and be what you want to be, but you learn that people like you run the school.  You learn that the president, the vice-president, the dean, the  bursar, the registrar, the coaches, the public relations office, the alumni office--all them folks look just like you.  When you go to Howard University, look at the people who run the dental school, the med school, the law school, the grad schools--all those black people in all those important positions.  So, you know, I just think over time, that means a lot.  I'll put it this way, I'll put it this way.  For the most part, for the most part I can tell you a student who went to a black university, and I can tell you a student who was one of the one or two among white kids.  When I was in school and I started going to a white universities and lecturing at white universities, I was just amazed by all these black girls wearing these dashikis and Afros and braids.  I had never seen that kind of stuff at black colleges.  I said I guess they're trying to convince these folks who they are.  But I never felt compelled to have to do that at Howard.  (Laughter).  You didn't have to do that at Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee] and Hampton.  So, you found more gals like [HM] Angela Davis on white college campuses than you'd find on black college campuses, that's for sure.  I mean, it's like a world of difference.  And I kind of, I kind of like the creativity and energy that comes out of those HBCU's.  You know, go to school wherever you can go.  And I just regret that so many black people have been denied treatment as human beings.  When they got opportunities, they wanted to give their children the best they could give them, and oftentimes put their kids in some very compromising situations.  Everybody's got to make a choice of their own.  But for me, my kids were never going to be one of the one or two at any kind of school at any kind of place at any kind of time.
Story_ID: 93342
Speaker 1: Sir, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?  As if you haven't been talking about it.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Anybody that says that black people are not doing better now than we did when I was a child, is lying, is lying.  Anybody that says black people are doing real good is even lying more so than the first group.  Because we're not doing that good as a people at all.  What disturbs me most now--and I think this is a real dilemma, and I see it anywhere.  When I came along, most successful black people that I knew were first generation college graduates.  Most black people that went to college came from relatively lower-middle class to poor homes.  That's where they came from.  Now, most black kids who are in colleges and universities are second generation potential college graduates in their family.  My kids and my friends' kids who are college educated, almost all of them go to college.  I don't know any communities like where I grew up where almost everybody in my high school class, some of them were first generation high school graduates.  All of them became the first generation college graduates in their families.  There was a report that came out that said for the very first time, most African-American children who attend college came from families where one or more of the parents had attended college.  Is that good or is that bad?  That's bad.  Because the percentage of black kids who are the resource pool for those who go to college, compared to those who come from families where one or two went to college, the difference is so huge as to tell me that if you're poor and you grew up in the projects and you're going to Cardozo High School, you're not going to college.  But if you're Al-Tony Gilmore's son, and your son, Mr. Crowe, and your son, and your son, then they're likely to go to college.  So, this gap between the rich and the poor is not just happening between whites and blacks in this country; it's happening between black people and black people in this country.
Story_ID: 93343
Speaker 1: I think the number one problem in this country right now for black people, and I mean it--and I know they're causes for it--urban terrorism, urban terrorism--black on black crimes.  When I grew up if I got out of my place, the chances of a white man killing me were very high.  The chances of a white man incarcerating me were very high.  If you grew up in my neighborhood now, and neighborhoods like my neighborhood across the country now, man, it's like being in Korea during the Korean War.  It's like, there are some neighborhoods just like Iraq right now, war zones, where your chance of living is slim and none.  Several years ago I'm reading in the Washington Post where black high school girls are picking out the clothes they want to be buried in, clothes for their funeral.  I had a couple of guys in my high school class, one or two, who died.  There ain't a kid in Washington, D.C. who doesn't know somebody that's been killed.  I knew nobody that got killed in Youngstown [Ohio] or Spartanburg [South Carolina], or my entire time in college [North Carolina Central University in Durham, North Carolina].  I don't think there's a single public high school kid in Washington, D.C.--I bet less than ten percent that has not had somebody they know personally who has been killed.  Something's wrong with that, man.  Something's wrong with that.  And I think we need to react to that.  And I think if white people were killing us like that, we'd be marching more than [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] ever marched.  I guarantee you that, because I'd be out there marching too.  And I need to still be marching about these black folks killing each other.  Ain't nothing cute about that, ain't nothing to apologize for that.  Don't tell me about your background.  You got to kill me?  There ain't no justification ever for killing me.  I don't care what kind of background you came from.  I can't believe that too many kids come from communities unlike mine.  It is a problem of major magnitude.  These kids not only are dying, these young black men don't even understand what black manhood is about.  They ain't even afraid to die, nor afraid to kill me, nor afraid to be incarcerated.  Why not be incarcerated?  That's where all their friends are.  You think when they get to prison they're going to be like I was when I got to Durham--didn't know anybody going to college?  No.  Black kids going to prison today is like if I'd gone to Livingstone, because everybody from Spartanburg was at Livingstone [College in Salisbury, North Carolina].  That's where all your friends.  Going to prison now is like a badge of honor, a rite of passage... "I spent some time in the joint."  They're as proud to say that as I was to play in the "nigger bowl."  It's something that they take with pride, and it bothers me.  Like I told you about that guy walking down B Street drunk when I was a little boy and he'd go by them churchwomen house and he'd straighten up.  He wouldn't ever understand these "hos" and "bitches" on these records they talking about.  Who are they talking about?  Are their mothers black women?  Are their grandmothers black women?  Didn't all of our people come over here on that same slave ship?  He talking about "hos" and "bitches."  Well, that's like when I went by that school, and they talking about "Hey, niggers."  What's the difference?  You can't tell me over time that something is not going to happen to you when black women become "hos" and "bitches," and it's fashionable to say that.  I went to speak at a high school, Black History Month, black guy sitting on the front row with a tee-shirt, "Bitch, don't ask me for shit."  Huh?  What's going on this school?  What's-- something's wrong.  We have just lost a connection, man.  We have lost a connection.  These kids have been raised on their own.  They've really never lived, so they ain't afraid to die.  It means nothing to them.  And I'm so embarrassed when I see five of them coming, and I go to the other side of the sidewalk.  I know how the white woman feels when I get on the elevator, I see how they look.  That's how I feel when they get on the elevator, I've got to be honest.  I've got a family.  Those young black men are likely to kill me if I'm in the wrong place.
Story_ID: 93344
Speaker 1: Do you see any, do you have any ideas about how to bridge this gap of fear and alienation and, you know, that you've been discussing?
Speaker 2: It's going to take something cataclysmic, something earth shattering, to turn this thing around... to turn this thing around.  What has saved this country from the revolution has been the middle class.  That's what hurt France, that's what hurt Russia.  One day in this neighborhood, down the road, people from the inner city are going to come out here--white, and black, Hispanic, Asian, Pacific Islander, American and Alaska Natives who were poor--and kill us all... and kill us all.  When that black guy comes down here and he wants to break in a house, do you think it makes any difference, that he says well, "That's an African American's house, I'm not going in there."  "Oh, that's the Hispanic's guy's house, I'm not going in there."  "That's the Asian's guy's house, I'm not going in there."  "I'm going to the white man's house."  No, he's going to all them folks who have been disconnected from him with this gap in this country around achievement, around wealth.  He's coming right... and take all of us off. And it's going to become as much of a class thing as it's becoming, as it has been a race thing.  I can see it happening, I can genuinely see it happening.  And I can see it being articulated when I hear these white rappers, and what they're talking about their experiences.  And I hear these black rappers talking about their experiences, okay.  These rap guys are saying something about their background.  If anybody had told me that music would last this long, I would have said they were lying.  I still don't understand it.  [HM] Quincy Jones knew about it much more than I did.  Anybody who invests that much money in a hip hop magazine [Vibe] must have known this thing was going to be around for a long, long time.  I know all the words to [HM] Smokey Robinson's records right now.  And when I'm blessed to have grandchildren, I'm going to sing all of those records to them.  I'm going to sing all of those Platters records, all of those Motown records, all of those Temptations records, all of those Supremes records, all of those Smokey Robinsons, all of those Harvey and the Moonglows, all of those Flamingos, all of those Five Satins--just like my grandmother used to sing all of the Louis Jordan's, all the Louis Armstrong's, all of the Ethel Waters, all of the Billie Holidays.  Can you imagine one day there could grandparents singing about "hos" and "bitches" because that's the music they grew up on?  When these young people get to the point where they get old as I am, what records do you think they're going to sing at their reunions?  They're going to sing about the "hos" and the "bitches."  What else can they sing about?  Ain't nothing else they play, is it?  As you get older, you reflect on the music of your youth.  Can you imagine grandparents sitting around singing rap?   Ain't nothing wrong with the rap, but I'm talking about those lyrics of the rap.  I'm saying conceivably that is where we could be going as a race.  Because, you know, you've got some guys out here right now in their forties, late forties, who grew up on rap; it's been around that long.  One day, they're going to fifty, then sixty.  They got stuff now called old rap, and new rap, and old school rap, okay.  And, and, and just think about that, you know.  That's like me saying--that's the difference for me between smooth soul and doo-wop.  And doo-wop is old school and smooth soul is the new stuff.  Look, they've got a line drawn just like that too.  And I'm not trying to say this tongue in cheek, and it sounds that way.  But you have to laugh about it to keep from crying.  But it's real bad.
Story_ID: 93345
Speaker 1: We have to regain our communities.  Poor people and black people don't live together anymore.  When I grew up, everybody black, even those who came from middle class families, lived no more than a block from the poorest people in your town--went to the same school, same recreation centers... same churches.  Washington, D.C., man, you got churches where everybody's middle class and black.  You've got entire parts of town here where everybody's been to college, everybody's black.  You've got some black kids grew up in Washington, D.C. who have never met anybody poor.  And you've got some poor kids in Washington, D.C. out in Southeast who never met anybody been to college.  That was impossible a generation ago.  And it's been perpetuated on both ends, okay.  Smart kids from good backgrounds getting more education and better jobs.  Poor kids on the other side of town getting worse educations--no skills at all to work in this economy today.  You know, when all my people and all of your people and all of our people left the South, the Great Migration, the literacy level that was required to make it--could you read, could you write, could you calculate?  A lot of black men couldn't do that, because illiteracy was a major problem in our community.  Do you know what the literacy level means now?  It means you have computer skills--you mean you're computer literate.  There ain't no place for you even in the economy.  Some industries have started to explore this, and to recognize this failing literacy rate.  McDonald's was the first major organization to do it.  They were losing money, because they couldn't train these minimum wage people to work their cash registers.  So, what did they start doing?  You seen a McDonald's cash register?  It's a Big Mac.  Push Big Mac, it'll calculate the money.  Twice, push it twice.  Shake, shake, three shakes... one, two, three.  Big Mac with cheese, cheese extra... hit that, put that thing that look like a piece of cheese.  Now, why do you think they did that?  Why do you think they do that?  They are prepared to deal with the workforce.  And the workforce is alarming, it is threatening the security of this country.  Most people's faith is based on the Social Security system.  I work now, and I'm paying those people who are in retirement.  I make a good salary, I make a good contribution to that fund.  When you and I retire, do you think we're going to receive a check based on people working at McDonald's, based on people making minimum wage?  Do you think that's going to be enough to keep the Social Security fund going?  Ask yourself that question.  This thing can get out of control; it can get very, very bad.  And that, and that's not a good note to see where we're going.  But it is the truth of where we're going.
Story_ID: 93346
Speaker 1: We're just-
Speaker 2: There was an issue you brought up a while ago when you were talking the NEA [National Education Association] I think that's significant in this regard too, and it's the voucher issue.  Now, I think we started to talk it, but we didn't really discuss it--school vouchers and how that affects the public education.
Speaker 1: Well, the NEA believes that school vouchers is just a masquerade party.  NEA believes that there are some people in this country who have concluded that we're going to be able to educate some black folks, but we ain't gonna never educate all of them.  So, we're going to take the best of them and we're going to give them some money to go to school, even though that's a lot more complicated than it sounds.  You're giving me a voucher to go to St. John's [St. John's College High School in Washington, D.C.], but St. John's is not required to accept me at all.  What is going to happen--you take the best kids out of the public schools and put them in the private schools, okay.  You take the best teachers in Washington, D.C. and you put them in Banneker [Benjamin Banneker Academic High School] and Duke Ellington [School of the Arts], okay.  You take the best kids from D.C. and give them vouchers and put them in Banneker or Ellington, and what's left?  The worst teachers and the worst students in the worse schools.  Vouchers is a safety valve, a concession, a concession that we've got to educate some of them, but we can't educate all of them.  I mean, just, I understand vouchers may give five or six kids over there a quote, unquote "chance," but look at the numbers.  There's never been a voucher plan anywhere that says we're giving everybody enough money to go to any school that they want to go to, based on the tuition rates.  So you average out what it costs to go to St. John's, average out what it costs to go to Georgetown, average out what it costs to go to Holton-Arms [School in Bethesda, Maryland]--and give everybody in this town a voucher for that amount, then we can talk about it.  But I'm saying it's perpetuating what I've been taking about.  It's going to add a few more kids to this mix.  But the number of kids who would be positively affected by vouchers will be so, so, small.  My concern is that why can't we fix them all.
Story_ID: 94275
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you--back to history for a minute.  And ask you what--give me your perception of some of the self-trained scholars, the older scholars that we had.
Speaker 2: Self-trained scholars?  Probably the most well-known self-trained scholar would be [Joel Augustus] J.A. Rogers.  He wrote a kind of, "I bet you didn't know this" kind of history.  "I bet you didn't know that we had presidents who were, who had African-American ancestry.  I bet you didn't know who the first blacks were that did this or that."  He was a self-trained guy, and he was loose and liberal with his facts.  But the importance of J.A. Rogers is that he wrote in publications that black people read.  Here's a good example, if impact means anything.  For every one person who reads an article in the Journal of Negro History [now the Journal of African American History], 20,000 will read an article in the New York Amsterdam News, in the Norfolk [New] Journal and Guide [Virginia], in the Baltimore [Maryland] African-American [Baltimore Afro-American], in the Cleveland Gazette [Ohio], in the Chicago Defender [Illinois], in the Indianapolis Freeman [Indiana], in the Los Angeles Sentinel [California].  Now, I'm calling the newspapers just like that, and I can call them on and on and on--the Philadelphia Inquirer [Pennsylvania], Baltimore African American newspaper, Norfolk Journal and Guide, Richmond Planet [Virginia].  Now, that doesn't mean anything today.  But the principal source of news about black people prior to 1960 was the black newspapers.  They didn't write about us, unless we were committing crimes or causing problems.  They didn't care for any human interest stories on black people in the Washington Post.  They didn't write about the fact that E. Frazier Franklin taught there [Howard University in Washington, D.C.], and Mordecai Johnson was there.  The only time they talked about Howard University was when a group of professors at Howard University said, "We've got the right to work where we buy."  Or, when a group of Howard University professors says, "If Marion Anderson can't sing there, then we're going to take her down... if she can't sing at Constitution Hall for the Daughters of the American Revolution, we're going to take her down to the grounds of the monuments.  I mean, just celebrating us as human beings.  Nobody had a beat... the beat to us was when you commit crimes.  So he reached a lot of people.
Story_ID: 94276
Speaker 1: When I was coming along--and I will called a self-made historian.  I'll tell you who was a self-made historian--but his training is journalism.  And I've changed my views completely on this, completely.  When I came out of college I picked up an Ebony magazine one day, and there was an article on Jack Johnson.  And the guy who wrote it was a guy named [HM] Lerone Bennett.  And everything in there was what was in my book.  And he mentioned my name a couple of times, but hell, he should have said "This is what Al-Tony..." the whole thing he should have said.  So, I didn't like that.  I didn't like that at all.  I still don't like the way, quite the way he plagiarized that at all.  But it occurred to me, more people probably read that Jack Johnson piece in Ebony magazine--more black people--than had ever read any piece on Jack Johnson anywhere in life.
Speaker 2: I read it.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: You read the piece, too?
Speaker 2: It was excellent.
Speaker 1: It was an excellent piece, yeah.
Speaker 2: So, congratulations to you and him.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, I had a lot of people who were really aggravated by that.  And, and I was so mad.  I was going to write a piece that sounded sort of like--it was going to be a historian's manifesto.  I was going to call to the floor, and call to task Lerone Bennett in much the same way as [W.E.B.] DuBois called Booker T. Washington.  I was going to call it, "Of Mr. Lerone Bennett and Others."  (Laughter).  I really was, just as the chapter in "The Souls of Black Folks" when DuBois said "of Mr. Booker T. Washington and others," that classic chapter.  I've changed my views on that.  I think that the issue of territory and who did it is less important than people getting to know that it did happen historically.
Speaker 2: Did you see his latest?  Have you seen his latest work?
Speaker 1: His latest book has not really gotten any attention, on Abraham Lincoln ["Forced into Glory"].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And he's very disappointed.  And I understand why that is, I understand why.  I've seen a couple of TV shows that talked about him.  But in terms of what he thought he was saying...  Now, historians have almost ignored the book, you do know that.  No book that was considered to be a major piece has ever been ignored in recent times as much as that book is ignored.  Now, why was that book ignored?  To be sure, I don't know of any historians, white or black--maybe one or two percent--who can write as well as Lerone Bennett.  That's a fact, okay.  But Lerone Bennett is a self-made historian, and does not really quite understand what it is when you research from original documents--the historical method, historical bibliography, his care to details, his footnoting, his research, his interpretations.  He's not aligned with historians with that.  I thought he wrote an interesting book.  I thought he said nothing that has not been said before.  And that's a major sin, to say you're writing a new book.  A new book that's important in the history community should make an original contribution to the knowledge base.  You know, that's the criterion.  Otherwise, if you're writing with secondary sources, it's a good book but you don't call it groundbreaking.  It says nothing that people don't already know.  He's got an interesting twist on it.  Frederick Jackson Turner, when he wrote "The Frontier Hypothesis," he didn't say anything that anybody had never heard before.  But his interpretation of the frontier has been the safety valve for democracy in this country.  That theme he put on it is what made it such a great monumental historical work.  And I think Bennett is lacking there.  And Bennett will get no sympathy from African American historians, who for years have felt... and a lot of... very much that they've been maligned by Lerone Bennett.
Story_ID: 94277
Speaker 1: When you ask the average person whose history have you read the most, clearly it would be if it's an African American answering that, it would be Lerone Bennett--absolutely, nothing even close.  Lerone Bennett is a household name, if there's any household name among historians.  Next comes [HM] John Hope Franklin.  Possibly next comes the self-made historian John Henrik Clarke, who's widely popular.  A generation ago, the next name would have been J.A. Rogers, because he wrote in the Pittsburgh Courier, and all the black newspapers.  Other than that, Carter G. Woodson, whose name still reigns high because he's associated with the development of Black History Month.  Short of that, to some extent, Charles Wesley, because he wrote the histories of so many social organizations--Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity and things like that, and he was also probably in the association.  Now, what I have just done--
Speaker 2: And Quarles, too, maybe on some level.
Speaker 1: And, I was going to say, and Benjamin Quarles, okay.  To some lesser extent, Rayford Logan.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I have just about exhausted the list of well-known African-American historians.  John Blassingame would have been one of the most well-known of all time.  But here again, that's a very short list I've given.  You think of it.  And I've read so many good books recently by this young fellow, I can't think of his name [Jonathan Scott Holloway].  He's up at Yale University [New Haven, Connecticut].  He wrote a book on the intellectual development of E. Franklin Frazier and Ralph Bunch and Abe Harris ["Confronting the Veil"].  It is an excellent book.  There's a fellow that wrote a book on John Hope, the John Hope who was the president of [Clark] Atlanta University [Georgia] and Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], okay, the first president of Morehouse College before it was Atlanta Baptist College when he went to ABC, Atlanta Baptist College, before he became president of it.  It's an excellent book.  And there are a number of others, real excellent books.  But these guys have not gotten that kind of household notoriety.  I don't know we'll ever have anybody like John Hope Franklin.  But you know, the least demanding book that John Hope Franklin ever wrote is the one he'll be best known for, for the rest of his life, and after his life.  And that's "From Slavery to Freedom."  That's based on secondary sources.  It is a general history of African Americans in this country.  Were John Hope Franklin to have only written that, and submitted that for tenure consideration of a university, no major university would have given him tenure based on that book.  But he could have gotten tenure for "The Free Negro in North Carolina," "The Militant South," "The Era of Reconstruction," [sic, Reconstruction: after the Civil War"] and just a host of other studies that he's written, okay.  "George Washington Williams," the first black historian.  I mean, these are well-written books.  And I think that says something about popular historians, trained historians, and self-made historians.  There's an interesting intersection of those three.  I am much more palatable and much more respectful and much more receptive to self-made historians who write in popular publications if it's of the caliber and the level of a Lerone Bennett, alright.  Now, J.A. Rogers' books remind me of guys, Muslims in particular, who go to jail and read one book and come out and now they know everything.  "Did you know this?  Did you know that?" "Did you know this?  Did you know that?"  One book.  Well, J.A. Rogers' books will lead you to believe that you know everything, you know.  And that's the danger of a J.A. Rogers book, as I see it.  People are looking for a short-cut, you know.  I once thought that was probably the only book they have in prison libraries, books by J.A. Rogers, I really thought that, and maybe Ebony magazine and Lerone Bennett.  And I'm saying that tongue in cheek, but have you ever met one of these guys on the corner and he knows it all?  It's because he read one book, okay.  So, that happens with the self-made historians.
Story_ID: 94278
Speaker 1: But I'm beginning to question what constitutes a legitimate historian.  Because there's a recently book on-- published on the life of Elijah Muhammad ["The Messanger"] which was written by a journalist, a fellow who writes for the Washington Post.  Now, what's not historical about that?  That's an excellent book, that's first class, man.
Speaker 2: You're talking about Karl Evanzz' books?
Speaker 1: Yes, I am.  That's serious, I like that.  My wife [Beryl S. Gilmore] liked that.  My brother [Curtis Tyrone Gilmore] liked that.  Yeah, that's good stuff.  So, I don't, I'm not necessarily saying that you have to go through a Ph.D. program in history to be a well-published, respected scholar.  But it's a different standard.  Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., the son of Arthur Schlesinger, one of the nation's top historians, maybe the dean of American historians.  When he won the Pulitzer Prize for his book, "The Age of Jackson," he didn't have a Ph.D.  That was his master's thesis, okay.  (Laughter).  And he never went to get a Ph.D.  So I'm saying, you know--and that man who taught me at North Carolina Central [University in Durham, North Carolina], Caulbert Jones.  Caulbert Jones' only sin was that he didn't publish.  But boy, was he smart.  Man, could he teach.  Man, could he inspire.  He was just something that I was glad that I was fortunate enough to have had the experience to say I actually sat and learned from Caulbert Jones.  So, a historian and a teacher of history, that's another thing.  There are a lot of guys who can really write history, who can't teach history.  So, you take their class and you're just saying, "Wow, is this what I'm getting?"  And then you get some graduate assistant down the hall who's working on a Ph.D. in history... and until he gets his Ph.D., he really knows how to teach.  But then when he gets his Ph.D., he knows that to survive is the least important thing he's going to be evaluated on--is his ability to teach.  When they call you before a tenure committee, they're going to ask you "What are your publications?  What are your journals?  What papers did you read?  What books did you write?"  When I taught at Howard [University in Washington, D.C.]... I'm not ashamed to say this.  They had a rating up there once, rating the teachers.  I had the highest rating of anybody in that university.  Now, the tragedy of that, I believe, if they had rewarded that--and there was another lady up there who didn't write as much as I did.  Her name was Olive Taylor.  She was second to me.  Olive Taylor didn't write.  But if we honored that and we respected that...  If Howard had more teachers like Olive Taylor and more people trying to teach, like Al-Tony Gilmore, who taught like that until he got tenure, okay, then it would have been a better school for history classes.  So when you don't value it, it will not be valued.
Speaker 2: So, you think--
Speaker 1: Historians are never going to be good teachers of history until you reward them for it.  If it plays no central part in the promotion process, in the tenure process, then why would anybody really want to grab it unless it's just something in your life blood?  But can you imagine how good I would have gotten, and how much better Olive Taylor would have been if they were going to promote us based on just teaching?  I might have even made a dean, man.
Speaker 2: And so the priorities are a little skewed.  I guess, that's what we're saying here.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And a lot of other professions, it's the same way.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 94279
Speaker 1: Tell me, when you look back at all the things that you've done--and you're still relatively young.  I mean, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, here again, my legacy I think is that I was, I've been a good son for my mother [Margaret Gilmore].  I've been a good husband for my wife [Beryl S. Gilmore], and I've been a good father for my children.  I have, I have done the best I could with what I have.  I've taught them to be productive, my children to be productive citizens, and to respect people based on who they are and not what they are.  I am really proud of the number of students who I taught, who I think I really made their college experiences pleasurable because they enjoyed coming to my class.  I also am proud of the number of students that I sent on to law schools, professional schools, and graduate schools.  Most of the students in my class were very bright.  I never encouraged them to go on to pursue Ph.D.'s in history, only or two.  Most of them I tried to get into law schools was because I just thought that they could have a better lifestyle, and they could make a better contribution that way.  But I sent a lot of kids off to some of the top schools in this country.  So in the university context, I'm proud of that.  I'm really proud that I introduced African American social history and sports history in the university context.  I think I developed the first course ever on the history and politics of black athletes in America, who taught at a major university.  I know that for a fact.  When I go to the Google search engine and push in "Al-Tony Gilmore" I get about maybe fifteen to twenty pages of single items of stuff I've done.  Some of the stuff, I've forgotten--HBO documentaries on black athletes in America; History Channel documentaries on Jack Johnson.  I think that stuff will live, and I like that, and that was good.  But you know, like [Henry David] Thoreau when he left Walden Pond, "I left there for the same reason I went there," it's time to do something different.  That's that history part of the legacy.
Story_ID: 94280
Speaker 1: Now I'm at the National Education Association; there's another legacy there.  My job at the Association has been to make certain that this big, huge 2.7 million member organization has a leadership that looks black, Asian, Hispanic, American Indian, Alaska Native, and Native Hawaiian.  It has to look like that.  Because years ago in 1966, the biggest black organization in this country, scholarly organization--the biggest black organization in this country--was the American Teachers Association.  That was all of the black teachers from Washington, D.C. all the way down through Mississippi, Alabama and Texas and their state associations, who had a group who had been founded since 1910 [sic, 1906] who financed [1954], more than any other group, the Brown v. Board of Education decision, financed that for the [NAACP] Legal Defense Fund, and financed the equal salary cases of 1948 and '49' [1949] which are just as fundamentally important, and all the cases leading to Brown.  The ATA merged with the NEA in 1966.  And all those great black minds, see, I'm what they wanted to be there.  I'm what they were hoping the NEA would eventually hire one day.  And that is somebody who never forgot what they wanted.  When they came to the NEA, they said to the NEA, "We're going to merge with you, but you're not ever going to forget us.  We want leadership training programs, we want structured programs, budgeting programs, to guarantee that at every level of this organization folks are going to look like us from now on.  Most of those people are dead now.  Only one or two are still around.  When I was at NEA's representative assembly we gave an award to Joe Reed, the oldest living executive secretary of one of those black state associations which was in Alabama.  When he went to the stand, he along with E.B. Palmer, older men from North Carolina.  When they said, "Thank God for Al-Tony Gilmore being with the Association," I think I had done something.  And I think every day I get up and go to work--and I know that a lot of people where I work ain't happy about what I do.  But I know that I'm doing what I was supposed to do.  I'm doing what the American Teachers Association wanted me to do.  I'm doing what Joe Reed wanted me to do.  I'm doing what my mother wanted me to do.  And I'm doing what I think is the right thing, because it's what I want to do.  So, when I look at the NEA and I know we have a black president...  Did you know the NEA has a black president [HM Reginald Weaver] of a 2.7 million member organization?  Well, did you know one day several years ago I went to Illinois, doing training on how to become a leader in the Association, and he was sitting right there in my class.  He's the president of the NEA.  Did you know that the NEA has an executive committee and out of the nine most powerful people there, four of them are black?  All of them I discovered--one in Mississippi, one in Maryland, one in Pennsylvania, one in Louisiana.  And I brought them all the way up through the ranks.  These were just high school teachers.  One was a support staff, she was a cafeteria worker.  And I brought her to the point that she could sit down and ask anybody running for president of the United States, "Sir, would you answer these questions for me, if you're seeking NEA's endorsements?" and put her in an arena like that.  To bring these people along where any issue affecting the public education of this country--you can call them, and they're going to answer.  To see these people give press conferences, to see these people speak before State legislatures, to testify on the Hill.  I just think that that's something that somebody in 1966 wanted to happen, and I didn't let NEA forget that it's supposed to happen.  So, I, I, I feel real, real good about that.  When I first came to the NEA, a lot of my white colleagues said, "I don't know.  Al-Tony, you're going to get identified with that black thing.  You're going to get identified with that minority thing.  Man, they're going to box you into that."  Man, that's my dream.  This guy's nightmare was my hope, my dream, my aspiration, all I ever wanted in life.  And he was a decent guy.  He just said, "Man, you're going to get boxed in that."  And so, I am boxed in it, and I hope I can't get out of this box.  I do hope following me, this organization will have the good sense to bring in some other folks younger than me, but with the same perspective that I've got.  My legacy, ain't nothing on earth can compromise who I am.  I'm black, I'm fair, I'm equitable, I don't dislike anybody else because they're not black.  But I'm deeply in love with myself and my people who are black.  I wish there would be a time when everybody on this planet could be respected under the themes for [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], Mahatma Gandhi, and other very intelligent people before them.  But I'm fundamentally locked in this thing, and I'm enjoying it.  And so my legacy's that when you think of me, if you say five words and "black" doesn't come out in the first five or six words, I'd be very disappointed.
Story_ID: 94281
Speaker 1: Sir, is there anything that you would do differently when you look back on your life?
Speaker 2: Oh, man.  Every mistake you made, you would never want to do again.  Every mistake you've made, you would not want to do again.  Man, I wish that I didn't feel the way I felt about the band and the guys who were in the band.  I wish that I had joined the Science Club and the Math Club.  I wish I had taken the time to let Mr. [Bobby] Leach teach me algebra and chemistry, and let Mr. Leach teach me trigonometry, because he was so good in science.  I wish I had read more when I was in undergraduate school.  I wish I had quit the track team a little earlier than I did, so that I could have studied on something that would mean something in my life.  I should never have left Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and gone to the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland].  Can't change that.  I could never, never ever could I over, overstate how bad a mistake that was for me.  I could never, ever overstate that, ever.  But you learn and you grow, and you just continue to go forward one step at a time.  I wish... I've enjoyed living in Washington, D.C., and I've made a real effort to connect the world for me here with people who see people for who they are.  Some of my best friends have never been close... my very closest friends have never been close to the front door of a college.  They're just as smart as I am; they're just as intelligent as I am, and several of them are probably better read than I am.  They just didn't go to college, okay.  But I value my friendship with them.  I think they're genuine, I think they're real.  I wish more people had that experience.  I regret that my kids grew up in a town where they didn't know enough poor people.  The only poor people my kids really know closely are the members of my family and the people who they know back in my hometown where I grew up.  And I see how uncomfortable they are, they don't really... they understand it, okay.  And they're not embarrassed by it, and they know that there's a lot of value to be gained from being around these people.  But they're not as relaxed and as comfortable with those folks as I am.  They're not nearly as relaxed or comfortable as I am with those kind of folks.  And I am much more comfortable with those kind of folks than I am with anybody I ever met at any university, or any place or any time in my life.  I never thought that I fit with the university people, because they always talked about their work, and I wanted to talk about my son.  They always talked about the paper they were going to read, and I wanted to talk about my daughter as a cheerleader.  They always wanted to talk about the new book that was coming out, and I wanted to hear one of them James Brown new CD, or James Brown's new record.  They always wanted to talk about things that were all academic, and I wanted to know could the [Baltimore] Bullets win the NBA championship.  They wanted to talk about things, and I wanted to talk about my wife [Beryl S. Gilmore], you know.  They just, to me, were in that tunnel.  And I think if I had not gotten out, that tunnel was going to suffocate me... it was going to suffocate me.  But you do what you can with what you got.  If I hadn't met Helen [G.] Edmonds, if I hadn't met my wife, I'd be back there now retired.  Because I would have gone back to my hometown [Spartanburg, South Carolina] and been a football coach and taught at my high school [Carver High School].  I told you that's all I ever wanted to do, all I ever wanted to do.  Because everybody who's ever done that... my father [David Cureton] had done that.  All my coaches have done that, and I enjoyed that.  And, and that would have been, that would have been my world.  So, you can always second-guess yourself.  But I think at every point you should just look forward and try to do something different.
Story_ID: 94282
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to put all of this behind me in a couple of years.  Because what I hope to amass is probably the greatest collection of rare black posters that anybody's ever collected.  And I think I'm probably well on the way there right now.
Speaker 2: I think so.  Anybody... well people can only see you in this video framed as you are.  But this house is filled with rare black--
Speaker 1: That's an original Josephine.  That's not a reproduction.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All of them are originals.  And I've been doing this for... and I enjoy it.  I, I, really do.  I used to go around and travel, and go to antique stores and flea markets and pick up things.  And then one day, somebody said there's something called eBay.  And you can go right to your computer and you can shop anywhere in the world, and see that people will put things up for auction or for sale.  And you write them and you e-mail them and you get to communicating with them, and you just start finding these treasures and pieces like that.  That's my connection with the past, you know, my connection with history.  I, I still live I guess in the past.  Somebody asked me one time, they said, "If you could have had it your perfect way, how would you have wanted to live?"  Well, I want to make this clear.  I am glad that I lived post-1954.  I often wonder about people who were born a slave and died a slave.  That's a concept you've just got to think about.  The man's born a slave, and one day he gets old and he dies, and he's still a slave, okay.  I wish I could have been around when [W.E.B.] DuBois... I wish I could have met him.  Man, what would it have been like if I could have had an hour with DuBois, or an hour with Paul Robeson, or an hour with [Martin] Delaney, or an hour with Frederic Douglass, you know, or a day with Nat Turner.  Because I don't think he was like [William] Styron said he was.  In fact, I know he wasn't, okay.  That's a hero for me, Nat Turner.  But if I had lived then, I would have not ever seen--what I think I saw is a glimpse of the prize.  All the people who died before 1954, man, and I'm using that--this is a watershed day.  It didn't change the world, but it started the changing of the laws.  At least the laws had started favoring us.  I have lived in a rigidly segregated world, and I've lived in an affluent integrated situation.  And I've learned from both.
Story_ID: 93355
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Our last question is similar to legacy, but not quite the same thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 1: Boy, that's a good one.  I want to be remembered by the people who really knew me.  It's not important that anybody remembers...  Years and years from now, people can read writings I've done.  If they enjoy them, if they learn from them, that's good.  To know the personnel or the person who wrote the book--and that person being me--or the article or the review--I don't really see that as important.  But I think it's important to be remembered by the people who knew you.  And that's who I want to be remembered by.  I want to be remembered by all of my students.  I don't want anybody... I hope the time never comes where a guy says, "Al-Tony Gilmore, let me see.  He could have been one my teachers.  What did he teach?"  No, I don't think that's going to happen.  I don't think that's going to happen, I can tell you that now.  My wife [Beryl S. Gilmore] will tell you, I go places and people will come all across the airport and places and say "Man, you taught me in a course, and I'll never forget something you said."  And I know that I taught them, because I remember that's how I felt about it.  I had a little philosophy when I taught at Howard [University in Washington, D.C.], and a lot of people remember this.  I said, "You know, I'm going to tell you something.  This is going to be a good experience for you.  If you come into my class every day, the least you're going to do is a C, the least you're going to do.  Because I'm going to make you... I'm going to make you earn at least that much just by coming in here.  I'm going to be that prepared for you every day, I'm going to be that up for you every day.  So, all you need to do is be here."  And I was saying that as a hook, but man, they started coming based on that.  I said "Don't worry about the grade, because I want you to come here to learn."  So, it's important to be remembered.  I want to be remembered as a good teacher because I really think... I really think that if there's anything that God gave me--I don't know about being a historian--but I certainly believe that I probably could teach with anybody.  I certainly think I could teach with anybody.  Even when I go places now and I do workshops in history--I don't do them a lot--I'm always invited back.  I mean, just almost everywhere.  In fact, I can't even go to all the places for Black History Month, because it ain't--it's my spin on it, my energy into it, my connection with it.  I'm going to do my homework, I'm going to know who I'm talking to.  So, I want people to remember me for that.  But I want my friends to remember me as the human being who I am, a guy who never forgot where he came from.  And who never, ever, really wanted to be anybody different, and got really confused among people around him who were always searching for something that they were not.  They were not nearly comfortable with who they were at that moment and that time.  I'm certain that I'm the same guy sitting here right now that would have been sitting here forty-five years ago.  I'm the same guy--same values, same perspective--that finished Carver High School [Spartanburg, South Carolina] in June of 1964.  I'm the same one, I'm the same guy who went to Cummings Street [Junior High School] in the early 1950's.  And when I go home, everybody says that.  My family says that, my friends say that.  They say... my pastor says that when they introduce me and all.  They say, "This guy has never changed, ain't going to never change."  The friends I grew up with in Spartanburg, I still call them, I still write them.  Some of them have their children they've named after me, man, my buddies.  We're still that tight.
Speaker 2: Do we have some more Al-Tony's?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I have a son, absolutely.  He's my best buddy, oh yeah.  That, that, that's a part of it.  And being a guy who was raised by women... you know, trying to be with a wife, trying to be as positive an influence on my children as my mother [Margaret Gilmore] and my aunts and my grandparents [Willie Atchison and Curtis Atchison] were on me.  So I want to be remembered--I thought about--as a good friend who would never change, and who was relaxed just being himself.  I can't think of nothing else I can tell you, man, to tell you the truth.
Speaker 2: Okay, thank you--
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: --very much.
Speaker 1: I enjoyed it, right, good.
Story_ID: 93356
Speaker 1: Okay, that picture right there?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me when I was at Cummings Street Elementary School [Spartanburg, South Carolina].  I was probably in about the fifth or sixth grade.  And that's who I was there.
Speaker 2: About 1952 or so?
Speaker 1: Oh, I would say a little later than that--around 1957, '58' [1958]--'57' [1957], '58' [1958].  Yeah, somewhere around there, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: That's my wife, Beryl.  Beryl [S. Gilmore] and I met at North Carolina College, now North Carolina Central University [in Durham, North Carolina], when she graduated from Hampton [University in Hampton, Virginia] and she came there to go to law school.  So, that's Beryl, my wife.
Speaker 2: What year was this taken?
Speaker 1: That picture there was taken at one of her Delta Sigma Theta [Sorority] functions maybe within the last, around 1998, '99' [1999].
Speaker 2: Alright, next.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's around 1982, around 1982.  That's my, those are my children and my wife.  That's Beryl, my wife and that's my son.  Beryl's holding Jack, and that's his twin sister Genevieve on the left in my, in my lap on my leg.
Speaker 2: Very good, next.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's some years later.  I'm a fan of the National Negro Leagues, and I buy so much of that stuff, we decided one Christmas we would all put on our Negro League outfits.  And that would be the Christmas card that we would send around.  We had a lot of shots and a lot of angles that we did with those.  But that's one of the pictures.  And that's Beryl with her Kansas City Monarchs on, and Jack with his St. Louis Grays.  That's me with my Birmingham Black Barons jacket, and that's my daughter Genevieve with the Homestead Grays jersey.
Speaker 2: And the year, if you recall?
Speaker 1: That was around the year 2000, 2001.
Speaker 2: You all were ready for the Negro Bowl.
Speaker 1: Oh boy, okay.
Speaker 2: This one?
Speaker 1: That's Dr. J. Rupert Picott, who's the executive director of the Association for the Study of African American Life and History.  No one has ever identified with me more as a father figure than Dr. J. Rupert Picott.  Dr. Picott brought me into the Association.  He mentored me and he introduced me to all the great historians, and he made me an active member of the Association.  And that was taken around 1982, '83' [1983] when William Bennett was the National Endowment for the Humanities Director, and we gave a reception for him when he came to Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 2: What's the spelling of his surname?
Speaker 1: J. Rupert Picott, P-I-C-O-T-T.
Speaker 2: Okay, and this one?
Speaker 1: That's Al-Tony Gilmore.  That's the publicity shot that they have sent around for years for me when I go out speaking for the National Education Association.  I've been working for the National Education Association since 1985.
Speaker 2: Excellent, next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me during Black History Month during [President] Jimmy Carter's first administration.  And I am there during Black History Month.  He invited some very prominent African American historians, and I was one of them.  And I-- also a great fan of Dr. J. Rupert Picott.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me taken in Dallas, Texas in 2002 with [HM] John Lewis.  John Lewis was the recipient of NEA's Friend of Education Award at the NEA's annual gathering of the representative assembly.  And John was our keynote speaker and I spent a lot of time with him, and we had a good chance to talk about the better books and the history of the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: This era, that's me when I was at the University of Toledo [Ohio].  That picture's important because had that movement backfired.  That was the morning that we decided, just me and one of my friends right there that we were going to shut down the University of Toledo because they didn't have enough black students, and they weren't sensitive to the needs of black people.  So, that was me going way out on a limb, risking my degree and risking everything.  And I'd like to remember that morning, because I think I made a difference in a lot of people's lives.  As a result of the courage and guts to do that, the University of Toledo gave me enough money to go out and recruit a lot of students.  And there are a lot of students who received their graduate degrees and professional degrees as a result of me and that bullhorn that morning of May 19, 1970.
Speaker 2: Do you want to identify your partner there?
Speaker 1: Yep.  That's John Gibson.  John Gibson was a student there at the University of Toledo.  And he and Roosevelt Cox and myself were the only ones who just said we were going to show up, and we were very successful.  This resulted because the University of Toledo did not recognize the kids that had been killed in South Carolina State College [South Carolina State University in Orangeburg, South Carolina] and Jackson State College [Jackson State University in Jackson, Mississippi], but the week before they had closed the university in memory and recognition of the deaths of those kids at Kent State [University] in Ohio.
Speaker 2: We did something similar at Wright State [University in Dayton, Ohio].
Speaker 1: This is me as a professor of history and director of the African American Studies program at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland].  And I was becoming very popular there, and that's one of their featured faculty publications, and I probably was the first black faculty to ever have a piece put on him like that.  And that's a piece of Maryland that was a good memory.  That was around 1981, '82' [1982].
Speaker 2: Right. Okay, next.
Speaker 1: When I was at North Carolina Central, I was a pretty good track athlete.  And that's me receiving first place for the 100 yard dash.  I was a long-jumper, and I ran relays.  And that picture's important for me because that was the first day that I'd ever ran the 100-yard dash in open competition.  I'd run the relays, but on the first day that I ran the 100-yard dash, not only did I win it, I ran 9'6", and that was an outstanding time back then.  And after that, people starting seeing me as a sprinter more than a broad jumper.  But up to that point, I was known as a long jumper.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's my track team at North Carolina College, now North Carolina Central University.  That man there in the middle is probably the most well-known African-American track coach of all time.  That's Dr. LeRoy T. Walker, who also eventually became the chancellor of the university.  And he was the head of the United States Olympic Committee, the highest position ever held by a black for Olympic track and field in Olympic competition.  And that's me standing to Dr. Walker's immediate right.
Speaker 2: What year was that?
Speaker 1: About 1966.
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead, next.
Speaker 1: That's me around 1979 or 1980 on a lecture circuit talking on Jack Johnson.  That was at Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's a very important picture there for me, because those are the kids who I grew up with in Spartanburg [South Carolina].  That's my high school [Carver High School] class.  That was my high school class's 20th Reunion.  That's 1984, and most kids on that picture went on to colleges and universities.  They are lawyers, doctors, dentists, scientists--there are all kinds of people on that picture.  And not only is that my class of 1964, my best friends that I grew up with, but most kids on that picture I have known all of my life.  We started out at Cummings Street together, more than half the people on that picture.
Speaker 2: Would you like to identify yourself in the photo?
Speaker 1: I'm right up here near the back, back there, that back row going up there on the bannister.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's my wedding picture.  That's August 29, 1970, and that's wife, Beryl Sansom Gilmore, and that's me Al-Tony Gilmore.  We were married in Raleigh, North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Very good, next.
Speaker 1: That's the cover to "Bad Nigger: The National Impact of Jack Johnson," the first book that I wrote.  And interestingly enough if you go on eBay and you search for that book, that book right now, a first edition copy will cost you about $300 something odd dollars.  That's, that's, that's the value of an original copy, a first edition of that book.  I'm very delighted and surprised at that, but that's the cover of the book, published in 1975 when I was at Howard University.
Speaker 2: Go ahead, next.
Speaker 1: That's me.  And I wish I had another copy of that picture.  That's me the first day that I arrived in Durham, North Carolina, from Spartanburg, South Carolina into a brand new world.  So, all the world that was going to be in front of me for my future started on that day.  That's my first day in college.  That picture would have been taken in September of 1964.
