Story_ID: 17986
Speaker 1: My name is Samuel Eldred Greenlee, Jr., otherwise known as Sam Greenlee.
Speaker 2: Will you spell it?
Speaker 1: It's spelled "G R E E N L E E".
Speaker 2: Spell Eldred, please.
Speaker 1: "E L D R E D" It's Welsh. And I was born in Chicago, [Illinois] July 13, Sunday, 1930. Born on Sunday means that I would be called 'Kwesi'. But I haven't bothered to change my name because discarding my father's name is hardly an African act. So I'll remain Sam Greenlee, Jr.
Speaker 2: And your date of birth--I mean you gave me your date of birth. I'm sorry, your birth place.  I would also like to know-- to have you state where we are right now.  We're at the History Makers?
Speaker 1: We're at History Makers on 1900 South Michigan Avenue, on the near South Side in Chicago. One interesting aspect about my birth is that I was probably the first, if not one of the first blackchilds born in St. Luke's Hospital, when it was over on 12th and Michigan.
Story_ID: 17987
Speaker 1: I just want to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: Favorite food?  Beans.
Speaker 1: You have a favorite type of beans?
Speaker 2: Blackeyed peas.
Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I got a pot at home right now.
Speaker 1: (laughs) My mother likes them. What about your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Autumn.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Anywhere in the sun.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: (Pause) "When you sleep on the floor, you can't fall out of bed."
Speaker 1: Is that a Sam Greenlee saying?
Speaker 2: I got that from my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Oh You did!
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 17988
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your parents. You--Let's first talk about your father. You know. And I'd like to talk about he and [unclear].
Speaker 2: Well my father [Samuel Eldred Greenlee, Sr.] was born in Forrest City, Arkansas. Although the family ancestral home is around Kosciusko, Mississippi, that's next door to West Point, [Mississippi]. In fact there's a Greenlee High School there named after my grand uncle. The reason my father was born in Forrest City [Arkansas] is that his father [Emmett Greenlee] had a first wife--he was a barber and a plasterer. And he came home unexpectedly and found her in bed with a prominent white man. Who he immediately beat until he crawled. And, of course, in those days he had to get out of Dodge. So he went across the river and set up in a barbershop. He had the second chair. And the owner of the barbershop's daughter fell in love, Fannie, Fannie Duncan [Greenlee Spivey]. And they were married. And he died of blood poisoning around the age of thirty. At the time he was putting my grandmother through college. It was a small college in Arkansas. Whose uncle was the President. So she had to quit college and take a job as a schoolteacher to raise her two sons. Sam, Sr. and Emmett. On my father's side, my great grandfather was a Union cavalry man, who became a member of the Ninth Cavalry. He was a Buffalo Soldier. And after fighting Indians throughout his career, he married one. He married a full, full-blooded Seminole. And my grandmother and my father both looked as much like Indians as they did black. She relo-, -located when my father and uncle were approaching puberty because they insisted on fighting white boys. And she knew that by the time they reached puberty they would have to be killed. So she relocated to Chicago around 1917, joined her brother, whom I knew as Uncle Duncan, who was working on the railroad. And later on, he was instrumental in getting my father a job during the Depression on the railroad, which was quite rare. And my father worked for the Santa Fe Railroad. He was on the Santa Fe Super Chief and rose up from bus boy, to waiter, to managing the bar car. And he worked on the road for 35 years. When he resigned, he became Maitre d' at the Cliffside Club [sic, the Cliff Dwellers' Club], one of the most prominent men's clubs in Chicago.  Not a men's club. Nah. By the time he was there they had integrated both blacks, Latinos and females. But early on, it was a totally white venue. The architects [Louis] Sullivan and Frank Lloyd Wright were among prominent members of that club. He worked there until he had a stroke and then he had to retire.
Speaker 1: Do you know much about the origin of the Greenlee name?
Speaker 2: Yes. Insofar as I know there were two Welsh brothers, who were Baptist educational missionaries. They came to the States prior to the Civil War. Settled first in Memphis, [Tennessee] where they married two free mulatto sisters, two siblings, when it was against the [anti-miscegenation] law. Then settled in Kosciusko [Mississippi]. And opened a school for blacks when that was also against the law. So the Greenlee name is not a slave name. They were not slave owners. In fact they were abolitionists. They were a strong  thrust of abolitionism in Great Britain wherein Baptists were on the cutting edge. And they were a product of that tradition.
Speaker 1: Sam, I don't come across, I mean in these interviews, come across people who know as much as you. But I'm wondering how you know?  Does this come across, you know, you were being told? Or  is this something [unclear], you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't research it. It's passed down usually along the matrilineal lines. The women in the United States and in certain parts of Africa are the repositories of family history. So I learned this from my--from my family. I didn't come across this knowledge about the Greenlee origin until I was a grown man. But I knew more intimately about my mother's side.
Story_ID: 17989
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about your mother. Give her name [unclear], you know, and what you know about her family.
Speaker 2: Her name was Desoree Alexander Greenlee Pyburn. She was named Desoree after the daughter of a early Civil Rights Attorney. His name is escaping me now. He was famous for the Snopes Trial. It'll come to me in a minute. Because my f-, grandfather was self-educated he spelled it "D E S O R E E" instead of "I" (laughs). She was an entertainer, singer, dancer, comedian and  actress. And a--an original Regalette. Regalettes came out of one of the prominent dancing schools on the South Side. They did a specialty act at the Regal when they were all at the age ranges 12 to 14. They were such a hit that they were hired to become the chorus line in the Regal [Theatre, Chicago, Illinois]. And they danced there for also ten years, throughout high school and 'til finally the group broke up for the usual reasons of  marriage and childbirth. My mother went on the road when I was about two or three years old. And moved east and played all of the major jazz clubs there. And was considered one of the finest jazz tap dancers of her time. She worked with all of the people there. For instance, she was a featured performer at the Oriental Theatre in the Loop [Chicago] at a time when Cab Calloway's Band was the house band. Cab left there to open the Cotton Club in [Harlem] New York and he was replaced by Duke Ellington's Band. And she shortly followed Cab and became a featured performer in, in the Cotton Club, The Apollo [Theatre, Harlem, New York] and other East Coast venues. When she returned at--in 1940, when I was ten years old, she played all of the prominent clubs here.  The Rhumboogie, Dreamland, The Grand Terrace, [Club] DeLisa, Beige Room and others. When she retired from show business--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Can you hold on for just one second? (unclear) I thought that her name was spelled differently. I was gonna mention that.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: You know. Okay. You were talking about the clubs your mother played at.
Speaker 2: She played all the prominent clubs. For instance, when she was at the DeLisa, the Master of Ceremonies was Redd Foxx. The House Band was led by Earl ['Fatha'] Hines. The male singer was Billy Eckstein. The female singer was Sarah Vaughn. And she was the headliner. So she was a star.
Story_ID: 17990
Speaker 1: She [mother, Desoree Alexander Greenlee Pyburn] was born in Vicksburg, Mississippi. And the family moved to Chicago [Illinois] about the same time as my father's [Samuel Eldred Greenlee, Sr.] family. It was a direct result of an attack on the most prominent doctor in Vicksburg, [Mississippi]--black doctor--his name was Doctor John Miller. And as my maternal grandfather [Charles John Alexander] was an arc welder, a skilled worker, he had social status, so his closest friend was Doctor Miller. And whites complained that Doctor Miller wasn't buying enough Liberty Bonds at the time, nor the black community so they were gonna teach him a lesson. And they pulled him out of his house and tarred and feathered him and then rode him on the rail. When my grandfather heard that he'd been captured, he left the roundhouse, went home, put on his best suit, filled his pockets with shotgun shells and went down to protect his friend. But when he came out the neighbors grabbed him and held him, until the incident was over.  Because they knew what kind of retaliation would come forth. My grandfather left for Chicago shortly after that. Got a transfer to the roundhouse here. He was working for the Illinois Central Railroad. And then sent for his family. And he never went back to the South and could never speak of the South without cussing. He had been born in--on a horse farm near Paducah, Kentucky. And it became what was known at the time as a traveling man. He left when he was fourteen years old. He worked on Mississippi riverboats. Because of his background on a horse farm, he became a wrangler. The difference between a wrangler and a cow hand is the wrangler looks out for the horses. A herd of horses that the cowboys used. And he was on several cattle drives from Texas to Kansas. He was a jack-of-all-trades. And he became the handyman at my grandmother's [Amanda Burrell Alexander] father's farm, around the turn of the century. They fell in love and got married. And then--this was in St. Joe, [Saint Joseph] Louisiana, which is right across the [Mississippi] river from Natchez, [Mississippi]. And they moved to Vicksburg because my grandmother's brother was there and had connections. And she used to say, "My man was a traveling man. At least he was 'til he met me." So he stopped traveling then.
Story_ID: 17991
Speaker 1: Do you know how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Yeah. When my mothe [Desoree Alexander Greenlee Pyburn] was featured as a Regalette [dancer] my father [Samuel Eldred Greenlee, Sr.] was the head usher at the Regal [Theater, Chicago, Illinois]. So I might well be a literal backstage brat. I could have been conceived backstage (laughs).
Speaker 1: Do you know how old they were at the point [unclear]?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) My mother--turned seventeen just after I was born in August and I was born in July. He was twenty. So they were quite young.
Speaker 1: And he had--Had he already been on the railroad at that time and had stopped that or--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No.
Speaker 1: that was later. That he was--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. That was [unclear].
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I think he joined the railroad around 1932, when I was about two years old.
Story_ID: 17992
Speaker 1: Your mother [Desoree Alexander Greenlee Pyburn]--Do you know what in her background made her artistically inclined? Or, you know. entertainment inclined? Because it didn't seem as though that was massive part, you know, of her background.
Speaker 2: Well Black entertainers at that time were highly prevalent. Unlike today when you wind up in condos downtown and in the suburbs. They couldn't live anywhere except in the ghetto. So we were in constant contact with those people. I grew up around the corner from the Pershing Hotel and the Evans Hotel. And the bands of Count [William] Basie and Duke [Edward Kennedy] Ellington and Earl ['Fatha'] Hines, Jimmie Lunceford were all staying there when they were playing in Chicago. And in addition to which many prominent jazz musicians had been living in Chicago, in my immediate neighborhood. So it wasn't uncommon for black people to have personal contact with entertainers. It's impossible today. Soon as they get a gig they leave the hood. At that time they didn't have anywhere to go.
Speaker 1: Well I meant--But I was wondering just in terms of her--where her artistic talent come from? Was it-- You know, because it didn't seem--You know--That's--I  was just wondering was there any performers before in her family? Or was this perceived  to be a natural side God-given talent?
Speaker 2: Well my grandfather [Charles John Alexander] was a gifted self-taught musician. He played banjo, guitar, harmonica and mouth harp. And he was a good singer. So I grew up with music--surrounded by music. You know. He used to get out the harmonica and sing, sing folk tunes. And as I recall coming up, because he was from Kentucky he loved western music. You know. One of his favorite groups was the Sons of the Pioneers. And he was crazy about Hank Williams. So every Saturday we heard the Grand Ole Opry [on the radio]. And then shortly after that Reverend [Clarence H.] Cobb's program would come on. We listened to that. Sister Rosetta Tharpe.  And Studs Terkel had a blues show. So from childhood I was introduced to jazz, blues and gospel.
Speaker 1: And country.
Speaker 2: And country. Yeah. And that's relatively rare for somebody black. So yeah. I've got a good grounding in country music and have a strong appreciation for it. I don't listen to it a lot except when I'm driving through the Midwest or the South.  'Cause that's all you can get on the radio. You know. It's wall-to-wall country. You from Ohio, you know that (laughs).
Speaker 1: I'm from Johnny Cash country (laughs).
Speaker 2: (laughs) There you go. There you go. People don't realize how pervasive country music is. It has a rare access to national media.  But it's probably listened across the country by more people than other form of music.
Story_ID: 17993
Speaker 1: Tell me what, you know, some of your earliest memories were of growing up. And you were born on--give the address--I mean of the house.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Oh wow! I guess we were somewhere on the South Side maybe around in the forty hundred block on South Indiana [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois]. I was born in St. Luke's Hospital that was on 12th and Michigan at the time.  Right next to the Illinois Central Terminal.
Speaker 1: Can you tell that story that your father did?
Speaker 2: Well my grandfather [Charles John Alexander] was probably a 'quadroon'. He looked white. And like many light-skinned blacks, he was super black. And he loved to break down segregation. When he got on the train coming north, you know, he just waited until the next station and went down, and went and sat in the white section, challenged the people to do anything about it. So he decided that he was going to break down segregation in St. Luke's Hospital. So he went down there with my mother [Desoree Charles Alexander Greenlee Pyburn], who was also light enough to pass. And they let 'em--let 'em on in. You know. And I can imagine the looks on these people in that delivery room when this brown-skinned baby came out. They were outraged. And when my family came down to view the baby, they had to come--go up on the freight elevator. So I come by my militancy naturally. I grew up among militants. My family were strong union people. My Uncle John [Miller Alexander] used to fight the goons during the [Chicago, Illinois] stockyards strike during the [19]30s. And I had any number of radicals who came through the house. So I'd sit at their feet and get conditioned.
Speaker 1: Now they weren't called radicals at the time. Weren't they called race men?
Speaker 2: Race men. He was a race man. But they were also radicals.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) They were radicals.
Speaker 2: Yes. They were communist.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Communist. Okay.
Speaker 2: And Wobblies. [International Workers of the World] You know. They were 'race men' too. But they were--as far left as you're gonna get on the spectrum. So I came in contact with those union organizers. They were race people across the board. My grandfather couldn't stand Uncle Toms. You know. And he thought the moderates were sellouts. And so do I. How are you gonna be moderate about racism? You know. That's like being moderate about death. I can't understand it. Either you oppose it or you accommodate to it. Is that what moderation is? Uh-uh.  I had to deal with that. Pretend to be a moderate.  You know. I recall when I was in New York, this sister was a director.  She was putting up a reading. She said, "Sam can you act?" I said, "How do you think I lasted for eight years in the foreign service, if I couldn't act?" But my militancy goes all the way back to childhood. I just became more and more radicalized by contact with racists.
Story_ID: 17994
Speaker 1: I was raised in working class comfort. We were neither poor, nor middle class. My family was what my brother used to call, the yard slaves. You know. All we know about are the field slaves and house slaves. But the yard slaves were the skilled workers. The blacksmith, carpenter, the seamstress, the people who actually were the glue that held the plantation together. The same was true with my family. They were hard working upwardly mobile people. Seldom had any formal education. My Uncle John [Miller Alexander] started out in the stockyards. He eventually began driving his own taxicab. Bought his own home. And my Uncle Bob [Robert Walter Winfrey] started out pressing clothes in a large plant. He used to be on the early shift. He'd come home around 3:00, take a nap, get up and my grandmother would fix him--something to eat. Then he would walk down to the next block and work pressing clothes in a cleaner. He eventually became the owner of the cleaner. My stepfather [Les Pyburn] started out as a hairdresser and he eventually owned his hair dressing shop. I had one uncle [Ulysses Grant Alexander], who was involved in the rackets. He worked in a policy station across the street from where we lived [on Chicago's South Side]. Aunt Chic [Alexander] was the manager there. So there was at least one racketeer in the family. The rest were all church going, hard working people.
Speaker 2: And you know--well, your mother [Desoree Alexander Greenlee Pyburn]. You said, she was away the first ten years of your life.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: So who was doing--raised you?
Speaker 1: The whole family. I was raised by an extended family. Until I was ten, my grandfather, my maternal grandfather [Charles John Alexander'] and grandmother [Amanda Burrell Alexander] were in the house. My grandmother was a true matriarch. She ran the show. My Aunt Alice [Alexander Winfrey] was there. Uncle Bob was there. Uncle John. So I had strong role--male role models as well as women raising me. You know. It was also my father's mother. He never lived more than five minutes walk in the neighborhood. So she was there too. You know. You can call me a mama's boy. I was raised by strong--four strong mamas. You know. And I had almost idylllic childhood.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Hmm.
Speaker 1: And a relatively miserable adolescence.  But all adolescents go through that. It was understood that I would get an education. They couldn't afford to send me to college. And it was taken for granted that I would figure out some way to do it on my own. And I did. I had a partial scholarship track--tracking cross-country at the University of Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin]. I never got a full scholarship, although I was a star, because of my militant activity on the campus.  Coach hinted that if I just cooled it, I could get a full scholarship and I laughed in his face.
Speaker 2: I wanna go back though. Just a little bit to the early memories. I'm talking about five, six, seven, eight--you know, that time period. You know. And I'm wondering, you know, what was the--what was the household growing up? And what was the neighborhood? I'm just trying to figure out what formed you as a person.  I'm getting some sense of that. But I just wanna get a little bit more.  What--?
Speaker 1: Until I was ten, I lived around 58th and Prairie [Chicago, Illinois].  That was a pretty rough neighborhood. We moved twice specifically so that we could--my brother and I could go to school on a full shift. The black schools were overcrowded. And I recall that when I went to Bet-, Betsy Ross [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] there was a white school that was only-- had only half attendance. That we could walk to in five minutes.  But we couldn't. So we went on a split shift. I went for three hours in the morning--
Speaker 2: (Background noise.)  (Simultaneously) Stop just a second.  Okay.
Speaker 1: And my brother for three hours in the afternoon. Then we moved so that we could go not to Betsy Ross but [William W.] Carter [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. And a year after we got there, they went on a split shift. So we moved into much smaller quarters on 63rd and St. Lawrence in West Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois]. So that we could go to McCosh Grammar School [James McCosh School, Chicago, Illinois], that had a full schedule. In effect the first five years of my education was divided in two. I can't count worth a damn to this point, as a result. And I've been angry about that every since. But in McCosh about sixty percent of the faculty were strong black teachers. And they picked me out as being bright and they got on my case. I never will forget Mrs. Maybelle Campbell (ph.), who taught English, in the seventh and eighth grade. And we used to be required to write these little essays.  and inevitably I'd be the first one finish. Remember those little blue books they'd pass out? She'd look at it and grade it. I might get a ninety or ninety-four. And she'd give it back to me and make me do it again, until I got a hundred. I couldn't understand that. You know. Everybody else was getting nineties, eighty-fives and the rest of 'em. They didn't have to do it over. So one day I asked her after class, I said, "Miss Campbell, how come I'm the only one got to get a hundred?" She said, "Because you're gifted, Samuel. Now do you want to run with herd or soar like an eagle?" After that she didn't have to give it back. I sat there until I got a hundred. But she's the first person who instilled the sense of perfection. That close is not good enough. Perfection is a goal in terms of your work. It might be unattainable, but you get as close to it as is possible. I'll never put a work of mine out there until it's satisfied--until I'm satisfied. And I've threw away more good work than most people write.
Story_ID: 17995
Speaker 1: I did not grow up in the stereotypical family of black literature.I did not grow up in grinding poverty a la Richard Wright and James Baldwin. Nor did I grow up in a professional middle class affluence. I fell in-between and I emphasize that I grew up in a working class comfort. We were not poor. I never missed a meal.  Not even in--during the Depression because the family came together, and lived under one roof, and pooled their resources. We were a lot more comfortable than most of the people surrounding us. Then we moved into West Woodlawn, which is a--was a strivers community. They had affluent middle class. They had poor people. Most of the people were somewhere in-between. And I remember somebody took me to Strivers Row in Harlem. I laughed. I said, "I came from a strivers community that's bigger than Harlem. I don't know what y'all are talking about." They were all hard working, upwardly mobile people. And I took on those values. Hard work has never frightened me. I've done every kind of [unclear] job, you can think of.
Story_ID: 17996
Speaker 1: Your brother. What about him? Give his name. He--You were the oldest. Right?
Speaker 2: Yeah. We were only 15 months apart. And my mother dressed us as twins, until we were around 11 or 12 years old. We bonded. We were very close. We were like twins. We could read one another's mind. I was the gifted athlete in the family. He was an excellent swimmer.  But I was an all around athlete. He was the studious one. He got the grades. I just--did just enough to get by. You know. I didn't become a scholar until my last couple of years in, in college. When I finally got into work that intrigued me and challenged me. He was the president of his graduating class. And I was the prom king of mine. So that shows the difference. You know. I was on the frivolous side. I ran track and cross-country and was on the swimming team. He was on the swimming team. And he went to University of Illinois in Champaign/Urbana [Illinois]. And I went to the University of Wisconsin in Madison, [Wisconsin]. And because I got the scholarship, it meant that what little funds available from the family--the lion's share could go to him. And so it balanced out. We both--he dropped out in his sophomore year, joined the [United States] Air Force. He was in the Air Force for eight years. Most of the time in Germany. He returned to University of Illinois [Champaign/Urbana, Illinois]. Got his degree in sociology and became a social worker. Towards the end of his career, he was in politics, he was chief of staff for a succession of aldermen, in the 20th Ward--which is Woodlawn, where I grew up and where I still live. He died of cancer about eight years ago.
Speaker 1: And his name?
Speaker 2: Donald Maurice Greenlee.
Story_ID: 17997
Speaker 1: You were, you know, talking about the, you know, at one point you were talking about a teacher who--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: motivated, you know, pushed you on. Were there others--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) She was only one of many.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay.
Speaker 2: At one time, I told my mother, I said, "They're picking on me." She went down and talked to the teachers. She said, "No.  Buddy, they want--they just want you to do better. They think you're gifted." And I said, "Well why didn't they tell me that (laughs)?"  From that point on, I, I--I rode on their input. You know. Miss Edith King was arts oriented. And so she developed the artistic skills that I had. At one time, I didn't know whether I wanted to be a painter and sculptor or a writer. But constantly got pulled towards the printed world. And my earliest publication was as editor of the fifth grade newspaper--I mean newspaper we put out in the sixth--or the seventh grade called, The McCosh Flag [McCosh Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. I recalled Gwendolyn Brooks asked me one time, when did I know I was gonna be a writer. I said, "Oh, around eight or nine years old." She seemed surprised. She said, "Well, I was around eleven or twelve." I said, "Better late than never." And she cracked up (laughing) ! I could--I had that kind of relationship with, with Gwen, we teased one another back--back and forth. And most of the pictures of Gwen shows her in the studious and stoic mood. But she was funny. She could have done s- stand-up. She had a wry, ironic, understated sense of humor. And she could keep you laughing for hours at a time.
Story_ID: 17998
Speaker 1: What would you say you were like then? That's what I'm trying to get a sense of you as a young person. You were--You were--You described yourself as people seeing you as gifted.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: But you also said that your brother was smarter than you.
Speaker 2: He was more studious than me.
Speaker 1: He was more studious. Okay. Not smarter but more studious.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) He may have been smarter.  But he got better grades because he worked harder for them.
Speaker 1: Hmm. So were you like a dreamer? Were you introspective? Were you rambunctious? Were you? You know. What, what--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) All of those things. I'm definitely a dreamer. I spent hours alone, reading books. I was also a rambunctious player on the--on the playgrounds. The people in my immediate neighborhood didn't like to play with me 'cause I played too hard. But there were some tougher kids that I used to gather with at the McCosh [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois] playground. I found--I found my metier with them. They liked to play hard. And so did I. So I used to play softball and, and touch football with them. And I could finally vent my hard physical attitudes. But I was both. I guess you might call me a gregarious loner. I need and--a lot of solitude. But I also like to be out among people laughing and joking, and what have you. 'Cause I'm almost schizophrenic that way.
Story_ID: 17999
Speaker 1: Did you ever dream of, you know, what you wanted to be? Or did you dream--? I mean any--You know. What were the thoughts going through your head?  What even [unclear]--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I knew I wanted to be a writer. I wanted--My strongest--I had one mentor, Wendell Smith, who was a pioneer sports writer. He started out with The Chicago Defender [weekly African American newspaper]. Then worked for The [Chicago] Daily News and finally wound up as a columnist for The [Chicago] Sun Times. And he was probably one of the top sports writers in the country. And he and my mother were close friends, in fact, I think they had gone to high school together. And when I was Sports Editor of The Daily Cardinal, at the University of Wisconsin, [Madison, Wisconsin], I used to send my columns home. And my mother would take them around in her--in her purse, and when she ran into Mr. Smith, show it to him and he would pass along tips. And he would stop by the, the house and we'd talk about writing. So for a long time, I wanted to be a sports writer. In fact, my last journalistic job was as a stringer for Sports Illustrated in Amsterdam. I'd intended to go to journalism school.  But then I got accepted in University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. And they don't have a "J" School.  So then I just went on to graduate study in international relations and political science with a, with a minor in history. I minored in history in both institutions. So I guess I have the equivalent of a Bachelors in History and a Masters in poli-sci [Political Science]. But I always knew I wanted to be a writer, okay, I wrote all the time. I wrote in high school. I wrote in college. I wrote in graduate school. I wrote in the Foreign Service. And then--the stress of being surrounded by these closet bigots was such that I stopped writing.
Story_ID: 18000
Speaker 1: When I was in Thessaloniki in Greece, I was attending university--university there. But I was still in the Foreign Service. And in aftermath of [John F.] Kennedy's assignation, Duke Ellington was on tour throughout the Middle East. He had five--stops, the last of which would have been Greece. And I was eager then to see him, because I had known him since childhood. These square State Department bigots did a survey of the five Ambassadors of whether they thought that--thought--I quote now, "--hot jazz would be appropriate for Kennedy's funeral and, and mourning." Four of 'em said, "Yes." The fifth was the Ambassador in, in Greece,  name's [Henry Richardson] Labouisse [Jr.] and he was from New Orleans. So, you know, he loved jazz. Even though Duke decided to play that kind of music appropriate for the occasion and offered to write a requiem for Kennedy, they canceled the tour. He was the only one, out of the scores of people on tour, under the State Department grants to be canceled. I sat up all night. I said, "If they could do that to Duke Ellington. What could they do to me?" And I sat down that night and wrote the first chapter of one of my novels. And less than a year later, I was on the island of Mykonos [Greece]  writing. I quit. I said, "I've got to get out of here. These people have shown me exactly what they think about black people. This is one of the finest products we've had. And they treat him like that?" I said, "No way. I'm not sticking with these people." So I quit.
Story_ID: 18001
Speaker 1: The Chicago you grew up in, what sights or--what-- either sights or sounds-- [unclear]?
Speaker 2: The blues was everywhere. Gospel music. Jazz. And I recall the horse-drawn carts that passed through the alley that Oscar Brown, Jr., wrote a song about. The iceman. The man that sharpened knives. The man that took on old clothes. The fruit peddlers, and the rest, I recall that. That was through--until well into the '40s [1940s]. I recall the street singers. The people, who would wander through the ghetto when it was time--during the summertime playing blues and singing. It was one in particular that we called the 'Chicken Man'. He used to train a series of chickens to dance while he played and sang. I wrote a long poem about him. The music more than anything else is what I remember.
Story_ID: 18002
Speaker 1: In fact, there was a time, I wanted to be a musician and I was discouraged by my mother, who wanted me to be an attorney. So I wound up in show business anyway. And I was in pre-law at [University of] Wisconsin. I even spent one summer session in law school. And decided,  no way, I was gonna be an attorney. After briefing cases for a whole semester, I said, "Look. If I gotta do this kind of writing for a living, no way in the world I can do creative writing unless I'm a schizophrenic." What she had done is; she had gone to the library before I went to [University of] Wisconsin and researched. And gave me a whole list of prominent writers, who had also been attorneys. And that's why I went into pre-law. But I didn't stick with it. I said, "Nah. I'm not gonna be an attorney. I don't like what attorneys do. I don't like attorneys--with exceptions. I think they're parasites--like I say, with exceptions.  And also I'd intended to be a civil rights attorney. And when those vibrant people out of Howard [University, Washington, DC] got through with the (pause) the decision that broke down segregation I said, "Well they already did that. So I might as well do something else."
Speaker 2: [Unclear].
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) But that's what I would've been. A militant civil rights attorney.
Story_ID: 18003
Speaker 1: You were big in, in track, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And your friends at that time? Who were you sort of hanging with at that time in high school? You know. Who were your friends and [unclear]?
Speaker 2: Well as I said, they were the sons and daughters of working people. Some were poor. Others had a certain professional affluency. Among them was some really people who came into prominence. I went to high school with Nichelle Nichols, who was on Star Trek [television program] for years. I took her to her first formal. I went to grammar school, high school and college with Lorraine Hansberry [playwright]. I was in school--grammar school with Melvin Van Peebles for a while. He was Melvin Peebles at the time. Melvin put on the 'Van' when he moved to Amsterdam to give the impression he had Dutch ancestors. Melvin's been a scam artist since he was this big. Novelist Ronald L. Fair was a close friend of mine. So I was surrounded by ambitious upwardly mobile people. Major Robert Lawrence, the first black astronaut was in school at that time. James Foreman, who formed--what is it?  SLICK or SNCC [Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee]?  I--
Speaker 1: SNCC. .
Speaker 2: SNCC. We used to play in intramural basketball. I was a point guard and he was a center. And--he was one of the first people, who wore his hair long and natural. You know, at the time everybody wanted to have a very short cut and put on stocking caps to keep it down. But even way back in 1945, you know, he was showing his nationalistic militancy. And I wasn't at all surprised when he came out to be a firebrand. 'Cause he was, he was tough. He was tough. I made a voyage from being a NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] reformer to my present stage as a radical by watching what the United States was doing in the Third World. And I thought, "You can't reform these, these people. You can't reform this society. You've got to do something else." So--. Lorraine [Hansberry] was a radical. She was about as left wing as you could get your president of the Labor Youth League that the Department of State determined was a Communist front. Now whether she was an actual member of the party, I don't know but she was certainly a Communist. She left [University of] Wisconsin in her junior year,  to visited her parents in Mexico for a short while. And then joined Paul Robeson as a member of his weekly newspaper, 'The Liberator' [sic, 'Freedom'].  And when she was at Wisconsin, she was studying art.  But she was also writing for the [school] newspaper as I was. But when she put out [A] Raisin In The Sun, I wasn't surprise. But she had been drawn towards painting just as I had.  But wound up as an imminent writer. Her death at thirty-three was a real loss for the community.  'Cause she was not only a writer but a thinker--and mean as hell.
Speaker 1: Wasn't there something about her father that he--something happened to him and she never forgot it  And that sort of [unclear].  Something bad happened to [unclear].
Speaker 2: (shakes head) No--.
Speaker 1: [Unclear].
Speaker 2: She came from a, a middle class family. Her uncle [William] Leo Hansberry was a prominent historian at Howard [University, Washington, DC]. Her father [Carl Augustus Hansberry] had been an United States Marshall. He got off into real estate and started making money. And he brought up to the Supreme Court one of the first open housing cases that broke down segregation on the South Side [of Chicago, Illinois] dealing with restrictive covenants. So she came from an activist background and it was no accident that she became an activist herself later on.
Story_ID: 18004
Speaker 1: What people don't want to deal with is that activism wasn't invented in the [19]60s. It goes all the way back as far in our history as--as you can go. The manifesto ['Appeal to the Coloured Citizens of the World'] that David Walker wrote in the early 19th Century would indicate that this has been a progression all the way along. You know. We come out of proud tradition of activists. Martin R. Delany, Mary Ann Shadd [Cary], the Grimke sisters [Angelina Grimke and Sarah Grimke], Frederick Douglass, Sojourner Truth, Harriet Tubman, all the way down through Robert S.[Sengstacke] Abbott, Ida B. Wells [-Barnett], W.E.B.[William Edward Burghardt] DuBois.  We've got a whole group of people out there who think that they've invented the wheel, who aren't aware of our history and the kind of tradition of which I and others spring. Black history is not taught. It's not taught. What they call "Black History" is putting up the 'Ebony Honor Roll of Black Heroes'. Just dealing with prominent blacks is not about history. You know. What were we doing as a people? Who were we? What happened after so called Emancipation when certain--suddenly we were a people without capital, without land, without resource? We had to struggle to build whatever black community we have today. Those people were heroes.  But we don't hear about 'em. We only hear about those who attracted the attention of white folks. What about the ordinary people, who--like my great grandfather worked the land in Louisiana? A landowner in Louisiana at the turn of the century? That's phenomenal. But we don't hear about them. We are the inheritors of the slave narrative which was used as a propaganda tool by the abolitionists. They couldn't deal with the fact that Black people had been resisting in a non-violent way, as well as a violent way. They had to project 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' as if the entirety of slavery were black people being beaten down. A little known fact is that--is that in 1865, at the end of the Civil War or--or in 1860 at the beginning, one-third of the black population in the deep south in the slave states were not slaves. They were free. Some of them had never been slaves. It's immigrants from Haiti and other places. Others had bought their slavery. One of the things that white folks jump on is that the fact that many black people are listed as slave owners. Because they bought their relatives. They bought their wives. They bought their children. They bought their aunts and uncles and mothers. Now you believe they were slave owners? In the records, they're listed as having bought this person. They were buying their freedom. The idea that black people were slave owners is--is absurd. They did have a hand full, who were slave owners, who did own the people who worked their land. But in 90--8% of the cases, you were talking about people, who were buying the freedom of friends and relatives. But we don't know about that. Okay? To teach black history as if it's the Ebony Honor Roll of, of history is absurd. We got--Nobody's teaching history in any kind of depth. I didn't get these facts out of a classroom. I had to dig them out in, in reading and research. So black history is a joke. It's a joke. Nobody deals with real black history during Black History Month. It's the same thing, the 'Ebony Honor Roll of Black Heroes.'  And that's not history.
Story_ID: 18005
Speaker 1: How did you end up choosing? Or did they end up choosing you? Or did it relate to your, you know, sports?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Nah. I was a walk-on.
Speaker 1: You were a walk-on?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What do you mean you were a walk-on?
Speaker 2: I just went on out and told the coach I was a runner and he gave me some spikes and a uniform. And within a matter of weeks he found out he had a gold mine.
Speaker 1: But you're living in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So how are you getting to [Madison],Wisconsin?  I mean that's all I'm ask--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Of the universities that sent me their applications, [Madison] Wisconsin was the only one that didn't ask for race or religion. It was close to home. It had an excellent reputation as a educational institution. But that's what sold me. I said, "If these people don't care what race I am, that's where I got to go." And it was a liberal school.  But I found out when we were there that black citizens of Wisconsin couldn't get into the dormitory. There was no formal segregation.  You just put your application in and you didn't get chosen. So as President of the [local branch of] NAACP [National Association and Advancement Colored People], we fought for three years until finally the, the university agreed to take some action.
Speaker 1: Now Sam, this is in the [19]40s. Right?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: This is like [19]40--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) [19]48 to [19]52.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I graduated in [19]52.
Speaker 1: Okay. And when you went there how many blacks were part of that campus? You know, since you put up a [unclear]. But how many? And that's a totally different environment than the Chicago you had come out of.
Speaker 2: There were less than a hundred blacks out of a student population of 27,000. And that included Africans and Caribbeans. Wasn't many black people up there.
Speaker 1: You know, I find that almost unbelievable. You don't even think of Wisconsin--I find it unbelievable that even in the [19]40s--I'm just saying--See this is what people have these perceptions in the [19]60s. They don't have this perception that these things are happening in [19]48 in Wisconsin. That's all I'm saying.
Speaker 2: What thing?
Speaker 1: I'm just saying that they have an international population--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: in you know, a majority white institution.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: That's all I'm-- You know.
Speaker 2: Yeah. It wasn't very big, but they were there.
Speaker 1: And so what is that environment like for you? Because it's so different than anything you've experienced.
Speaker 2: It was different. It was like living on a different planet. But I took the opportunity to study white folks. I often say, "I majored in white folks." That was my first contact with them. That was--I had the ability to watch how they acted, how they dressed, how they talked, how they fought. And it's stood me in good stead when I finally got in the Foreign Service. You know. 'Cause I knew what to expect. I knew what their trains of thought were. And knew how to manipulate and anticipate.  So I don't regret for a minute having gone to white universities. In fact, I was--there was the struggle. You know, one part of me thought I should go to a black institution. And my decision was, "No, I'm gonna be in competition with white people so I have to know who and what they are. And I'm not gonna find that out at Howard [University, Washington, DC] or Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] or Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  So that's why I decided to go to a Big Ten school. And of the ones, I had acceptance from Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], [University of] Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa] and then going to [University of] Illinois [Champaign/Urbana, Illinois] would have been a cinch. Out of those five, I chose [University of] Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin]. And I don't regret it. I got a good solid education there. And--Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Are there ways that you felt you changed a little bit? I'm saying college is often, you know, acculturation step--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: But are there ways that you can [unclear]?
Speaker 2: Hmm. Yeah. I became a scholar at Wisconsin. Not a student but a scholar. But a--I mean that a student gets his degree and that's it. A scholar continues to study and grow intellectually. And I continued to do that. I dev-, continued to develop my skills as a writer. I'd been writing as I said, in grammar school and high school and college. I took one creative writing course and I never took another. It became obvious to me that these people were trying to put me in a box. You know. All this jargon, talking about technique and what have you. And I had two; the first was a fan of [Ernest] Hemingway. So he wanted all his students to write like Hemingway. I didn't have any problem with that. I was an admirer of Hemingway at that time.  And so writing in that style was fine. Then he became ill. And the next teacher came in, he was a [William] Faulkner fan. And you couldn't be further apart in terms of styles than Hemingway and Faulkner. And he wanted everybody to write, write like Faulkner. And it gradually dawned on me that--as a stylist I would be ruined by creative writing courses. You know.  And I run into writers now, who have degrees, MFA [Masters of Fine Arts] degrees in creative writing. They all write alike. You can't tell the difference without a scorecard. They all sound and read alike. And that's because they're put in this cookie cutter aspect. They're all taught the same. And in rare exceptions they're taught by wanna be writers, who can't write themselves. Who filled their head full of a whole lot of ideas about technique and the rest of it-and that's the way to write.  The great writers are all self trained.  [William] Shakespeare didn't go to creative writing school and neither did anybody else until the advent of the last twenty years.
Story_ID: 18006
Speaker 1: I went into the army with an ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] Commission as an infantry officer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And they assigned me--assigned me to the 'Dixie Division'.  31st Infantry, Dixie Division.
Speaker 2: Now why did you go into the ROTC?  'Cause that's a thing of choice.  Was it opportunity?  [Unclear].
Speaker 1: Because that's the only way I could avoid being drafted.  All right?  I was guaranteed a degree.  I couldn't be drafted.  And once I earned my degree, I was offered a commission as second lieutenant.  So that's why I joined the ROTC.  In fact I urged my friends to do that.  They didn't, and they got drafted out of college.  They targeted the blacks.  I know in Woodlawn, West Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois neighborhood] was this mixed community, middle-class oriented. Just across Cottage Grove [Avenue], it was white and predominantly working class. And they would fill the quota with blacks from West Woodlawn, regardless of their education and background.  So that the white boys didn't have to go in.  And I knew I was gonna be drafted.  I beat 'em to the punch.  I joined the ROTC and they couldn't do anything with me.
Speaker 2: Now how was that experience those few years?
Speaker 1: It was serious.  It was my first contact with Southerners. The Dixie Division had fought for the Confederacy.  The division flag is the Confederate battle flag.  The band marched in Confederate uniform.  Its headquarters is in Vicksburg, Mississippi.  And this was my first contact with Southerners from the Deep South.  And I was embattled. They threatened to court marshal me because I refused to wear the division insignia (points at his shoulders) up here and (unclear), a replica of the Confederate Battle Flag.  And I wouldn't wear it.  I was walking down post headquarters one day, and this major called me over and said I wasn't in uniform.  I asked him "Why not?" He said, I didn't have the division insignia on it. "Oh, I guess I forgot."  So I ducked him for about three weeks until he caught me again and I didn't have it on.  So he gave me a direct order to report the next morning in uniform.  And if I didn't have that on, he was gonna court marshal me.  I stayed up all night trying to figure out what to do.  And what I did is I went on in there without the insignia.  And he asked me if I was crazy.  I told him no.  I said, "I understand what that means to you. It's representative of a glorious past."  I said, "But what it represents to me is enslavement of my people.  And with all due respect, I'm not gonna wear it."  And he said, "Well I guess I'll just have to court marshal you."  I said, "Well I understand I can ask for civilian repre--legal representation under the Uniform Code of Military Justice."  He said, "That's true."  I said, "Well I'm gonna ask to be represented by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]." Now I was bluffin!  No way in the world the NAACP was gonna touch a case like that. They were pushing for integration in the army.  I mean--And here I was making a stance that did nothing towards that end.  But he didn't know it.  So I got transferred out of the post headquarters, and it was a different insignia so I put that on.  But I went through that kind of stuff all the way through.  You know, they were watching me every step to get--for an excuse to kick me out.  But I survived.  I had an honorable discharge.  I was discharged as a first lieutenant.  And I survived that, and had similar experiences when I was in the Foreign Service. The idea that the typical bigot was a beer-bellied, red-necked, semi-literate Southerner is--is ridiculous.  A far more dangerous bigots are the, what I call the politically correct closet bigots.  People who pretend that they're color blind, but have their own ideas about who and what we are as black people.
Speaker 2: Did you find that in the South, too?
Speaker 1: I didn't spend much time in the South.
Speaker 2: You didn't?
Speaker 1: Nn-no.
Speaker 2: So you didn't spend much time in Vicksburg.
Speaker 1: No I was born and raised in Chicago.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No I'm saying when you were sta- -You said that--Okay, you were going on another--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Most of my posts were in the north.
Speaker 2: Oh they were!  Okay, you said that--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) I spent some time in--No I said the headquarters of the Dixie Division were in Vicksburg.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay.
Speaker 1: I spent some time in Fort Benning, Georgia and at North Carolina, but we were first stationed in Camp Atterbury, Indiana, and then transferred to Fort Carson, Colorado, in Colorado Springs.  So although I was surrounded by Southerners, I wasn't in the South.
Story_ID: 18007
Speaker 1: So you decide to head back to Chicago and you--you said that you were originally thinking about journalism.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was thinking about going back to [University of] Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin] and studying journalism.  But I was encouraged by somebody--I don't know who it was.  Oh!  Yeah.  I ran in the Fifth Army track meet that was held at the University of Chicago.  Stag Field.  And Ted Hayden, the coach at [University of] Chicago, suggested I apply for graduate school.  'Cause see I had a year's eligibility left.  They had no problem with graduate students running in Chicago.  And he said, "Why don't you come here?"  And I thought, "That might be a good idea! It's a good school, I can continue my track career."  So I applied to Chicago, and I was accepted, and I ran for the university.  I earned three more letters there in indoor/outdoor track and cross-country.  I had a total of nine letters at Wisconsin and Chicago.  And in '51 [1951], I was honorable mention all-American.  I had Olympic ambitions.  But I was ser-, seriously inj-, injured in an automobile accident.  I came back but I didn't have the same quality of performance.
Speaker 1: Now when did you decide to go into international [unclear]? How did that come about?
Speaker 2: When I met Ralph Bunche at the University of Wisconsin as a junior.  He had been invited to speak.  I was president of the [local branch of the] NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  I contacted him prior to his visit and asked him if he would speak to the NAACP.  He was delighted.  And he spoke, and afterwards, we spoke and he suggested I join the Foreign Service.  That--His experiences hadn't been too, too well, but it was inevitable that they would have to recruit  black people as African countries became--independent.  So that's when I started--that was in 1951--and that's when I started having a specialty in international relations. In addition to which, I noticed a change in my brother [Donald Maurice Greenlee] when he had been abroad.  I mean he grew up in, in the [U.S.] Air Force.  He went out as a boy and he came back as a man.  And I was impressed by the impac-, impact of his foreign travel.  So I wanted to get out there and travel.  And I did.  I been around the world three times.  And I'm a traveling man.  You know. Any time you see me in Chicago, I'm broke.  Soon as I get some money, I'm gone--somewhere.
Speaker 1: You say that's in the family blood.
Speaker 2: Yes!  My grandfather was a traveling man.  My father was a railroad man.  So it's in the blood.
Speaker 1: Now when you--What is U of C like at this point?  Is it a, you know, is it--is Because--is it? How is it viewed in the community? I mean, how--What is it like? That--I mean, what is it like?  Is it like a laboratory?  Is it a, a liberal--you know, more a liberal institution?
Speaker 2: It was a liberal institution.  It's not now.  It's as right-wing as you can get.  But at that time, it had almost equal group of right-wingers and, and leftists.  And we were constantly clashing.  It was marvelous for that reason.  You know, to be exposed to the total spectrum of political thought.  And that's what was so great about it at that time.  But it wasn't until Hanna [Holborn Gray] came in [as University President, in 1978]; and her biggest move was when the students staged a sit-in, because of segregationist policies in the inst--in the university, and the land grab at, in East Woodlawn.  She had people take pictures, and she expelled everybody that could be identified in that, in that group.  Since that point, it's become more and more and more right winged.  But at the time I was there, it had the whole spectrum.
Story_ID: 18008
Speaker 1: [Ralph] Bunche was responsible for you even sort of being involved now--Was that--? Then that--Did that lead immediately to the path?  That and your injury, you know, after the crash--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: lead you to the path of saying you wanted to be in the foreign service?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I attended a recruitment session, both for the Department of State and for U.S.I.A. [United States Information Agency] and I decided on U.S.I.A. because of the kinds of things that they were dealing with.  Media across the board, cultural--programs--all of which I felt would contribute to me as a writer.  And I had no desire to be stamping passports in the Department of State for half my career.  So I chose the U.S.I.A.  And--I was writing my thesis on [Vladimir Ilyich] Lenin at the time.  So I didn't have any classes; I decided to go to Washington [D.C.] and scout the territory.  I thought I would get a job in the government until I completed my thesis.  And one day I wondered into the U.S.I.A. 1776 Pennsylvania Avenue.  One block down from the White House.  And so I went in, filled out an application as a clerk.  And the secretary looked at my credentials and said, "Wait a minute."  And she took me into the recruitment office.  Not to the guy who was gonna hire people as a, as a clerk.  And he was enthusiastic.  They'd been--He'd been looking for somebody black to go into a special programming--junior officer training program, which was designed to produce a professional cadre of propagandists.  And he urged me to apply, apply for that program.  I did.  I was called out to Washington for an interview.  And I remember the communal suit that my brother had had made when he was in, in Germany.  Whoever had a hot date wore that suit (laughing) .  There were about four or five of us who shared that suit.  And I took the suit and wore it for my interview.  And I passed the interview with flying colors. I was supposed to come in the following February.  But that class was canceled and I was called by the recruitment officer and said, "Look, you better come in--in July." So I went in prior to completing the thesis, not even thinking I could do it while I was in Foreign Service.  And a year later I was caught up in the Baghdad [Iraq] Revolution and writing a thesis was the last thing on my mind! So that's how I got in the Foreign Service.
Speaker 1: This is a pretty high point of your life then. Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: That experience there.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It was.
Speaker 2: Now who--Were you the only one in your class, black?
Speaker 1: In my entering class?  Yes
Speaker 2: Um-h--
Speaker 1: Yes.  I was the third black to go into the junior officer's training program.  And when I resigned in 1965, I was still the third.  So they weren't really serious about it.  I was telling one recruiting officer, that they were looking for blacks, and couldn't find any qualified."  I said, "Well where are you looking?"  I said, "Put me on the recruitments circle, I'll get you twenty in a year."  They didn't pick up on it.
Story_ID: 18009
Speaker 1: Now what, what training did they [unclear] prepare you for in the [unclear]? How did they--
Speaker 2: I was trained in all media.  Radio--television, which was just beginning to come into the third world.  Journalism, trained as a cultural officer in all aspects of the media.  The first two years, I was on probation.  My first post was in Baghdad.  And I found out later on that the staff had voted to have me dropped from the program.  Except during the revolution, I and the executive officer had to go across the [Tigris] river to lead a U.S.I.S. [United States Information Service] family back across the, the river.  And we brought 'em back across under fire.  And I was recommended for a medal.  And, of course, you can't fire a hero!  So I got through that period.  And then the next time, I was awarded the Meritorious Service Award--the third highest award in the U.S.I.A.  So I was an authentic hero. So I survived probation.  And after that, it's like being a tenured professor.  Once you get in the Foreign Service, it's almost impossible to fire you. And my first post was Baghdad.  I survived the revolution there.  I went to East Pakistan, which is now Bangladesh, and I was there when Ayub Khan ordered his coup.  And my third post was in Jakarta, Indonesia. And I was there when the U.S.I.S. [or the Central Intelligence Agency who were supplying aid to Indonesian rebels] tried to assassinate President Sukarno by a pilot flying, flying a MIG jet--they attacked the palace.  And he was supposed to have had a staff meeting in one wing. But being the playboy he is, he canceled the meeting so he could dilly dally on the other side of the, the palace with one of his mistresses.  So they blew up the empty wing.  And I happened to know the pilot, because I was going out with his sister.  His name is Henk Maukar and his sister was named Sylvia [Maukar].  And they were both  Manadonese separatists.  They were trying to break away Manado was in the Moluccas [islands, Maluku province, Indonesia] and they were trying to break away from Indonesia.  As it turned out, she pretended to be a socialite and dilettante, but in effect, she was the commander of the underground separatist army in, in Java.  I got--caught up in, in the politics simply because I was in love.  And I detailed that in my third novel, 'Djakarta Blues.'
Story_ID: 18010
Speaker 1: What is it?  This blues theme.  (laughing) .  I got to get-back to this blues theme is an interesting theme.  Baghdad Blues.  This is--I want to know--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well as my second wife said, I'm a blues man! Okay, I incorporate all of that--all of what that meant.  I'm steeped in folk culture, and folklore.  I identify most with the black urban masses.  My orientation is towards the blues.  I've been influenced by the blues and by those writers who have also been influenced by jazz and blues.  And one day Yvette, my second wife--was an actress.  And we met when she was in a road show of 'colored girls' ['for colored girls who have considered suicide when the rainbow is enuf'].  And as I told Ntozake Shange last week.  I said, "I saw that thing so man-, so many times, I could resi- recite it from beginning to end."  Because I was courting Yvette.  At the time when I was courting Yvette, Sam Jackson was courting his present wife, Latonya Richardson. That's how I met Sam.  And several of 'em went to a woman's' prison in, in New York State to meet the women prisoners and perform some of the stuff from 'colored girls.'  And I went along.  And I was sitting in the audience, and one of the inmates said, "What's his name?  He looks familiar." And I said, "Sam Greenlee."  Said, "You wrote 'The Spook [Who Sat By the Door]?"  I said, "Yeah." They all--went up the wall!  And Yvette said, "My man is a blues man."  And I am!  I sing blues!  When I'd run out of money in--in Greece, on the island of Mykonos, I'd go into the Greek clubs and sing the blues, and they'd pass the hat.  And I'd make enough money in three days for three or four months more living.  Go on back to Mykonos and start writing again.
Story_ID: 18011
Speaker 1: I was a propagandist.  As a cultural officer, I would produce the shows of traveling--artists.  Okay. Musicians, dancers, painters, writers who would be recruited by the [U.S.] Foreign Service to tour various companies and countries.  And I would have to set up the whole program, rent the theater, do the advertising and promotion, and meet 'em at the airport, and be sort of the roadie while they were there, and take 'em back.  And that honed my experiences as a, as a producer.  It wasn't difficult.  Because I had been exposed to show business by my mother.  And I used to help her when she produced shows. So that just honed it.  I also work in, worked in the press section and honed my skills as a journalist; radio section--radio.  I worked with some of the documentary filmmakers who would come out and shoot films to be circulated.  So it was intensive training into what I eventually became.
Speaker 2: So this was a nice gig in a lot of ways then.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah!
Speaker 2: It was nice then.
Speaker 1: It was fantastic!
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) The only thing bad about it was the white folks I had to deal with.  And since I was socially ostracized, I only had to deal with 'em in the office.  You know.  After office, I got out among the people and made friends and made companions among the Indonesians, the Arabs and the Bangladeshi. And it was, it was marvelous!
Speaker 2: And what were some--and also at this time, and even later years, black entertainers that was of course--(unclear) no room--Did they choo--But they had criteria about who they found acceptable and (unclear), right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So who were some of the people that, you know, came, that were black (unclear)?
Speaker 1: The Golden Gate Quartet, [pause] The Step Brothers, a tap-dance team.  Who else?  Had a classical pianist--what was her name?  Natalie Hinderas out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Her name was actually [Natalie] Henderson, but she didn't think that a black classical pianist was gonna be accepted.  So she gave herself a Latino name.  She came through.  Betty Allen, the [mezzo-]soprano, performed in, in Greece. There weren't many, but they had some.  [Wyatt] 'Bull' Ruther came through with Buddy Rich's band; Eugene Wright, who was a Chicagoan and a bassist, appearing with Dave Brubeck when he came through.  And so I was locked up with the black artists as they came through.  'Cause (1): it was my job and (2): I would've done it anyway.
Story_ID: 18012
Speaker 1: What did you learn in terms of your appreciation for that area and thatculture--[unclear] They're different.  Those were different cultures.
Speaker 2: I served in three Islamic countries in a row: Iraq, East Pakistan [later Bangladesh] and Indonesia.  And culturally, they're diverse.  They're all different.  The only thing they have in common is that they're all Islamic.  In the mosque, everybody prayed the same way.  Once you come out of the mosque, the religion takes on the atmosphere of the culture.  And--which is why we keep on--when the people talk about the "Islamic world" on television, they're lying! There is no such thing.  It's no more monolithic than Christianity.  The religion takes on the cultural aspects of the people.  And that's why fundamentalist Islam is ridiculous!  Islam is fundamentalist by definition.  You talking about Islamic Extremist!  Everybody--Everyone, who is a Muslim, has to follow the dictates of the Koran.  The Koran is taken as the word of Allah as dictated to the prophet.  So it's not open for much interpretation.  So by definition, Islam although it came into being as a reformist religion, by definition, it's fundamentalist!  No such thing as an Islamic fundamentalist.  These people they call fundamentalists are fanatics, and extremists.  Everybody that practices Islam is practicing a fundamentalist religion which is not open to interpretation.  There are only two denominations among Islam: The Sunni and the Shi'a.  And that split came for political reasons, not because of the kind of reasons of the schisms between Protestants and the Catholics in Europe.  The ignorance of Islam in this country is abysmal.  Not just of Islam, but of anything outside of the United States. We're probably the most ignorant people in terms of geography, history and international relations on the planet.  The average American doesn't even know where Athens is.  You know.  I was in a taxi last week, and the driver--I always ask each one of the drivers where they're from. And he was from the Sudan.  I said, "Oh are you from Khartoum?"  He almost went off the road.  He said, "You know where Khartoum is?"  I said, "Of course.  It's the capital of Sudana."  He said, "When I tell most people I'm from the Sudan, they ask me if that's in the West Indies."  (laughing) .  And that's typical!  You know, I value the fact that I got up among these diverse communities--I grew up in a foreign city.
Speaker 1: What did you learn to appreciate about the cultures [unclear]?
Speaker 2: [Pause].  That they were more important in shaping the individual than the United States is as a secular nation. These people live their religion in a way that very few Americans do.  They are aware of their past and their traditions.  Because America has no past.  This country is four-hundred-years old.  That's an eye blink in history.  We don't have any history, therefore as a people; we're in denial about the places in the world, where they got saddles older than the United States.  So they are aware of their traditions, and their history.  They are aware, particularly among Islam, that Islam has had a proud history.  That during their golden days, they were far more advanced than probably any other group of people on the planet.  They were into astronomy; which is high mathematics.  Their numeral system opened up science for the West.  No way you could've worked out a nuclear formula with Roman numerals.  For themselves. the west picked up on Arabic numerals.  That's when the scientific explosion occurred.  They know that in terms of science and art, they know that in terms of military art, they taught the Europeans. They were mariners.  The stereotype of Islam as being a backward religion just minimizes education and [unclear].  And the Muslims are aware of their history, and are frustrated at the present conditions.  Which they blame to a great extent on colonialism and imperialism, and they know they're under the Hamerists, and a series of despots, most of whom the United States has supported. Nobody's talking about the why of what's happened here. Which is understandable because we're too caught up with the what, the fact that 6000 [sic] got slaughtered in such a dramatic fashion [in the terrorist attacks on America, September 11, 2001]. Nobody wants to know why. And when you suggest--get to the why, the assumption far too often is that you've approved of that attack.
Story_ID: 18013
Speaker 1: The end of your term [with the U.S. Foreign Service].  Why did it end?  You know, after the eight years.  Remember you said that, "I could have--you know, it's a job that But [unclear]."
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So how did it end up [unclear]?
Speaker 2: I already dealt with that [earlier in this interview].  When they [the State Department] humiliated one of my heroes Duke Ellington.  I decided to get out.  I had been encountering bigotry all along, without much difficulty.  I know how to handle bigots.  Like a snake, you don't strike, you hiss.  Make 'em think you might kick their ass.  And once you do it, the suspense is gone.  You just draw the line with body language, look, on occasion, a sound, keep 'em backing off.  But--What had happened is, I was spending so much time dealing with the bigotry that I got to a period when I wasn't writing.  And I had to make a choice. I was on a fast track.  You know, I had--One of the best white men I had ever--met.  A New Englander named Robert Lincoln.  He was from a solid WASP [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant] family.  I think he grew up in Massachusetts, had attended Groton [Prep School, Groton, Massachusetts], Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]; a man totally color blind.  I worked for him when--when he was in charge of the Middle East. I was one of his assistants.  And he became my 'Rabbi.' Under him, I got three promotions in a row, and was recommended for the fourth when I quit.  But, I recognized that if I wanted to be a writer, I had to get out.  And the Ellington incident was the catalyst.  I had been procrastinating and postponing and what have you.  So on that night I decided, "Hey, it's now or never."  Six months later, I was--I handed in my resignation.  And a year later, I was hard at work in a little house on the island of Mykonos [Greece].  I wrote for two years in Mykonos.  Out of it came 'The Spook Who Sat by the Door' and the other two novels that are in progress, plus 'Baghdad Blues' that I intend to reprint.
Story_ID: 18014
Speaker 1: You quit [the U.S. Foreign Service] in [19]65.  So are you aware of what's going on in the States?  You know, I mean I know you're working for an agency--Are you getting back at all?  Or are you rarely--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah between each post you come back on what they call home leave.
Speaker 1: For how long?
Speaker 2: About three months.  And that's written in the regulations because they want you to be in touch with your culture, and not become an expatriate inadvertently.  So yes, I was back, was in the hood.  I was talking to my friends and colleagues who were in it, many of whom became activists.  Jim [James] Montgomery and I go back fifty years.  There were others that I grew up with.  Three of 'em are judges now.  Jim is a prominent attorney, and most of my friends became active in the Civil Rights Movement.  So I had that access when I came back.  But what really sparked 'The Spook Who Sat by the Door' is I was here in '65 [1965] when Watts [neighborhood, Los Angeles, California] blew up.  Okay.  And my experiences in, in the foreign service indicated that these kinds of rebellions are always the forerunner of more organized revolutionary activity. So I anticipated the arrival of the [Black] Panthers, and the Symbionese Liberation Army [a group of left wing radicals], and the Republic of Black Afrika  [New Afrikan Republic, a group that called for a separate country for African Americans in the southern U.S.], and others--and decided to write 'The Spook Who Sat by the Door.'  In fact, I was tempted to do what I wrote.  Because I was offered a job which would have made me a--a roving street gang worker.  I would've been in touch with every prominent street gang in Chicago [Illinois].  And I recognized at the time, the, the revolutionary potential.  Now [Karl] Marx called 'em lumpen proletariats.  He hated 'em.  He said they have--potential only for reactionary activity--as was true among the fascists in both Italy and, and Germany.  But [Leon] Trotsky--Trotsky said, "No!  They have equal potential for revolutionary and reactionary activity."  And it was Trotsky who came into Moscow [Russia] when the workers were for forming Soviets.  'Soviet' means 'small group'.  And against the grain.  One of the reasons [Vladimir Ilyich] Lenin broke away from the Mensheviks and formed the Bolshevik party is the argument over whether or not they had to go through the Marxist evolution--from peasantry to the industrial revolution, the pro-, product of a bourgeoise society which would then be over-, overthrown.  Well, you didn't have any proletariat to speak of in Russia.  So when they had a revolution, they leapt over the Marxist aspect, Marx's diagram.  And that's what made Lenin and Trotsky so different!  They weren't following Marx's formula.  And the street gangs are the lumpen proletariat  of our society.  And they did have potential for revolutionary activity.  And some of 'em engaged in--revolutionary activity on a--on a primitive lay- level.  The Blackstone Rangers [AKA Black P-Stone Nation, later the El Rukn street gang]-, for instance.  And the Black Panthers recruited from the lumpen.  So I--I decided to write it instead of doing it. And the reason it's so detailed is, I was planning on doing it all the time.  So I just put those plans on paper.  And I know it was required reading at the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] Academy for years.  "This is what you're gonna have to face one day so you better study it."  And--
Speaker 1: What--let me--what was the real impetus--because--I'm trying to understand that someone should think that you were, you know, I don't--Who was trying to recruit you to do that in the first place?
Speaker 2: To do what?
Speaker 1: You said to be--
Speaker 2: Oh it was a private social service organization, they used to put people down with the street gangs, and allegedly to guide 'em into more healthy activities.
Speaker 1: So it wasn't the government.  It wasn't anyone--this, this was--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) They had both.  They had the [Chicago] Mayor's Commission on Youth Welfare that my brother [Donald Maurice Greenlee] worked with, and he worked with street gangs.  And then there was this private organization that offered me the gig that was funded by the YMCA [Young Mens' Christian Association].  Okay.  The truth is, they pro-, served as intelligence--people.  I mean, they were picking their brains.  Their reports would go right into the gang crime units of Chicago [Illinois].  They would go into the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency].  So they were agents.  Inadvertently agents.  Most of 'em didn't know that's what they were being used for.  Some of 'em did.  Some of 'em were trained infiltrators.  And when they busted gang members, they'd show up as witnesses, and then disappear into the witness protection program.  There was one guy named Leon--Leonard Sengali who worked with the Blackstone Rangers.  He's disappeared off the face of the earth.  And he was a, a key witness against Jeff Fort and others.  So he had been an infiltrator from the get-go.  One of the reasons the [Black] Panthers failed is they didn't have an underground unit.  They called themselves armed propagandists.  There's no such thing.  If they had done what the IRA does, Sinn Fein is above ground.  They're unarmed and they're propagandists, in a non-violent way.  The IRA [Irish Republican Army] is underground and secret.  If the Panthers had divided themselves along that basis, they might still be around.  But by the time they got into feeding hungry people and that kind of thing, they were still undivided.  The armed portion should have just disappeared--gone underground, while the others were carrying out the programs that had a real impact on the, on the community.  I know on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois], and the West Side, they were highly regarded because of the kinds of programs they were instituting.  And they'd like you to think that the Panthers were anathema to the community.  And there was a certain ambivalence.  But on the whole, the community knew these people were standing up.  They were risking their lives--for instance when Fred Hampton and Mark Clark got assassinated on the West Side, the community was up in arms.  I just met Fred Hampton Jr. a couple weeks ago.  He was on my radio show and he came out and read at my poetry series.  A fine young man, you know. And it was a pleasure to know him.  I never met his father.  We knew one another by reputation--he was functioning on the West Side and I was over here on the South Side.  I had a lot of respect for him.  And I'm hoping to meet his mother.  She's familiar with my work and, and with me. But I went through the mill and I survived.  I can't get a job commensurate with my education.  I've been turned down for teaching positions by scores of universities.  I know of at least one case when the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] intervened for a job I was qualified for.  And so I'm a street hustler so I've lived off the land.  Which is what a guerrilla is supposed to do.
Story_ID: 18015
Speaker 1: The book [unclear] understanding a lot of [unclear] you know, [unclear] it's so--in understanding of government--I mean I'm just saying--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: I think it's lasting and has--you know, for a reason. it shows a lot of your experience from the book.  I want to understand how [unclear] How did you end up [unclear]?  I mean what was the motivation behind it?  And why did you feel sad?  And was that--And did it come out of discussions with people, or did it come out of--? I mean, what were the formative things that brought it to (unclear)?  That's what I'm trying to understand.  Here you are--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Observing whites in their everyday lives.  As a student at the University of Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin], as a student in high school.  I was going to school with working-class whites who, in 1945, a number of 'em walked out, and said, they didn't wanna go to school with niggers any more. I had a working-class background of first- and- second generation white immigrants, and I went to Wisconsin.  And they were these direct descendants of Scandinavian and German Immigrants.  And I went into the Foreign Services and I was surrounded by white Anglo-Saxon Protestants from well-to-do families.  And I was watching them while they were watching me!  So I got a fairly intimate knowledge of white America.  And I wanted to put that in here.  One of the things is, a  white critic, at one time, said that all novels were direct descendants of the slave narrative.  I was enraged until I thought about it.  And said, "Yes, it is!"  "Yes, it is!"  'Native Son'  'Invisible Man', 'Beloved'.  All of 'em come out of that tradition. Which is designed to have a moral appeal to white people.  "Look how bad you treating us! Why don't you stop?" I decided I wasn't gonna write a protest novel.  You know.
Speaker 1: But did you decide it at the ti--that's what I'm wondering.  Was it a conscious--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It was a conscious decision.  Yes.  You know, you can't protest a tiger for attacking you.  'Cause that's what tigers do.  You can't protest white bigotry.  Because that's what whites do.  It's as natural for them as breathing!  So protesting it is just getting a scorecard so they can see how effective they are in acting out their bigoted practices.  In all of these protest novels, whether male or female, the protagonist in the last chapter discovers just what white racist America is, is about.  And they usually die!  I decided my protagonist would know this before he even came on the scene.  And would have made a decision about the--what to do about it.  He wasn't gonna go through the whole book, and suffer the slings and arrows of white racist bigotry, and discover in the last chapter, "Oh my God!  This is the way these people really are!" When he came on the scene, he already knew.  And he had a plan.  That's what made him so different from 'protest novels.'  When people would tell me that " [The] Spook [Who Sat by the Door"] is a protest novel, I'd just chuckle.  It's not.  It's a conscious departure from that.  Put it another way: Suppose this man had been the younger brother of Bigger Thomas [protagonist in 'Native Son'], who had gone to college.  Or the younger brother of the unnamed protagonist in Invisible Man, who wound up living in a sewer.  And suppose he learned from then and observation what they didn't learn until the last chapter.  In the first case, Bigger is executed.  In the second--case, the man has just disappeared, off the face of the earth, out of frustration.  Protagonist Dan Freeman is not frustrated.  He's not uptight about white America.  He knows exactly who they are, and he knows exactly what he wants to do about it.  So the scene is Promethean.  It's about Prometheus who goes and steals fire from the gods and takes it back to the people.  Okay.  In the first part of the book he's Sisy- Sisyphus. That's the Greek hero who was doomed to roll that rock up to the top of the hill and it'd roll right on back down.  So while he--while he's in the Foreign Service learning the tactics, he's rolling that rock up the hill.  But when he gets back to the ghetto, he's Prometheus.  He's stolen fire--from the gods--and he's teaches 'em how to use it.  And I think that's a metaphor for-- not necessarily for armed struggle, but for the resistance that we have traditionally made, going back to slavery.  We weren't just a passive people. At the very worst, we formed a bargain with them.  "Okay, if you don't treat us right, your barn is gonna go up in flames.  Your children are gonna die mysteriously.  Your crops are gonna be burned."  That's what enforced at least a certain benign nature.  Brutal slave masters were put out of business by the slaves.  And, of course, you had, as Herbert Aptheker [historian] has documented, well over three hundred and sixty slave rebellions during the time of slavery.  So the idea that we were the passive victims of slavery, is absurd.  We resisted every step of the way.  Just as we've resisted segregation and continued discrimination.  But, because of the tradition of abolitionist literature, which is designed to make a moral appeal to an immoral pe-, people, the tradition we come out of is to show how much damage is being done to us as black people by white people and ignoring the resilience and the resistance that is a hallmark of our survival here. Our literature is one-sided. Anybody came down here from Mars, they would think that all we did is say, "Please, Massa, don't whip me no mo'!"  Come on!  We do--did a whole lot more than that.
Story_ID: 18016
Speaker 1: After so-called emancipation, we were people, as [W.E.B.] DuBois has said "without land or without capital."  And what have we done?  Built our own interdependent economy, educated ourselves, moved up the social and intellectual ladder.  Okay.  How did we do that?  And to whose credit is it?  Didn't do it alone.  Our progressive whites have helped us every step of the way.  But we were at the forefront of our development.  And it's a tribute to the human spirit in terms of what our ancestors have done.  And all we have to do, today, is understand what they did in the past and replicate it.  Continue it.  We've got to develop our own economic institutions.  We have to develop our own media institutions.  All of which was done as early as the nine-, early nineteenth century.  We're looking around for new ways to do things.  Integration has been--the thing.  We know that's a failure. The integrationists won't admit it, but it is.  They're rolling up the affirmative action programs.  When we down, downsize the majority of the people who are fired are black.  We've got a whole--we have tens of thousands of black people out there who were earning five and six-figure salaries who are now being fired under this recession.  Nobody talks about that.  If we took the top one hundred black companies, combined their assets, it wouldn't make the For--Fortune five hundred.  And my attitude is simple. I'm an anti-capitalist by philosophy and temperament.  But I believe pragmatically, that if you're gonna live in a capitalist country, you better become a capitalist!  If you can't beat 'em, join 'em.  So when I talk about economic interdependence, it's because you can't have total independence within the context of an economy that's controlled by whites.
Story_ID: 18017
Speaker 1: When other ethnic groups develop a kind of economic institution, I'm talking about, they're applauded as acting out the American dream.  But when we do it, we're called separatists.  This society doesn't want us to succeed.  Why?  Because we're the reference point.  We're the reference point.  I don't care how--how bad off a white person is, they can always look to the black people and say, "I'm better off than they are."  So we are a palliative in the economy.  Racism--permits a distraction that the white rulers of this nation, all of whom are white, Anglo-Saxon, Protestant male--they'll give honorary membership to people like Condoleezza Rice [National Security Advisor for George W. Bush] and Clarence Thomas [Supreme Court justice] and others in the way that they had honorary whites in South Africa.  They'll have honorary males among the white females that they allow to come into promi--prom-, prom-, prominence.  But the ruling class in this country is made up of about five thousand white males who control eighty-five percent to ninety percent of the assets in this nation.  And racism has always been utilized to destroy every progressive movement in this country.  And the Europeans have learned that their immigrant non-white population is just as useful to distract people from what they're doing.  Its like a pickpocket.  He hits you on the shoulder while he picks your pocket.  We are the pickpocket's distraction here in this nation.  The assimilationists--there've always been people here who took the position of, "In order to survive in a white society, you have to become as white as they are. In terms of thought, dress, action." But the black masses have been too proud of their ownselves and their heritage, they've always resisted that.  They didn't wanna become white.  But the assimilationists won a propaganda victory when they posited integration as being the antonym of segregation.  Nobody wanted to be pro-segregationist.  But the antonym for segregation is desegregation, not integration.  Once they convince the community that integration and desegregation were polar opposites and could accuse those of us who knew integration wasn't what it was cracked up to be.  Then we said, "Okay.  Innovation--"  The way I feel about integration is it ought to be an individual t- choice.  If you wanna be out there and work for white folks all your life, hey, be my guest.  But there's another option.  That's to work within if not live within the black community and develop it economically, psychologically and across the board.  But those of who advocate that are accused of being 'separatists'.  In other words, we are engaged in self-segregation.  That's not the case-- anyway.  If you so-, show me somebody that's truly integrated in this society--I don't care whether you're talking about Colin Powell, or Condoleezza [Rice] what-cha-ma-call her, or anybody else.  They're tokens.  They're spooks who sit by the door.  The only way you can integrate into American society, is if you light enough to pass and become white.  Otherwise, you born a nigger, you live a nigger and you die a nigger.  And I found that out in the Foreign Service.  I looked around me--I, I thought maybe it was just my personality and temperament that brought on the kinds of difficulties I had.  But then I would watch the blacks that the whites pretended to be fond of.  And they had less respect for them than they had for me.  'Cause they were scared of me.  But they weren't scared of those other, other people who would suck up to 'em like puppy dogs. (drinks)  I have nothing but sympathy and compassion for anybody black who has to get up in the morning, send their children off to a public school system that's designed as a concentration camp complex, and not designed to educate anybody, go down to work for white folks from nine until five and come home and try to keep their lives together.  It's the kind of people that Albert Murray referred to as "Those of us who live daily lives of quiet heroism."  I know what integrated Negroes are going through. And it ain't no easy gig.  'Cause I used to be there.
Story_ID: 18018
Speaker 1: 'The Spook Who Sat by the Door' --Did you know you had a winner?  Did you feel you had something special when you wrote the last word on the page?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Sure I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.  I knew it was a hell of a book.  I knew it would be difficult to get it published in the United States. It proved to be that.  It was rejected more than forty times between 1966 when I wrote it and 1969 in March, when it was first published in London [United Kingdom].  Okay.  The first published black novel was published not in the United States, but in London.  The brother who wrote it [William Wells Brown] had to take it there.  And more than a hundred years later, I had to do the same thing.  Now it was an instant hit and bestseller in London.  It had three Book of the Year mentions in the London Times [the Times of London], the London Telegraph and the London Observer .  It garnered more than a hundred reviews, most of 'em favorable.  In contrast, in the United States, it was reviewed a half a dozen times by mostly by midwestern new--newspapers.  The normal venues of criticism ignored the book.  They didn't deal with it.  It was too radical! Scared'em! They knew that this was a--a possibility.  And with the [Black] Panthers in action, and people like Joanne Chesimard [Assata Shakur] and others engaging in armed struggle, they knew it was also dangerous.  The film [1974] was suppressed by the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation].  That film was financed, in the majority by--independent investors. Most of 'em black.
Story_ID: 18019
Speaker 1: You're living basically--you're still in Greece [after having finished writing his novel 'The Spook Who Sat by the Door' in 1966].
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Are you coming back and sending it to publishers here [the U.S.]?  Or what's...
Speaker 2: I'm sending it to publishers. You know, as soon as I get a rejection, I send it out again.  I met a young Englishman,  Alexis Lykiard.  He's a writer, and he had published several books.  An uncle and aunt had a house in Mykonos.  And he used to come out during spring breaks.  We had a mutual interest in jazz and blues.  And he'd come up in my house, and we'd smoke hashish and drink wine, and listen to music and talk about literature.  And I let him read some of 'The Spook who Sat By the Door.'  And  he said, "Man, I gotta help you get this published."  So he took a manuscript back with him and gave it to his publishers, and they rejected it.  And he passed it around to a half a dozen others, and they all rejected it.  And the next time he came to Mykonos, he said, "Look! Sam, I got a couple of friends of mine, Clyde Allison and Margaret Busby.  And they've been publishing poetry.  They're  friends--they both work for publishing houses, and they want to open up their own house."  And he said,  "Would you mind if I gave them your manuscript?"  I said, "No."  So he passed it along to them.  And when I came through London [United Kingdom] in [19]67, I was staying in Jame--in Jimmy [James] Baldwin's house.  He had rented a house in Chelsea on Tedworth Square.  I was staying with his sister Paula and his brother David.  Jimmy wasn't there. He was in Hollywood, trying to write a film script.  I think he was writing a film script on Malcolm X, that he was gonna produce.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And I was supposed to meet these two for lunch at a Chinese restaurant.  Well I didn't like Clyde Allison.  He was a typically pompous white boy, who was over compensating for the fact that he was trying to show me he wasn't prejudiced [unclear].  So I thought I could get a meal out of it. And then in walked Margaret. This fine sister--she was so pretty.  And she set down there, and she was articulate and well spoken.  She was born in Ghana.  And a couple of years ago, she was inducted as a queen mother of the Fante tribe. You know.  I felt when I was sitting there falling in love with this woman, "Where's the contract?" (laughing)  Though, they [Allison and Busby publishing house] published the book.  Started the country--company with fifteen thousand pounds, which amounts to about twenty thousand dollars, and brought me over to promote it.  And I'm a wind up toy.  you know, point me to a camera or a microphone and I do my thing.  Like I'm doing now.  And it kind of just took right off.
Story_ID: 18020
Speaker 1: You became celebrated in England [United Kingdom].
Speaker 2: Yes, and I still am.  And really I'm not here. You know.
Speaker 1: So how does that feel?  After that--I mean you had been sort of falling away in the--you know on an island--.  You know, I'm not saying you weren't social. But you were sort of falling away at that point as a writer.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So how did that feel?
Speaker 2: It felt good. It was fantastic. You know, here I was in one of the worlds capitals.  And I was being seriously taken as a writer.  And this was my first published novel.  I'd  been published in Negro Digest/Black World, prior to that.  My first publication in Negro Digest was in December 1966. And I published a half a dozen short stories, and some essays, and some critic, criticism.  So I was not unpublished.  But to have a novel take off in that kind of way. And to be taken seriously by people who read-- I mean the British are serious about literature in a way the United States is not.  It was fantastic.  And when I was ignored here in the United States, I wasn't surprised nor disappointed.  I just beat the drummer on, on the black side.  For instance Ellis Haizlip, had a talk show ['Soul!', on WNET television].  He came into being at the same time as Tony Brown. But he didn't last because he was too militant.  But he brought me out to New York, and I was interviewed by Jerry Butler , the "Iceman."  And at one point Jerry said, "Well look Sam, you said you want the brothers on the block to read this book. But at that price, they can't afford it."  I said, "Like I tell the brothers on the block, if you can't--can't buy it, rip it off."  And that took off. You know. They said, Whoa!"  The brothers say, "He don't--he ain't looking for no money, I can rip off the book. I better--I better check that out."  So the book first took root in the masses, which is generally the opposite way.  And intellectuals didn't get in, get into it until they were forced to, by the people that were working on a mass basis.  They were being asked about this book, and embarrassed, they had to go out and buy it and read it.  But most black intellectuals were too frightened to say anything about the book.  It was attacked by Larry Neil and Amiri Baraka, who was Leroi Jones at the time. Amiri has since come around, but I knew there would be some ambivalence in terms of the book.
Speaker 1: I'm surprised about Baraka.  I mean why--I mean, I am really surprised that you been attacked by him, at the time.
Speaker 2: It was territoriality.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Just before he was--he wasn't anymore Leroi Jones at that point, was he?
Speaker 2: He had just changed his name and his stance.  He was a cultural nationalist, okay.  And this guy [the protagonist of Greenlee's "The Spook Who Sat By the Door"] wasn't into cultural nationalism.  He was a revolutionary.  You know. He wasn't about, how you grow your hair, and I mean dashikis wearing, and the rest of it.  Because he would've  thought that was anathema.  You're making yourself a target when you let everybody know, by changing your name, and your dress, and your demeanor, where you're at.  He used his mask as a, as disguises.  And it's also territoriality. You know.  Baraka at the time wanted to be "THE revolutionary," you know.  And here comes somebody e-, a, along the way that he gotta share the territory with.  It was natural for him to make that attack and--he attacks everybody. He been on Spike Lee's case.  And he was--he's a very contentious little banty rooster. You know,  little runt of a dude.  Like--People like that over-compensate for their, for their size.  You know, unlike me, he was never an athlete, so bluff and bluster takes that place.  But I love the brother. You know, we've become close friends and companions.  When he attacked the book in Negro Digest, Hoyt Fuller called me up and asked me if I wanted to respond.  I said "Nah."  'Cause it was really nasty and a personal attack.  He said, "Why not?"  I said, "Long time ago, my grandfather told me never to get into a pissing contest with a skunk."  [Pause] So I didn't respond.  And in those attacks, my attitude was, "The book speaks for itself.  I don't have to defend me for having written it, and I don't have to defend the book. The book is its own defense.
Story_ID: 18021
Speaker 1: And later on, I formed a partnership with Ivan Dickson.  And we started raising funds as we, as we shot ['The Spook Who Sat by the Door'].  We couldn't get permission to shoot it here in Chicago [Illinois].  All the Chicago [Ilinois] scenes have been stolen by--with a hand-held camera.  So we were sitting in my bedroom and I was studying.  Ivan said, "Well how are we gonna get the Chicago flavor, if we can't shoot in Chicago?"  I said, "Look man, most of the stuff is in the alleys." And I said, "The alleys over in Gary [Indiana] look just like the alleys in Chicago.  These gray painted porches." I said, "You want that to be the focal point of your work?."  I said, "Let's go on over there."  "How we gonna get over there?"  I said, "Mayor [Richard Gordon] Hatcher [first African American mayor of Gary, Indiana] is over there."  Okay. And the brother who had written his biography--(Thinking) Damn if I could remember his name, [Alex Poinsett] He was a writer at Ebony.  And I knew him, and I picked up the phone and I call him. And I said, "Hey!  Look man.  I wanna get in touched with Mayor Hatcher." He said, "why?"  I said, "We wanna go over there and shoot 'The Spook Who Sat By The Door."  He said, "let me get on it."  A half-hour later, I picked up the phone, and a woman said, "Is this Sam Greenlee?"  I said, "Yes."  She said, "Just a moment. Mayor Hatcher wants to talk to you."  He said, "Sam, what you want?"  I said, "We wanna come over and shoot the film."  "When?"  I said, "In a couple of weeks."  He said, "Come on."  And they rolled out the red carpet.  You know, we had police protection.  The cops in the film were actual cops in uniform working as extras.  One of the reasons the riot scene was so effective, is the extras who were playing the rioters and the cops, they were patrolling these people's neighborhoods.  And this was the first legitimate chance they had to fire on a cop.  So them cops were fighting for their lives (laughing)  [unclear].  One day Ivan was shooting on the street and the Chief of Police came by and said, "Hey, would you like to have a helicopter shot?"  Ivan said, "yeah."  It would have cost one hundred fifty thousand dollars, two hundred thousand dollars for a helicopter shot. He picked up his radiophone.  Here comes the police helicopter, set down right in the street.  Some cinematographer took a hand--cameraman took a hand-, a hand-held camera.  And we went up, and we got about a quarter of a million-dollars worth of shots on that helicopter.  You see this is just an example of how black people have supported me because of what I say.  All right, there are those who opposed it, like Jesse Jackson for instance. He stepped in--a liberal consortium in Washington, DC, of middle class black professionals--an investors' club. And they had a proposal on the table, and they had voted to provide us with completion funds.  Somebody said, "Let's table that until we check with, with Jesse.  Sam's from Chicago [Illinois], Jesse's from Chicago. Let's check him out."  Jesse told 'em, he invoked the name of Martin Luther King! That, "Under no circumstances should you support this film because it's against all of the tenets of King, and the rest of it."  So, they didn't come up with the money.
Speaker 2: Well who came up with the money? You said [unclear].
Speaker 1: Doctors, attorneys, school teachers, school principles. We had one welfare mother who came up with a portion--dipped into her savings and came up with a portion of a share.  There were maybe a half a dozen white investors.  We never knew on Thursday whether we could meet the payroll on Friday. 'Cause the money was coming in [gradually].  That film couldn't have been made without independent black funding.  Nobody talks about that. 'Cause United Artists was the distributor, people assumed it was a Hollywood [California] production. It was an Anti-Hollywood production.
Speaker 2: But even--how did that even come about though?  You know?  I mean getting distribution is not the easiest thing.  And you gotta make the [unclear].
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: So how did--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) When we ran out of dough, we cut the action footage.  All right. So they thought they had a black exploitation film.  "Wham, bam, thank you ma'am." When they saw the rough-cut, they went right up the wall!  I told him. I looked the dude right in the face.  I said, "Look you asked for six copies of the script. If nobody bothered to read 'em, that ain't our hang-up."  But we were clever enough to know that we couldn't put the politics in there.  So we shot--we showed them twenty minutes-fifteen or twenty minutes of the action footage, and they thought they had one more "Wham, bam, thank you mam," black exploitation film.  By the time they found out, things were tied down in the contract.  And that's how it got out there.  The making of The Spook Who Sat By The Door is as intriguing as the book.  We were running a game all the way, straight down the line. Just like [Dan] Freeman [the protagonist] was doing.  I had to live the book--to get the film done.
Story_ID: 18022
Speaker 1: Back to the book itself. It took off in the streets really and among the movements. You know I'm talking about the students and on college campuses. Wasn't it?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was across the board.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) It was across the board.
Speaker 2: Yeah. The street people picked up on it like that.  People who don't ordinarily read books. I don't know how many people like--have approached me and said, "Sam, that was the first book I ever read from cover to cover. And you kept me on--up all night with it."  And one of the reason's intellectuals didn't think much of it, is that none of the intricate techniques that a modern novel is supposed to be involved with, was incorporated in the book.  I specifically wrote it in plain English that could be understood by anybody who could read a newspaper.  Alright.  And they worship obscurity; they worship experimentation.  Their  heroes are James Joyce and, and the rest.  And I'm writin' this book like it's a blues tale.  And a lot of people assume to this day that I'm a semi-literate, self-trained taxi driver or what have you.  When they found out my--y'know, educational, intellectual credentials, they're surprised.  'Cause I can usually match theirs in spade. But I didn't want to go there.  I was writin' for the masses.  And I did it with great success. And I'm proud of that.
Story_ID: 18023
Speaker 1: With the movie, did you find--Okay. So, how long was the making of the tape [sic, film]?  How long did--Had you started--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) We shot it in about ten weeks.  We closed down for three weeks.  We shot five weeks in Gary [Indiana], and another two weeks in Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: And the whole budget was then?
Speaker 2: A million.
Speaker 1: A million.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: That's a lot of money.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Back then that was a lot of money!
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That was a lot of money back then.  Yeah, but we went first class.  We had Panavision cameras. We had a full crew, a third of which was black.  That was a phenomenon back then, you know. There weren't many blacks who broke in to the industry.  And the product is there. It's technically a good film.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) That's true.
Speaker 2: And its well written, well acted, and well directed.  Ivan [Dickson] and I won--producers' award--the [NAACP] Image Awards for that year.  It was nominated for a number of other awards.  But because it was--being promoted by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]," they sta--the election committee stayed up until dawn, arguing about whether or not this--movie should even receive nominations.  Okay. Because it was an anathema in terms of the whole NAACP thrust  It's the only black revolutionary novel ever published. The rest are protest novels.  And I was hoping I would establish a tradition, but it's the only one out there. [Pause] That's incredible.  The assimilationists are in control.  The honor- honorary whites are in control.
Story_ID: 18024
Speaker 1: You asked me about tokenism earlier.  A token is somebody you hire, and sit down front in a prominent position, so that people can think you're integrated.  Somebody asked me, how I could refer to these people as tokens, because they wered obviously well qualified.  And I told them, "Look you don't understand the theory of tokenism."  I said, "If you find somebody--hire somebody obviously incompetent, you defeat the purpose.  What you do is, you hire the brightest person you can get. And then claim that those--that's the only one you can find.  And no others are around here, because you can't find anybody up to those standards.  That's what tokenism is about.  You don't want an incompetent tokenist. token.
Speaker 2: Now before--Okay.  I'm--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And all of the people I met--I mentioned, are highly qualified.  Colin Powell is brilliant.  So is Condoleeza Rice.  And contrary to popular opr-, opinion, the same is true of Clarence Thomas. He is no dummy.  None of them are.  Not only that, they represent a solid--aspect of opinion within the context of the black community.  I don't necessarily agree with them, you know.  But they certainly deserve to be where they are.  I'd love to sit down with Clarence Thomas and get nose to nose with him.  I think we could have a ball. The same with Colin Powell. Condoleeza Rice, I don't think so. You know.  But them other two, yeah, I can sit down with a bottle of wine or a bottle of booze and stay up until dawn, bumping heads. And have big fun.  But I don't have access to those kinds of successful people.
Story_ID: 18025
Speaker 1: Now--let's--Okay, so the movie came out.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: United Artists [Films, Hollywood, California] gives it limited, very limited distribution. Because they realize what they have.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right.
Speaker 1: How limited is limited?
Speaker 2: Oh. I don't know how limited it was.  I know they were making money, even through limited distribution.  But things started happening.  We noticed that an exhibitor, who would sign a contract for a three weeks run with an option to extend, would open a film on Thursday and be--be closed down on Monday.  Even though the box office records indicated it was making a huge amount of money.  Then reports started coming in, including one from the former manager of the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois], who was managing the theater downtown.  He sat me down when the film was there.  And said that he had been approached by two FBI agents, who tried to convince him to close the film.  Now they went in, you know, in a very benign fashion. They didn't go in bogartin'.  They would sit the exhibitor down, and gently tell him that this film was dangerous and could cause all kinds of difficulties.  And so I know of at least a half a dozen times when exhibitors were visited by the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation].  I also know from hearsay evidence that they sat down with the executives of United Artist and discussed UA pulling the film off the market.  UA says, "We don't have much money in the film, but we want to get that out, plus."  They did, and they closed down.  They closed down.  They sent a memo to the PR [public relations] man here saying only those films already in the pipeline will be exhibited.  They weren't putting any more out.  So in effect the film was suppressed by the Federal Bureau of Investigations, by the United States Government.
Speaker 1: And that's what year?
Speaker 2: That was in [19]75.
Speaker 1: [19]75 okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  And we shot it in [19]73. It was released Labor Day [19]74.  It was cut off after sixteen straight weeks on "Variety's [newspaper] Top Grosses."  The film was doing well.  If it had had its full run, I'd be a mill--I'd be rich.  But it was crushed in February and March of [19]75.
Speaker 1: Did you--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) And I've been underground ever since.
Speaker 1: Did you get any money off the film?
Speaker 2: $12,500 for my half of the screenplay.  That's it.
Speaker 1: And you--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I own twenty-five percent of that film, as co-producer with Ivan Dickson.
Speaker 1: Now where is Ivan Dickson now?
Speaker 2: Ivan is ill.  He just had a triple bypass, and he's back in Los Angeles [California].  He retired and moved to Hawaii, and bought a radio station there, and gave it a jazz orientation.  I talk to him from time to time.  But he's living in the [San Fernando] Valley in Los Angeles.
Speaker 1: Now why did you have to go underground?  Did he go underground?  He didn't go underground.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Because he wasn't the author.
Speaker 2: And he agreed not to sue.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: Alright.
Speaker 1: And you did not?
Speaker 2: I was out of the, out of the loop at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So they rewarded him-- They [United Artists] gave the rights back to his company.  He didn't do much to try to get it back out there.  And his reward was to have a lucrative career as a director of television.  So--I'm on welfare; he's a multi-millionaire. It's that choice. [softly spoken]
Speaker 1: Let's talk about--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I don't regret it.
Story_ID: 18026
Speaker 1: I earned a comfortable living on the college lecture circuit for about ten years.  And that's how I survived.  Doing that and selling books out of my shoulder bag.  But I guess about the last year I had any real income was 1980.  I earned about eighteen thousand dollars. After that it dropped off gradually to the point where I just wasn't getting any lecture gigs anymore.  A whole new crop of black students came in. And by this time they were cutting their budgets back.  You know, they had huge budgets during the[19]60s and [19]70s, which was designed to distract them from the sit-ins, and takeovers, and what have you.  But as soon as they calmed down, a whole new crop of students came in, who were not militants.  And came from moderate political families. They just didn't have an interest in 'The Spook Who Sat by The Door.'  But there's been a recent resergence of interest.  The young kids out there now, are overwhelmed by it.  By the book and the film, when they can get a hold of it.  So I imagine I can get back on the lecture circuit and start making some money again.
Story_ID: 18027
Speaker 1: You lost your voice though too  in this, in this process of [unclear]. And I'm wandering what happened as a part of that?  That's all I'm--[tape skips] You know, you had this very rich period that, you know, maybe in this Greek island it seems like.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: You know, this whole--You have this rich period.  You became--you came, you know, unconventional. But most people--But Black people who have come out of the unconventional, it happened in Europe, you know, it doesn't happen in the States.  You had notoriety, you know, even though underground.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: But a great deal of notoriety.  And they're--[unclear].
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I didn't lose my voice, I lost my market.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) You lost your what?
Speaker 2: The market.  I hadn't been able to publish anything since 1976.
Speaker 1: But what I'm saying is that, you felt that it was part of--What I'm saying about losing your voice Sam, is that did you--you felt almost under attack.  That's what I'm saying.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I was under attack
Speaker 1: Well this is my point.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously laughing].
Speaker 1: Okay, it was almost a survival mode versus--I'm just--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: I'm--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm
Speaker 1: Okay I'm trying to--I'm not trying to put words in your mouth.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: I'm trying to get what happened.  So--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, I had my phones tapped, my mail intercepted, target of character assassination, declared a non-person, couldn't get no [unclear] )published or produced.  Couldn't get a job teaching, or any kind of job commensurate with my education.  I finally got so fed up; I just, I just left the country again.
Speaker 1: And what year was that?
Speaker 2: I left in [19]84 and I went to London [United Kingdom].  And I called my first wife, who was living in Amsterdam [the Netherlands] at the time.  And she invited me over for a weekend. and we were together until about a year ago.  A long weekend.  We first settled on the island of Ibiza, [Spain].  She was living with me in Mykonos [Greece], prior to our getting married.  And it's been a lengthy relationship.  It's run since [19]63 when I met her.  We fell out, we were divorced, but we're still close friends.  Then she bought a house in the south of Spain, on the proceeds of brother's death.  She was a direct inheritor. And I--We stayed there from [19]85 until [19]88, when I came back to the States.  And among that period, I had to nurse my brother [Donald Maurice Greenlee] through his terminal illness.  I left again in [19]95 and went back to Spain. And I was there until 2000 when I went to Ghana, and stayed for 8 months.  I contracted malaria, so I had to come back here to recuperate.  And I've been back ever since.
Story_ID: 18028
Speaker 1: [19]84 to [19]88 I was in the South of Spain.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Before that, for a short while in London and Amsterdam.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay.
Speaker 1: I came back to Chicago [Illinois], and I was in Chicago from [19]88 until--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) 2000. No,  it was [19]80--
Speaker 1: from '88 until '94
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I spent a short period of time in Selma, Alabama. Then I spent some time in New York City [New York].  And then in [19]95, the summer of [19]95, I went back to Spain.  And I was there until the fall of 2000, when I went to Accra [Ghana].  And I stayed in Ghana until June of 2000. I went there in [19]99 [unclear]
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I--Those periods that you set out, what were they-- What was happening to you during that--? I mean how were you developing for yourself?
Speaker 1: I was writing and I was sticking myself in an alien culture, learning the language, checking out flamenco, hanging out in bars.  I didn't study the language. I picked it up in the bars.  You know. The times when I'd run out of money; I'd work picking fruit. I did construction work. The area I was living in, nobody spoke English. So I had to learn Spanish, and--and I did.  I became a respected member of the community.  And I can go back there anytime, and everybody there knows me.  The population of that town was only about eight hundred. I guess it might be up to about twelve hundred now.  And I lived across the river, in a town--in a village that only had twenty-seven houses.  And most of the homes are owned by people who use them for summer homes.  So during the winter, it'd be about six of us in--in that town.  In the summer it'd be maybe two dozen.  So it was total isolation.  And there was myself and Nina [wife], and a bunch of cats and a dog.  You know. I had my music and television set, eventually I had a computer and so I'd get up every morning and take a walk into town for my--take my exercise and sit down and write until noon.  Then go into town, and have a wine or cognac, and check the mail and come on back, take my siesta, and get up and work some more.  The perfect place to work.  I completed two additional novels, a new volume of poetry, four screenplays and four stage plays during that period.
Speaker 2: And what was--Give me the names of some of the works that you completed then.
Speaker 1: Jakarta Blues and Mykonos Blues, which are the second and third novels in trilogy of which Baghdad Blues is the first.  I outlined my autobiography, which I'm presently working on.  And let's see. I did a remake of the script for 'The Spook Who Sat By the Door.'  But September 11th [2001 terrorist attacks on United States] killed that. I'm not gonna do a film of that nature behind what happened.  I also have a--I'm not on de--have a adaptation of 'Lysistrata'  both as a screenplay and a stage play that's set at Robert Taylor Homes here in Chicago. I have a--film script and a stage script  about a Chicago jazz musician that's set in the late '40 [1940s]s and the '50s [1950s]. And a filmscript  that I'm working on that's set in Ghana.  It's about an aging black revolutionary who's making a long postponed pilgrimage to Ghana, and his adventures there.  Of course that's--All my work is autobiographical. You know. It comes directly out of my experiences. And very little of it is, is imaginative.  It doesn't have to be.  I've lived a rich and adventurous life, and I don't have to make up anything.  I just write about what I've done, and what I do, and what I intend to do.  So I've got a whole trunk full of stuff.  You know. It's just a matter of time before somebody is courageous enough or greedy enough to do it.
Story_ID: 18029
Speaker 1: You said from what I've read, that you lost both wives--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: because of the whole experience. You know--Well I wanna say attacked and per-ersecuted [unclear].
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: but--And that's why I went to this, you know.  Did you leave [unclear]?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) My first wife is Dutch, so I was attacked in the sixties as a traitor because my wife was white.  All right. They were all indirect attacks. Nobody came up and spoke to me face to face about it. That's why I didn't respect them. For damn good reason, I might have punched them in the mouth.  My attitude was, "Who I marry was nobody's business except mine."  Okay. But there was a--That whole thing, you know, everybody--Amiri Baraka all the way back to Fredrick Douglass who was attacked about that.  I just read something not long ago in this magazine wherein--it was this whole article about Black men marrying white women.  And I've asked feminists time and time again.  I said, "Okay, you're a miscegenationist." I said, "but how come you always talk about black males, and always prominent black males? The ones that got money and celebrity, married to white females."  I said, "What about all the black females marrying the white men? You got a problem with Whoopi Goldberg, Diana Ross, Tina Turner?  Okay! That's never mentioned. If you're gonna be a miscegenationist., be a miscegenationist..  Oppose any intermixture." But it's always about black males and white females, which is steeped in the tradition.  White males have been lying down with black females for four hundred years. Ain't nothing new about that.  It's only new now, at this period of time, when black males are beginning to openly cohabit with white females.  If you think black males weren't laying down with white females back there during the slavery days, you're crazier than hell.  The word "Jody" which became a military term that referred to the man who was dealing with your woman back home while you were on the front lines fighting, came out of the Civil War.  "Jody" was the male slave who was lying down with Massa's woman, while he was off fighting for the Confederacy.  But that's hidden history. Don't nobody wanna talk about that.  My second wife was black American.  She was born in Mount Claire, New Jersey.  She was a fine actress. As a matter of fact, both of my wives were creative.  They were writers and actresses, and --it's frightening--you know--I'm attracted to the same kind of woman my mother was, (laughing) . You know, talented, creative, flamboyant, temperamental.  My second wife died of cancer, Yvette.  And it was--although we were divorced, she had never taken me off of her insurance.  So it was the insurance money that I used to go to Spain and live for those years.
Speaker 1: Do you think there's a reason you're back [in the United States]? You know, 'cause--Were you planning to stay in Ghana  [unclear]?
Speaker 2: No.  No, I always intended to come back.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay.
Speaker 2: My fight is here.  You know, I was just on R and R [Rest and Relaxation].  I'm too stubborn to let people run me out of my country!  All I had to do was go and relax, get the frustrations and rest off of my back, and come back to fight again.  So I'm back, and that's what I'm doing. And I'm gonna get my work out there one way or another.  I figured out a way to do it before and I'm going to do it again!
Story_ID: 18030
Speaker 1: So how has Sam Greenlee changed [unclear]?
Speaker 2: Well my friends tell me I've mellowed.  I think that's probably true.  You know. I'm more laid back and relaxed. No less angry, but I've learned how to bank those fires. You know, with something, and to use them when necessary.  And I'm probably enjoying myself a lot more than I ever had in my life.  You know, the simple pleasures.  I had a stroke a few months ago and that was a real wake up call. It reminded me of my mortality.  So now a bottle of wine or a good joint or a good meal is even more important than it's--it has been.  And I've always been a sensual person. But e--now the senses are wide-awake. Because I know the days are counting down.  So I enjoy my life a lot more than, than anytime. Little simple pleasures give me great gratification.
Speaker 1: You had a very--you had a very slight heart attack?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You had no problems?
Speaker 2: Slight immobility of the left arm, which is coming back. And the left leg, and that's already back--all the way back. You know.  I've been a coach.  I'm a graduate of a army physical training school.  So I knew what kind of rehabilitation I had to get into. I was--I'm on my bike everyday, and two months ago I joined the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] so I've been working the weight machines for muscle tone and the bike for aerobics.  And--I'm okay.  I'm in better shape than most people half my age.
Story_ID: 18031
Speaker 1: I know that blues is the central part--and I know that its autobiographic--biograph--I mean all the writing. But, you know, [unclear].
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: There's a sadness that, you know, I would not say that, you know. I wouldn't call Spook a sad--you know.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: There's a sadness.  there's,--You know, There's a lot of commentary, but there's a sadness. And--Well there's lots of ways I could ask this question.  And, you know, they say that in the blues, [unclear] there's sadness, there's storytelling.  But I detected a lot of [unclear]--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It's catharsis.  You sing the blues not 'cause you got the blues but you sing the blues to keep the blues at bay. You take that sa--that sadness and you sing it right out of your system.  But after dealing with all kinds of horrendous circumstances in song, you've lifted it off your back.  When you go to church, you do the same thing, when you--sing a hymn or a spiritual.  It's designed to uplift, to take that pain away.  It's not anesthetic, it's ridding yourself of the pain, you get it out.  And how do you get it out?  Not by ignoring or suppressing those emotions, but dealing with it, head on. And we are very good about, about that.  As a people, we're far better at it then whites, who suppress anger, suppress the emotions.  You know, this is a Calvinistic soc-, society.  And Calvinists are trained to suppress emotions, and some of us are too.  But at our best, we put it on out there, for ourselves and everybody around us.  So yeah, if I deal--if the circumstances made me sad, I present it as a sad thing.  And when I get up, it's gone.  Catharsis is a Greek cognate.  It literally means cleansing and blues are cleansing.  Now I got some happy blues in there.
Speaker 1: I'm not saying you don't.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: but I'm just saying that there was--you know, there was a sadness in some respect, you know.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.  Well I m'a lie, if I said I ain't never been sad. You know?
Speaker 1: Have you ever thought of yourself as a black [Ernest] Hemingway?
Speaker 2: (Laughing)  Hell, no!! (laughing) .
Speaker 1: Are you surprised by that question?
Speaker 2: (laughing)  No, I get that question all the time. You know.  Not necessarily Hemingway, but I'm always compared with some, to some white writer. You know.
Speaker 1: It was the lifestyle.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I'm a black--Chester Hines.  That's the writer I most identify with.  And just by coincidence, he died within a half day's drive of where I was living in the south of Spain. He's my primary influence as a novelist. Not Hemingway, Chester Hines.  Politically, Richard Wright.  Poetically, Langston Hughes.  All my literary references are black.  I recall Andrew Salkey, a fine writer and critic.  He was a Panamaian Jamacian. He died recently of diabetes.  He was teaching in a New England college.  Well when 'The Spook' first got published, a friend of mine Rudy Kisner had a gathering of all of the strong black intellectuals and political minds.  We were all in this [unclear].  I cooked a whole mess of fried chicken. And so we ate and got into this debate. Afterwards Andrew said, "All of the references you used to support your arguments were black." And I had to think about it, and they were.  It was just automatic with me. You know. These people were talking about Proust and Cezanne and all the European intellectuals that they had been force-fed in college,. And I had been exposed to them too.  But it never occurred to me to use Europeans to support my black arguments.  I'm steeped in my own culture, and it's natural to me.  But it doesn't mean that I haven't been influenced and don't admire Hemingway.  He was one of my earliest influences, stylistically  as a writer.  I mean I read Hemingway by the pound.  His short stories I started reading when I was 15 years old.  And I've read every novel he's written.  In fact, when I was in Spain I reread 'For Whom The Bell Tolls.'  Okay, and it had more of an impact, because I realized that when a Spaniard spoke, they were speaking in a kind of syntax and rhythm of--that they do in Spanish.  Okay. And it wasn't until I learned Spanish that I could understand why the dialogue of the Spaniard seemed so stilted.  But it's not. It was an almost literal translation of the way Spanish peasants spoke.  So I got a whole new dimension of reading my book, which was set in Spain while I was in Spain.
Story_ID: 18032
Speaker 1: What about Stanley Crouch? What are your views about him?
Speaker 2: (Laughing)  Stanley's a joke! (Pause) I like Stanley. We meet from time to time.  I got no problem with him.  But he knows on what--which side his white bread is buttered.  He walks that tightrope.  And he couldn't be what he was, if he didn't walk the tight rope.  You know, he knows exactly what he's doing. And he does it well.  You know. My attitude is towards any black intellectual or any black artist is the same as the Hippocratic oath, "Do no harm."  If you're doing some harm to the community, I'm gonna attack you.  If you're not, "Hey, right on brother. Buy me a drink the next time I see you."  But Stanley is a spook.  You know. He gives the white folks what they want, in their column. You know. But the problem I dealt with in the book was, how long can you pretend to be one thing without becoming that?  So I don't know where Stanley is nowadays. I haven't seen him in years.  Amiri [Baraka, LeRoi Jones] hasn't changed.
Speaker 1: You had so many of the same models, though.  I mean you liked Alex Haley. right?
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Murray?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm, um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.  And Jazz.
Speaker 1: And jazz, your former writings.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, right.  Um-hmm.  But he's a conservative and I'm not.
Speaker 1: You call him a conservative because he is a black nationalist?
Speaker 2: No. Because he's a legitimate conservative.  It's no reason why we--we shouldn't have the total spectrum of political thought in our community.  And I respect his political viewpoint, even when I don't agree with it.  I encourage diversity of thought.  I spoke about that at the Gwendolyn Brooks Festival.  I said, "People have been giving me literary manifestos for thirty years, about what is and is not a black writer." I said, "If a black writer can't be free, then nobody can be free."  And I think any black writer has a right to write whatever they want.  And I quoted the Hippocratic oath "Do no harm."  What is this? Who is gonna tell me what and how I should write! That's absurd. I m'a do it my way, and if somebody don't like it, forget it.  So my attitude is simple.  "We need free competition of all aspects of thought before we can come up with the right direction."  The problem, of course, is that people like Stanley, and Tom Sole, and Condoleezza Rice, and Colin Powell, are given free reign exposed in the media.  Wherein people like myself, and Amiri and Angela Davis, no longer have access.  But there's an advantage there, it legitimizes me in the hood.  Okay. Because I'm not up there, talking to these white talking heads on television.  People know that I'm not being--given access to the media.  So they're more interested in what I have to say when they pick up my books or when they talk to me face to face.  I can't be labelled a sell out. 'Cause they know I haven't been sold out.  And being attacked by certain aspects of the white community, just legitimizes me in the hood.  So it works.
Speaker 1: You're saying that you don't want to ever be a sell out?
Speaker 2: I don't know how, and I'm too old to learn.
Speaker 1: Um, I want to ask about one other--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I wanna make some money in spite of it. That's my challenge.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Well you--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) To make the dough without selling out.
Story_ID: 18033
Speaker 1: What do you think about the Rap Industry?
Speaker 2: That's interesting.  Rap came in as a militant critique of White America.  And that must have created some real tension with the whites who control the industry.  When they discovered that gangster rap could be sold, that's what they emphasized.  And the political content of the early rappers, like Ice T, Ice Cube, Public Enemy, were shoved to the side.  Even so, there's still a minority of rappers who have a sense of responsibility, and are dealing not with the bitches and whores, and the rest of the gangster raps that had some content.  My attitude is, "It's not in the interest of the white folks who control the record industry, to promote the kinds of revolutionary aspects of some of the better rappers."  So what else are we gonna do except push them to the side, and put the harmless or socially destructive out there.  That doesn't ameliorate my attitude toward the ones who are all too eager to be that kind of prostitute.  We have to understand that the real pimp are the white folks who are out there.  And my grandfather told me a long time ago, "never argue with the monkey, when the organ grinder is in the room."  See we have to pinpoint the people who control the music, rather than the ones who are doing what they want them to do.
Speaker 1: But there are those who would say that--Let's say [unclear] The Spook Who Sat By The Door and hip-hop [unclear].
Speaker 2: I wouldn't argue with that. You know.  I hope so, I hope so.  The fact that many people in hip-hop are forming their own companies.  They're working with Black attorneys, black accountants.  They have been and continue to produce their own music.  They are managing their own affairs.  So, regardless of the contents of their work, they're engaging in a revolutionary activity.  I've been in touch with a bunch of young bloods who had a group called Public Enemy.  And they want to get into film. And we discussed the possibility, of my writing a film script, but they ain't got no money.  So, I told them, "when you get some dough, let's go."  I don't work for spec for nobody, except myself.  I'm glad you brought that up, because that's the most important thing about hip-hop.  These people are engaged in nationalistic activity without engaging in nationalistic rhetoric.  And everybody ignores that.  I'm proud of these young bloods.  Look at Puff Daddy [Sean Combs, a Hip Hop and urban wear mogul]. Everybody wants to project him as a clown.  Are you kidding?  Puff Daddy owns Puff Daddy, 100%! He ain't sold an ounce of flesh. Not a pound of flesh.  He runs his own recording industry. He runs his own fashion house.  When he was approached by a record company, he'd already sold more than 100,000 copies of his books, out of his--the trunk of his car and getting them out into the record store.  If he was white, they'd call him a  genius.  You know, I'd love to meet that brother.  He's doing right--He's doing exactly what I told him to do in The Spook Who Sat By The Door. Yeah, I don't necessarily think he--they did it because of that. I would like to believe so.  But in certain cases, I know Public Enemy has been influenced by my book.  They took one line of dialogue from a long monolog in the film and made a whole song around it.  And the brother who played that role told me about it.  He said, "Man you know that line in that monolog in the film? Public Enemy got a record out on that."  So yeah.  I'm delighted with what they're doing.
Story_ID: 18034
Speaker 1: Where are you now? I mean in your life right now?  What do you want to do now?
Speaker 2: I want to get my work out there, make some money and retire some place in the sun.  And then, spend the rest of my time writing and kicking back where it's warm.  I'm thinking about St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands] or St. John [U.S. Virgin Islands], if not West Africa.  You know. But I got work to do.  And so the work I have now, I'm in Chicago [Illinois].  You know, 'cause Chicago is home to me.  I don't like living anywhere else in the states.  I don't like New York [City, New York].  I hate Los Angeles [California].  San Francisco [California] is not my kind of thing. You know.  Atlanta [Georgia] is nothing, you know, for the bourgeois negroes.  Chicago is Chicago.  The thing about home is, you don't have to like it. It's just home. You know.  You live in an alien environment, you're looking for certain things you don't necessarily have to have in Chicago.
Story_ID: 18035
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself?  Are you an American?  You were American before.
Speaker 2: No, I'm not American.
Speaker 1: Well what are you?
Speaker 2: I wrote a poem about this, it is called "Anomaly."  I've always considered African-American to be an anomaly.  Because I was not born in Africa and I'm not American, because [stressed] they won't let me be.  I'm somebody who was born and raised here.  I'm permitted to have an American passport.  But every step in my career, I was reminded by white folks, "You're not one of us. You are different, and you don't belong among us."  So I excepted that status. Embraced it.  My attitude is, "Forget it."  The difference between the fox, who called the grapes he couldn't reach sour, is that I tasted the grapes. I know they're sour.  I wouldn't wish integration on anybody Black.  If anybody can earn a living independent of daily contact with white folks, I say, "hallelujah." because I've been there and I've done it.  And it was not fun!
Story_ID: 18036
Speaker 1: But the slaves heard about the [Emancipation] Proclamation and started walking away from the plantation in droves.  So even though it didn't free anybody on a de jure basis, the slaves freed themselves by walking away through the Union line.  And the Union had a hell of a time,  feeding these tens of thousands of people would just walk up and say, "Well Mr. Lincoln done freed us."  And sit down and look for a meal.  But all of that's been obscured by history.  You know. The resiliency, the resistance of our people as slaves and as freed persons and today--the courage, the resistance that's gone into that has been obscured.  And even the militants don't wanna talk about it.  'Cause then they feel like they have to have a dramatic reason to be militant now.  Concentrate on the dysfunction in our society to believe that something has to be done about the masses on a whole.  I taught in a maximum-security prison for a couple of years.  [unclear].
Story_ID: 18037
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns about black people here in this country.  [unclear].  But what are your hopes for at this point?
Speaker 2: That we'll continue to do what our ancestors have done.  Roll that rock up the hill until finally it stays there. To never quit, tenacity, discipline.  We went through a, a period of error.  Nobody could sustain the kind of energy that went into the movement of the  [19]60s.  There had to be a period of repose and--reenergizing.  And that's what we're gong through.  Now I've been out  among the young bloods who are reading in, in the poetry sessions around town.  And there's a whole new spirit that wasn't there even ten or fifteen years ago.  They're immensely curious about what happened.  I told a friend of mine a long time ago--several decades ago, I said,  "Look Danny, our children aren't gonna be nothing.  But our grandchildren are gonna be bad."  And political movements just like anything else often skip a generation.  You know.  A gene doesn't always go direct down.  You know it's somehow a rebounding.  So the grandchildren of those people in the movement are now showing the same kinds of energy and curiosity.  They wanna know what we did back then and what they can do now.  And it's been a literary explosion.  I mean I was with a judge a few months ago at the Def Jam poetry contest, the preliminaries.  In one day, we judged one hundred and twenty poets.  And they had to close the list on one hundred twenty.  It was about another one hundred waiting to get up there and perform.  One hundred and twenty in one day.  That ain't no small thing.  Okay.  So where do you get that information?  The media's not dealing with it, black or white.  They're not dealing with the exposure that exists.  Not just in Chicago, but across the country.  And hip-hop is part of it.  Rap is part of it.  These kids are not rapping in--in the traditional sense.  They're writing formal poetry, which is comparable to much of what came out of the [19]60s.  And the[19]60s have been romanticized beyond belief.  But like any artistic movement, most of it was garbage.  The best was fantastic.  But if you wanna get the idea that everybody was doing what [Amiri] Baraka [formerly Leroi Jones] and Toni [Morrison] and I and others were doing.  Uh-uh.  You could go to a, a poetry reading and be bored to death.  Twelve poets would read, three of 'em would be bad, the rest of em' ranged from mediocre to inept.  The same thing is true now.  You're never gonna have a majority of any artistic movement composed of highly competent artists.  But the incompetent are as important as the competent. You gotta have something against which to judge.  And the wanna-be artists are as important as the ones who succeed.  I'm not an elitist.  Two things happen. Number one, you never know who's gonna be the late bloomer.  You never know if today the person who's up there saying--writing the worst poetry you've ever heard, ten years from now might be the best of that particular group.  Secondly, in a personal sense, I don't think that a bad artists gets any less joy or whatever it is I receive  than I do and I'm a good one.  So they got the whole spectrum.  You know, when  I go to these poetry reading, readings, most of 'em bore me stiff.  But then out of nowhere comes these people who are really into it.  You know, and they just make the whole thing worth while.  Those are the ones who infuse me and inspire me.  I go home and have a ball.  Like the poets that came down to read at my poetry sets.  So far only the best have showed up.  I don't know why that is.  But the mediocrities haven't appeared yet.  And I wouldn't be unhappy if they didn't.  But they're gonna come eventually.  You know, because they're not out there for serious reasons.  They're out there because it's a hip place to go.  So until the young sisters start coming up, they ain't gonna come.  And they haven't picked up on it yet.  But they will.  You know, they're the faddists. They're doing it 'cause it's hip and they can hit on the young sisters and that's all their poetry is about.  But they got some serious ones.  And they've been coming out.  And I like hanging out with young people as well as with my peers.  You can't lock yourself into a bag.  It's not--that's not healthy.
Story_ID: 18038
Speaker 1: Well they were around when I first hit.  They were delighted.  You know.  My mother said that she thought that my book was gonna be on such an intellectual level that it wouldn't reach the people.  I don't know why she said that.  But she was delighted that it was down there and accessible to everyone.  Aunt Alice used to ask me sometimes, "Baby why don't you get a job?"  I told her, "I got a job.  I'm a writer (laughing) ."  But that wasn't a legiti--well you know.  When you had a job, you get up in the morning, you go to work and you come back home.  So she never saw me as, as a worker.  They were all very proud of me.  Very proud.  Hell, I was the first of my immediate family to earn a degree, that-- I was a fine athlete, a member of the Foreign Service and I became a, a celebrated writer.  They were the core of my fan club.  They loved it.  They're all gone now.  I'm the last.
Story_ID: 18039
Speaker 1: There was a sister at Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi], a professor of literature.  Enormous woman.  She invited me out to her class.  And somewhere along the line, she said, "What you got to understand about Sam is that he speaks in a--speaks with a voice, in our own voice." [crying].
Speaker 2: (Pause)
Speaker 1: And would that be your legacy, Sam?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I hope so.  No.  My legacy is if I can convince some young bloods to do what I've done.  You know, to carry the torch.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think I have.  I was at the conference and these young writers were around me like bees around honey.  And one young sister hugged me.  And I said, "You keep on writing."  She said, "I got to.  You passed the torch."  So I ain't made no money.  But I've had a whole lot of fun.  And my work has endured.  I had no idea when I wrote that book in [19]66 that it would be in continuous print for more than thirty years.  And I'm very proud of that.  And it's now being dealt with by a third generation.  But I got a whole lot of other stuff to get out there.  You know, and the publishers are not gonna publish it.  So I'm gonna publish it myself.  The present technology is such that I don't need a publisher to do it.  I can go to a print-on-demand printer and have one hundred books published--or printed, or fifty books.  When I get down to ten, order another fifty, and do what I've been doing all my career.  Selling books out of my shoulder bag.  Dropping off ten or fifteen at a black book store.  They call me up when they've sold eight.  I go down there.  They give me the money for those eight.  I give them another ten.  So I just serve as the writer, the publisher and the distributor.  I can't get as many books out there as a publishing house, but since they ain't gonna publish it and distribute it no way, why be worried about that?
Story_ID: 18040
Speaker 1: What is a good writer?  To you, what is it?
Speaker 2: A good writer is someone who can say something having insights into the human condition.  And his, his craft is secondary to me.  There are some clumsy writers who had a profound impact on the society.  And there are other highly facile writers who had no impact whatever.  So technical ability is not important.  It's the ability to offer insights into the human condition and offer some kind of optimism for the future even while you might be criticizing the present.  A good writer is someone who makes you think and someone who makes you feel better about yourself and humanity.  That's a good writer to me.  And it doesn't matter what they write.  You know, I don't put 'em into categories.  I can't read a strong writer while I'm writing.  I haven't read Toni Morrison in about ten years.  Because if I try to read Toni Morrison while I'm working on, on a piece of work, for several weeks if not months after that, what I'm turning out is bad Toni Morrison (laughing) .  Okay.  So I read the kind of entertaining fiction that doesn't enter into my consciousness and come out on the computer.  Mysteries mainly, private eye stories, John D. McDonald, Ross McDonald, Robert B. Parker, certainly Walter Mosley, P. D. James, John Sanford.  That's my reading.  My serious reading is history.  But I cannot read a good novelist when I'm write--writing.  And one of these days I'm gonna have to tell Toni that.  "I can't read you sister, 'cause you too good.  It just creeps right into my work."  Now early in my career that was okay.  You know, learning how to write by--like you said,  writing like Hemingway.  Or I'd be writing, trying to write sonnets likes Shakespeare or writing short stories, tough short stories like James M. King, or one like Chester Hines.  Write poetry like Langston Hughes or Carl Sandburg or what have you.  You have to experiment, you know.  These young writers don't even wanna read.  Okay.  And they learn how to write by listening to one another.  So that's the blind leading the blind.  And they all--most of 'em are writing the same poem.  The [Poetry] Slam is the most idiotic thing to come along the line.  You know.  Have you been to any Slam contests?  You ain't missed nothing.  They all have three minutes to get up there and they're judged after they've competed.  Okay.  So. The judges don't know anything about poetry.  They just know how flamboyant the performance is and the content and, and the rest.  So all of 'em are along the same two minute, fifty-nine second poem.  In terms of content, in terms of style, the whole thing.  And it could be fun because the audience enjoys it.  You know, but they're all locked into this one style.  And they're all writing the same poem.  It's not helpful.  But many of 'em use this as a learning tool and inevitably branch out in to more serious and reflective work.  So the best of 'em can get up there and win the Slam and then go to more serious readings like mine and read their more serious stuff.  And so some of 'em can incorporate serious thoughts into, into that slam context. My feeling is anything that encourages the creativity of another person whether it's called Slam or hip-hop or rap or what have you, is beneficial for society as a whole.  'Cause some of those people are going to be doing something that can lift you out of your misery in the same way that the blues singers do.  In the same way that the anonymous writers of the spirituals did.  Our culture has sustained us.  Without our music, we'd all be crazy.  Art has been a foundation, which mainly has kept us sane as human beings in a society that's designed to drive us crazy.  We as artists are the  therapists of black America.  And I think we've been pretty successful there.  Even though some of us have had to go insane in the process.  'Cause when you take on all of that pain, if you can't put it back out, you're destroyed.  I saw my brother destroyed by the pain he took on from his clients as a social worker.  And many black artists were destroyed that way too.  I remained relatively healthy; 'cause I was crazy to begin with.  My best friends will tell you I'm crazy.
