Story_ID: 77983
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: It's Reynaldo, R-E-Y-N-A-L-D-O, Preston, Glover, G-L-O-V-E-R.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Chicago, Illinois, March 2, 1943.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: I have--February 27th, 2003 (laughter).
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In Chicago, Illinois at 203 North LaSalle.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an attorney by training, but at the present time, I'm also serving as president of TLC Beatrice International [Holdings] out of New York.
Story_ID: 77984
Speaker 1: All right, before we go into depth, there are five "People" Magazine-ish type questions that we always ask, and just require a brief, concise answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Probably chili.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, I have two.  In the wintertime when there's snow on the ground, I love green.  In the summertime, I love sky blue.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I have a little place up in Michigan that we get to as often as we can.  So my idea of a vacation is to go spend time on the farm in Michigan.
Speaker 1: And finally, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "Never give up, never surrender."
Story_ID: 77985
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, let me ask you about your family history.  How much of it do you know?  How far back can you--I mean how far back can you go?  That's what I want to know first.  How far back can you go?
Speaker 2: Well, comfortably, I can go back to my great-grandmother, who was in part Choctaw Indian.  My family roots were in Shreveport, Louisiana on my mother's side.  My father's side, I don't know much of that history, but my mother, I can go back to my great grandmother.
Speaker 1: Shreveport.
Speaker 2: Shreveport, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Now, did she have any stories or songs or any anecdotes about growing up in Shreveport that she shared with you or about--
Speaker 2: My grandmother and mother were very stoic people so that whenever you began to probe about their history, they had a tendency to be very tightlipped, although I heard many stories about what life was like in Louisiana and the racial prejudices and the kind of isolationist aura and the community that existed down there.  I mean I didn't pick up much from them because they just wouldn't share.
Speaker 1: Now, Shreveport is down on the Gulf [of Mexico], right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  Okay, so do you remember any specific stories that--
Speaker 2: Not offhand.  I mean there were just stories about not being able to ride on trains, not being able to go into certain places, not being able to do many things that we now take for granted, but nothing specific.
Speaker 1: Now, what was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: My grandmother's name was Pauley Bullett [ph.].
Speaker 1: Now, this is your great grandmother in--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: My great grandmother.
Speaker 1: --who lived in Shreveport?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Did you know her name?
Speaker 2: Pauley, Pauley Bullett [ph.].
Speaker 1: All right, and is there a story about how the family came up to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: My grandfather [Clark Bullett] was a general contractor who built homes.  And he decided when my mother [Mattie Cora Bullett] was college age that he could probably do better living in the North than in the South.  And they migrated to Gary, Indiana.  I don't know that there was any particular story affiliated with that other than his decision that he could probably do very well coming to the North, to a community where you had a large contingency of African American population.
Speaker 1: Now, when would that have been?
Speaker 2: Oh, probably in the '30's [1930s].  I would say in the '30's [1930].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 77986
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your mother.  Can you give us her name and--
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Mattie Cora Bullett.  She's--
Speaker 1: How do you spell Mattie?
Speaker 2: M-A-T-T-T-I-E, Cora, C-O-R-A, Bullett, B-U-double L-E-T-T.
Speaker 1: And when was she born and where?
Speaker 2: I have, I have no--I assume she was born in Shreveport [Louisiana], and I have--I don't recall her date of birth.  But she grew up, her formative years were spent in Shreveport.  And then she went off to college and spent two years in college, and then for reasons which were never explained to me, didn't complete college.  And by that time, my grandfather [Clark Bullett] and she and my uncle had moved to Gary, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Now, did her mother die or something--
Speaker 2: Her mother died--my grandmother passed when my mom and uncle were in their formative years.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, do you know what college she went to?
Speaker 2: She went to Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Fisk, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  It's starting to come together.
Speaker 2: That's right (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, what kind of person was she?  What did she like to do and--
Speaker 2: By the time I was in, I was a young boy, my grandfather had gone bankrupt in his business so that we--I mean she had gone from living a kind of lower, middle-class life to one of significant poverty so that there were five of us, five of her children.  She worked in the steel mills.  She was a seamstress and a terrific tailor.  And much of what I remember about my mother is always working to put food on the table.  I mean that is my most vivid recollection of mama, always going to or coming from some kind of work experience to feed and house, and cloth and house her children.  In terms of what she liked to do, I think she was a personality that was most happy when she saw her children being happy.
Speaker 1: Very dedicated.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 77987
Speaker 1: Now, what about your father?  Can you give us his name and date--
Speaker 2: His name was Paul Glover, G-L-O-V-E-R.  I don't know--he was born in Michigan, but I don't have a date of birth on him.  My dad was an alcoholic.  And in many ways, an abusive husband, and an abusive father so that my mom and dad separated and ultimately divorced as I recall when I was about nine or 10.  So that he was not a major influence in my life, and to the extent that he had an impact on my life, I would regard it in today's terms as very negative.  My father figure growing up was my granddaddy [Clark Bullett].
Speaker 1: Okay, your mother's father?
Speaker 2: My mother's father.
Story_ID: 77988
Speaker 1: All right, now, do you have an idea of, any of idea of why he [Glover's maternal grandfather, Clark Bullett], his business failed, did he--
Speaker 2: He was not a good businessman.  He enjoyed building houses.  But he was not a personality who understood the economics of the business.  I mean so that if you were to say to him, "Come build me a home," he had the knowledge and expertise of doing that, but when you started talking about sophisticated financing, he was just not very good at that.  So that time after time after time, he found himself in a situation where he had underbid the cost of a project because his interest was in building it.  And so that I remember, I remember the last transaction he did where he really went bankrupt.  And the building stayed partially built for four or five years after that.  But he had significantly underbid the job.
Speaker 1: Okay, you think it was a--well, I don't know.  He--he was fairly successful in Shreveport [Louisiana] or--
Speaker 2: I think he, I think he was more successful in Shreveport than he was in Gary.  And I think in large part also, it was a function.  In Gary [Indiana], he had the opportunity to do bigger jobs.  And I think that he was very naive in simply translating the kinds of estimates for the smaller jobs to the bigger jobs.  And those economies just didn't work.
Speaker 1: Okay, getting the proper scale--
Speaker 2: I think that's right.  Now, you have to keep in mind that I had to be in my preteens, maybe 11 or 12 when all of this unraveled for him, so that much of what really went on, I was a child at the time and didn't know.  But I do recall that by the time I was 12 or 13, the money was just gone from the family.
Speaker 1: Did you like an economic kind of a burden yourself, that you had to, wanted to do something--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I mean, I, I think that I developed an incredibly strong sense of responsibility, and I was always sensitive to and concerned about not being more of an imposition on my mother [Mattie Cora Bullett] than I had to be, so that I remember, by the time I was 11 or 12, I always had little gigs, little jobs, shining shoes, delivering papers or in some way attempting to generate some kind of income.  And I think that grew out of a sense that I don't want to be a burden on my mother.
Story_ID: 77989
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Mattie Cora Bullett] or your father [Paul Glover] have a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: No, I don't recall ever being told.
Speaker 1: Can you kind of reflect back and give us some idea--now, you were born in Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: But grew up in Gary [Indiana].
Speaker 1: Gary.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Gary, grew up in Gary.  What happened?  Was there circumstances--
Speaker 2: My recollection is, and I was born here.  My father was working in some kind of construction job, lost that job and decided that we would all move back to Gary where my grandfather [Clark Bullett] was in business at the time.  But again, I don't, I was a, I was a child at the time, so I don't remember what the exact nuances were.  But my grandfather and my uncle and other family members were in Gary, so that when my father lost his job here in Chicago, they migrated to Gary.
Story_ID: 77990
Speaker 1: Okay, now, can you reflect on growing up in Gary [Indiana]?  And give us an idea of some of the, give us an idea of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Gary?
Speaker 2: At the time I grew up, we lived an incredibly insular life.  I mean that, I meaning by that, that from a macro prospective, there was incredible racial polarization.  We didn't understand that, and we didn't know that because we grew up very much with a strong sense of our own community.  We grew up with the police living a few doors down the street, with the doctor living a block from my home, with the, with the minister living a block and a half, so that we grew up with our entire community as a whole within the community.  So that the grocer that we frequently, I mean whose store we shopped at was African American.  The barber shop was a block and a half around the street, so that Gary at that time--we were, in fact, in an enclave.  We didn't, we, as children, didn't appreciate the significance of that.  And that had the effect of enabling us to be kind of cocooned, but at the same time, it taught us a valuable lesson.  It taught us the lesson that it was not unusual for African Americans to be in positions of leadership.  The principal of my school was African American, my doctor was African American, the police who knocked us upside the head when we did wrong was African American.  So that in effect, we grew up in an environment where we were Snow Whites in the school play.  I mean we were able to fulfill every gamut of the spectrum of our society so that we didn't grow up believing that we could not accomplish positions of leadership and success because everybody around us, from our perspective, was, was, occupied the entire spectrum.  The one thing that I remember in terms of smell was a place on Broadway called Coney Island Hamburger.  And I suppose that on the basis of what I now know about proper nutrition, it was the worst food that one could fathom.  I mean they took, would take hamburger meat and deep fry it, and the grease would be two weeks old, and it had the most delicious taste that I have--for my entire life, I've searched the world looking to replicate the taste of that Coney Island hamburger, and it was absolutely fabulous.  Gary was a thriving community when I grew up.  The steel mills were very, very thriving.  People could work in the steel mill and make a comfortable living.  There was a kind of vitality and, and vibrance to the city that was just palpable to the experience.  So it was an incredibly uplifting community for us.  I went to Gary Roosevelt undergrad--I mean to elementary school and high school, a strong African American middle class.  We had lawyers and doctors and educators and the entire spectrum of leadership there.  And so in a very real sense, it was a, it was a vital community in a way that allowed all of us to grow up with a sense of being able to accomplish great things and with a sense of being concerned about and protected.
Story_ID: 77991
Speaker 1: Well, what kind of a little boy were you in the neighborhood?  What did you like to do?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) We were--
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I have two sisters and four brothers.
Speaker 1: Seven and where do you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: One of my brothers died.  I was the second oldest, but, and one of my younger brothers died when we were--when I was a teen.  I--
Speaker 1: And where did you rank?
Speaker 2: I was the second oldest.  But my older brother [Clark Walls] lived with my aunt so that I was the oldest child in our immediate family environment.  We were mischievous.  I mean I remember raiding cherry trees, but by today's standards, it was incredibly innocent mischief.  I mean we weren't robbing or looting or doing terrible things.  But we were mischievous.  I mean we were children who had the luxury and benefit of knowing that we were cared about, and we lived in a community where it was possible to have a sense of small family and big family.  And we were mischievous.  I remember we would raid cherry trees in other people's property.  We would do stuff.  And I picked up on athletics by the time I was 10 or 11.  And that kind of changed a lot of my young formative activities and became the direction in which I chose to live my life.  And there were those of us who grew up, who got into pool, who got into all kinds of other activities.  And mine was athletics.  I liked playing baseball, basketball and football, so that I then began to associate with boys who were doing that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you primarily play at the park or at school or--
Speaker 2: We played--I lived two blocks from my school, so they had all kinds of facilities at the school outdoors in the summertime.  And I remember we would set up these wood baskets on a telephone pole in the alley behind my house and play basketball year around on my wooden basket.  But we, there were tremendous facilities if you were interested in athletics.  I mean, again, my school was a couple of blocks from my home so that we'd go to the school and play basketball any time.  And they had just great, great group--great opportunities for us to participate in that if that's what we chose to do.
Story_ID: 77992
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell me about school?  What grade school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I went to Roosevelt Grade School [Gary Roosevelt High School], and I have no recollection of elementary school or grade school other than I remember those terrible graham crackers and warm milk, and having to take naps.  That I remember very vividly.  Now, I don't know what it says about me that that's my most vivid recollection of elementary school, but that is my most vivid recollection.  By the time I got into the fifth, sixth and seventh grade, I mean I was kind of gearing toward the athletics, and we were just incredibly innocent by comparison to today's standards.  People worked.  People attempted to do what they could to be good citizens.  And we were, it was mandated that you attempt to give it your best shot.  Now, we were mischievous.  We were always--and I think that a part of our mis--a part of our mischief grew out of a sense of curiosity.  We were always trying to figure stuff out, and I remember once in a chemistry class, we had this potassium that the teacher dropped in a little--in the sink, and it gave this tremendous fizz.  And I remember there were three or four of us said, you know, if that little drop can create that kind of fizz, if we dropped the whole damn thing in, what would it look like?  And that's exactly what we did after class, and we got in all kind of trouble.  So that as a practical matter, we were just, we were just young men and women who had an incredible curiosity about the world around us, and we weren't considered bad children, but we were not the goody goody people.  And there were people that I went to school with who never got in trouble, who were considered the, the teacher's pets and all of that.  We were kind of on the fringe of all that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you weren't the teacher's pet type?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Did you--were you good academically?
Speaker 2: Nope.  We were inquisitive but I didn't learn the fundamentals of study, of education in academia until much later in my life.  Our environment was such that I was an average student, maybe a little above average in elementary and high school, but the whole concept of education hadn't taken root in those formative years.  So that I was about an average student.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was your favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: History.  And you gotta remember, this was back in the late '50's [1950s], so the concept of African American History was unheard of.  So that I loved hearing stories.  I used to love to hear stories about what the experiences were like, and growing up in Gary, Indiana, that was right before the real intense development of the Black Muslims, so there was a lot of banter about the history of African American people.  But in the schools, there was not much, if any, of that.
Speaker 1: Now, the schools were segregated, right?  And you had like black administrators in the schools?
Speaker 2: Well, the school systems were community schools so that the school I went to was all-African American, but there were schools in the city that were racially mixed.  So the schools were driven by the population, by the community.  And if you lived in an integrated community, you went to an integrated school.  So that I--my recollection is there were eight schools--eight high schools in the city.  And probably there were a couple of all-white schools, and I think ours was the only all-black school.  And the rest of them had some mixture of racial integration.
Speaker 1: Okay, who were some of your favorite teachers in school?
Speaker 2: I loved my, my speech and drama teacher.  I mean I loved the flare, I loved the kind of melodrama that she brought to every subject matter.  I loved my history teacher.  I loved my English teacher, who was two feet tall, and didn't tolerate any nonsense out of any of us.  I mean so there were--Gary Roosevelt [High School in Gary, Indiana] was an environment of teachers and administrators who cared.  And they refused to allow us not to develop correctly.  I mean so that in a real sense, I mean I, I loved many of my--I didn't, at the time, I didn't recognize that's what I was doing, but I admired and appreciated and respected many of my teachers, many of my coaches in my athletic endeavors.  But, but it was, it was more than just an individual.  It was an aura and an environment where people cared about their job, people cared about our development.  And people cared about what we wanted to do and be in life.
Story_ID: 77993
Speaker 1: What was it that you liked about history, you know, and you--I mean the absence of African American history being taught, I mean what did you, what did you really like about history?
Speaker 2: I think that I reacted rather strongly to the notion that I didn't see us in our history.  I mean so that as a practical matter, we learned the American History, we learned European History, we learned all kinds of histories.  But I didn't see us in that picture.  So that for me, the interests grew out, we gotta find us somewhere in this mix.  So that as a practical matter, we--I remember, we would spend many days, fellow students and I, having discussions about where we fit in this entire mix.  And you gotta remember, I grew up at a time when the notion of Tarzan--you could go to a movie and see "Tarzan," and hear our people rooting for Tarzan.  I mean and it occurred to me at a very formative age, something's wrong with that.  I mean somehow, how does some white guy go to Africa and become king of all the jungle.  I mean so that, that we had to, in effect, unlearn a lot of the stuff that we had learned about the world.  But at the same time, we had to be sure that we understood who we were in that context, and that was very difficult.
Speaker 1: Was there a source of information around?
Speaker 2: The libraries, and there were, there were people.  I mean, again, there were teachers.  There were individuals.  There were groups, the church, the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].  I mean there were all kinds of social organizations that attempted to make sure we had a good balance of who we were and where we fit.  I mean we didn't have an African American foreman at U. S. Steel when I was growing up, and I remember hearing about the first guy who had risen to the level of foreman in the steel mill.  I mean so that, that was very much a notion that somehow we weren't supposed to be in control of the bigger picture, but at the same time, there were people who were striving to get ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you remember any specific books or anything that you came across that had like pictures of--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember a book by the author, I think his name was Rogers, "101 Facts About--
Speaker 1: "Amazing facts about the Negro".
Speaker 2: I remembered, and I couldn't believe some--
Speaker 1: J. A. Rogers.
Speaker 2: [Joel Augustus] J. A. Rogers, you got it.  I remember, I was just stunned to hear, to read stuff like [Ludwig van] Beethoven was black.  I mean, and I remember, I read that book over and over and over because it just so amazed me that these were things that I was reading about and hearing about that were never a part of our formal educational fiber.  I think that W.E.B. DuBois, and the, reading about George Washington Carver and the amazing things he accomplished with a peanut and the whole debate about whether black folks had souls.  I mean so that at a very formative age, I began to become sensitized to the fact that there were things out here that we weren't being told.  And so that history was an interesting attraction to me because I believed that there were things being kept from us.  And I don't know at the time I thought of it as any deliberate conspiracy or plot, but I did know there were things and other ways of approaching history and ideas that we weren't being told in our formal classroom.
Story_ID: 77994
Speaker 1: Now, what about church?  Was that a big deal when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: Well, I kept getting kicked out of church.  My, one of my grandfather's [Clark Bullett] past, part-time experiences, he was a, kind of quasi-Baptist minister.  So, and he was allowed to be a quasi-Baptist minister because he built and paid for the church.  I mean so that he was a good guy.  And one of my really traumatic experiences was realizing that I couldn't carry a tune.  And I was not allowed to sing in the choir because I sang so badly.
Speaker 1: Now, that's pretty radical.
Speaker 2: Well, I--you don't have to hurt me.  I mean I (laughter), I mean it was, I mean I was, I was thirteen years old.  What do you think it did to me (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (Unclear) you know, the church--
Speaker 2: Well, I know, I know.  But as a--
Speaker 1: Usually in a black church, they develop you, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I know, they didn't--
Speaker 1: --no matter how bad you sing--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Nah, I couldn't--
Speaker 1: --they sit up there--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I mean, probably I kept throwing everybody off key, so they told me that I could be the business manager, but I couldn't sing in the choir.  And I remember reacting to that, so I misplaced all the robes.  So one Sunday, they couldn't find the robes for the choir.  So they kept--and so every Sunday, we'd go to Peter's Rock Baptist Church, and I really never developed a real interest in religion, going to church.  I mean I enjoyed the social experience, but I never developed, oh, an attitude, "Oh, my God, I gotta go to church because it has something to do with spirituality."  For me, it was let me go see what's going, and I enjoyed the choir that I was not allowed to sing in.  And sometimes, we had guest preachers who were terrific.  So that the church experience was not a guiding force in my life that I was consciously aware of, but it was important because I was there.
Speaker 1: Now, did you doubt some of the religious principles of the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, you know, it, it--it was not a function of saying, "Okay, is this right or is this wrong?"  I mean it, it was not any conscious debate.  I mean, it was, you go to church because that's what my grandfather and mother [Mattie Cora Bullett] said you do.  And so we did it.  And so it was not me rejecting religion or rejecting spirituality.  I mean I, I just never took it on that way until much later in life it was not an issue for me to question the validity or the substance of spiritualty.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's just something you did, but it wasn't very--however they approached it, it didn't really affect you the way that they hoped it would, I guess?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, I--our attendance was demanded, so we went.  If you say to me, okay, on a Sunday morning, would you have preferred going to church or going out to play baseball?  It wouldn't have been close.  I mean so that it was not a function of me rejecting church.  It was, there were things I'd prefer being--I'd prefer doing.  So, and I didn't understand a lot of the underpinning, the spiritual underpinnings of religion at that time.  So it was just something we did because it was mandated.  So I didn't embrace the spirituality, nor did I reject it.  It was just there.
Story_ID: 78702
Speaker 1: I mean, I learned about fundraising from the church because we had a Building Fund that every Sunday, I remember the preacher trying to raise money for the Building Fund, and to the best of my knowledge, we never built anything (laughter).  I mean so that (laughter) the truth is it was great.  I mean I thought, oh, boy, this is really a great deal, that you keep adding money to the Building Fund and we never built anything.  And I think that in watching and looking back on that, I understood the brilliance of black ministers in that you always keep the congregation, legitimately, aware of the need to do more so that they always keep coming back and making valuable contributions.  And I learned that and watched it happen in Gary, Indiana at Peter's Rock Baptist Church.
Speaker 2: And what was--okay, so did you go to church the entire time you were a teenager?
Speaker 1: No, by the time I was 13, maybe 14, my father--my grandfather [Clark Bullett] was having a lot of difficulties, so we began then to pull away from the church, and eventually stopped going altogether, at least I did.
Speaker 2: But he was really the main reason why everybody was at the church?
Speaker 1: Yes.  He was, he was the glue that, around which everybody in the family kind of circulated.  And I think that in a real sense, he was the one individual that everybody kind of gyrated toward, so that when he began to have financial difficulties, then I think when he--well, he didn't pull back from the church as he began to develop a more survivalist agenda.  Then everybody else did too.
Story_ID: 78703
Speaker 1: Okay, and, well, did he [Glover's grandfather, Clark Bullett] undertake other kinds of work that he ordinarily did--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I mean it was, I think it was hardest on my mother [Mattie Cora Bullett] and maybe on him too because he had gone from being everybody's father.  I mean he had gone from being "the" guy.  He was the man.  So when gramps showed up, you knew you were gonna get something.  You knew he was bringing something.  And I think he relished the role of being the patriarch of the family, extended and immediate.  My mother, on the other hand, in her formative years, had the benefit of growing up with, not affluence, but with a nice little life.  And when all of that was gone, I think having had the experience of knowing both was very hard on her.  We, on the other, hand, in my generation, didn't have the benefit of that history so that by the time we came along, the family was in poverty so that we didn't know that difference.  So it was no big deal for us because that's all we'd ever known.  But she had the experience of having known what a nice-income life was like, and then poverty.
Speaker 1: Plus, she attended Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee] too and--
Speaker 2: And went to Fisk for a couple of years, and so that as a practical matter, a big to do.
Speaker 1: It can't be minimized, you know--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --anytime a black family is exposed to college on some level.
Speaker 2: I think that's right, I think that's right.
Story_ID: 78704
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Did, did you all have the sense when you were in grade school or in high school that you were gonna go to college?
Speaker 2: I mean all of that stuff was kind of fantasy.  I mean we knew lawyers, we knew doctors, we knew teachers.  But it was fantasy.  That was not a part of the fabric of my life.  I mean when I started playing athletics, it was a given that if you were good enough, you could get a scholarship to some school, but, and education throughout the formative-years' experience was stressed very heavily.  But again, it wasn't one of these things, "Okay, I gotta go to college."  I mean I don't think that I thought about it.  I mean it was, when it was time for me to decide what to do, college was a natural progression.  And having been a basketball player at Gary Roosevelt [High School in Gary, Indiana], presumably, I could get a scholarship somewhere.  But I didn't' grow up saying, "Okay, I gotta get a college degree."  I mean it--for me, it was more about I gotta continue to move.  I gotta continue to grow.  I gotta continue--it wasn't formalized.  I don't think I was that sophisticated to know that from high school, you gotta go to college, and then to other things.  But it was about continuing to try and improve yourself.
Speaker 1: I suppose you're describing sort of a present-time orientation when you knew you had to do certain things now--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --and you couldn't really plan.
Speaker 2: My children understand the progression they should make, that I want them to make.  There was nobody around who said, "Okay, now, after high school, you go to college, and after college, you do--if you wanna do something professional, you do something professional."  The notion of being a lawyer in my formative years was a fantasy.  I mean, I mean that was not a part of my level of consciousness of the--the ability to achieve that was beyond my consciousness.  I mean so that as a practical matter, I didn't, I--you know, I envy people who say "At fourteen, I knew exactly what I wanted to be in life."  I didn't have that.  I mean it was, I wanna, I wanna continue to explore and grow, but there was no end-game agenda to how I wanted to do that.
Story_ID: 78705
Speaker 1: Now, when you started high school, you knew you were gonna play, you know, sports, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about high school?  Now, Roosevelt [High School] --are the grade school and the high school on the same grounds?
Speaker 2: It was, the grade school, as I recall was in a different building, but on the grounds--same footprint.  High school was, was traumatic because we had everything that one could expect to experience--I started in high school.  We had the good people, the smart people, the dumb people, the bad people.  I mean there was, it was--so that, I remember as a freshman feeling like such a little pion.  You had all these guys walking around who were big shots, and all of these, the varsity ball players, I mean the Glee Club people, the Pom-Pom girls, I mean so that in a real sense, I was very intimidated by that process.  To go from the little building to the big building, which is where you wanted to go if you were gonna be somebody, I mean it was very intimidating.
Speaker 1: So, but you said, I mean a bad experience.  I mean what was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, well, not bad, but traumatic because all of a sudden I went from a rather small environment in elementary school where we were treated like children to being thrust in an environment where we were expected to and treated like upcoming adults.  So that in a real sense, it was very traumatic all of a sudden for me to be in this, in the terrific environment where I didn't have a sense that--I had a sense that I had to be more responsible for myself.  And in that sense, I had a sense that I had to grow up fairly quickly.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how did you carve a niche out for yourself?
Speaker 2: We had, unfortunately, at that time cliques.  We had--
Speaker 1: They're better than gangs (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, that's true, much better than gangs, but in some way more devastating.  I mean we had the sons and daughters of the lawyers and the doctors and the school administrators who were light-skinned invariably and straight hair who had their little social clique.  We had the incredibly brilliant nerds who were gonna, were obviously, gonna be very successful because they were so smart.  And they had their clique, and then we had what I call the school government types who were always running for some office, who were the good citizens, who were the, got all of the little badges and patches and stuff.  And then there were the Jocks.  And so that at the end of the day in retrospect, I now understand what it was all about was having what I came to describe as a "Red Badge of Courage," I mean something that you could say gives me reason to have confidence in myself.  So that in a real sense, all of these cliques intertwined at some level, but were very, very discriminatory in who was allowed to be in them.  And if one of the Nerds tried to be a Jock, I mean the Jocks didn't look too kindly on that.  And if one of the Jocks tried to be a Nerd, I mean didn't look too kindly on that.  I mean so that I tended to kind of hang out with the Jocks because that's what I thought I was good at and wanted to be.  Now, and that's, that's about right.  I mean I had a tendency to move toward the guys who were doing and women who were doing things athletically.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have athletic heroes at Roosevelt?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  And I remember, I mean--the quintessential thing growing up in Gary, Indiana and going to Gary Roosevelt was to make Varsity.  I mean, I mean if you could make Varsity, then, you know, you'd arrived.  I mean so that, at that time, we had guys like, I remember the Heflin [ph.] boys were Varsity.  I mean they were--the Gordon boys were Varsity. I mean so that I grew up looking at those guys who were playing Varsity.  And that was the end all and be-all.  I mean that was the thing you wanted to be and do if you were gonna be a Jock, to make Varsity, to get a Letter and be a Varsity guy.  And I played, I think a year, I think a year behind a guy by the name of Manny Newsome, and Manny Newsome was the best Roosevelt had ever seen in our lifetime.  And Manny was just phenomenal.  I mean he was incredibly phenomenal.  And I remember wanting to be like Manny.  I mean I wanted to, to grow up to be as good as Manny, although it was never gonna happen, I mean, but there were many heroes that I had.  But they were all within the family of the school.  And there were guys who went to rival schools that I admired who were terrific.  So, yeah, I mean there--I grew up with many athletic heroes.
Story_ID: 78706
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So how long did it take you to become a noted athlete?
Speaker 2: By my junior year [at Gary Roosevelt High School], it was clear that I was gonna be one of the boys.  I mean I was, I was in the loop by my junior year.  But it really wasn't until my senior year in high school that I was a player.  I was, I was one of the mainstays of our football and basketball teams.  So that it wasn't until then that I became somebody.
Speaker 1: Now, what position did you play on the football team?
Speaker 2: Football, I was defensive halfback and offensive guard.  I was small, but slow.  And I remember--
Speaker 1: Small, but slow (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Small, but slow.  I was a dynamite.  I remember being smart and in football, my greatest salvation was that I was always thinking.  But in terms of athletic skills and talent, I remember playing against a guy by the name of "Baby Huey."  I was 155 pounds and Baby Huey was 250 pounds.  And he just stomped on me.  I mean he was always stomping on me.  So there were many experiences that I had (laughter) playing football, but I learned.  You had to be smart.  So I was always thinking.  Now, how do I avoid being hurt, but accomplishing the objective playing football?  And we had some tremendous athletes, tremendous--guys who were fast, guys who were big, guys who were strong, but guys who relied on talent and not hard work and not a lot of thought.  So that my--I learned very early that if I was gonna survive in that environment, I had to always be thinking and anticipating.  So in that sense, I was a solid football player, having none of the athletic skills of my peers, but I was solid because I was always thinking ahead.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, this--so in terms of the coaching staff, did you have like good coaches?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they were phenomenal.  They loved their boys, and we--I had a coach by the name of [James] Dowdell who my recollection was 5'5".  And he talked in this deep gravelly voice, playing football.  And, and we would sweaty and mud in our face and grass all up our behinds.  And we'd be laying on the ground, by the time he walked (unclear), "Are you hurt, are you hurt?  Get up then and play."  I mean, I mean it really was an incredible athletic experience.  I mean we had smart coaches, we had coaches who were dedicated to their teams, and who understood the necessary components and elements of winning.  And they attempted to impart that to us.  We worked like the dickens.  We worked consistently and all the time, and they were committed to us being the best Jocks that we can be--could be.  And so that in that sense, they were just terrific.
Story_ID: 78707
Speaker 1: Now, this, this Roosevelt High School, was it Teddy Roosevelt High School?
Speaker 2: No, it was just Gary Roosevelt High School [sic, the school's name was Theodore Roosevelt High School].
Speaker 1: Just Gary--I mean but was it named for [President Theodore] Teddy Roosevelt?
Speaker 2: I have no idea who it was named for?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: One Roosevelt is good as another.  I mean I--the problem--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I just wondered.
Speaker 2: I don't recall.
Speaker 1: Yeah, usually, if it's an older school (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: See, Indiana is a basketball state.  I mean so that if you played, I mean it was a basketball state and a high school basketball state.  And if you played basketball in Indiana, I mean and you played with, in a program and in an environment that was reputed to be good, I mean that was significant.  When I was a senior in high school, we would have 5,000 people come out to watch our games.  I mean, I mean it really was a kind of life high to be a Varsity athlete in Gary, Indiana at Gary Roosevelt High School.  And everybody had an opinion.  Every Monday, I could go to my barbershop and sit and listen to what we should have done differently and listen to--everybody in Gary, Indiana in my community was a coach.  I mean the fact of the matter is, I was played wrong.  Somebody else was played wrong.  I mean it really was a holistic experience in being a Varsity athlete in Gary because everybody knew who you were.  Everybody had a sense of what you should be doing in the sport.  I mean so, in that sense, if you played basketball in Indiana, you were in the loop.  Now, after the season was over, you were forgotten (laughter).  But while the season was on, it was a very exciting experience.  And I have, I have friends who to this very day will remember some, some play that occurred forty years ago.  Now, I'm at an age when I'm saying, I don't remember what I did last week, and I had a guy say, do you remember that time you stole the ball from me and had that layup.  And I'm thinking, I don't even know who you are, fellow (laughter).  So as a practical matter, it was, it was a high.  It really was, to grow up in my community where the mayor knew who you were, where you were given the keys to the city, where the, the local entrepreneurs cared about what was happening to you.  And there was such an incredible competitive urge that my rival high school and other rival high schools, where if you went to Roosevelt, you were the good guys.  I mean there really was a tremendous sense of that aura in that community, and it was just marvelous, absolutely marvelous to be a part of that.
Speaker 1: So, that you were a guard on the basketball team?
Speaker 2: On the basketball team, yes.
Speaker 1: Were you the point guard?
Speaker 2: We didn't describe, I mean, yeah, I'm too old--I mean the answer is, I guess if I had to compare what we did then to what it is now, I would have been a point guard.
Speaker 1: So your job was to protect the ball and to distribute the ball (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my job was to run the offense and be sure that we were doing what we were supposed to be doing.  But, again, we didn't describe it in those terms back in those days, but that's exactly right.
Story_ID: 78708
Speaker 1: 'Cause I learned a lot of valuable life lessons from basketball.
Speaker 2: All right, now, on that theme, what are some of the incidents that really stand out in your basketball career in high school?
Speaker 1: I mean--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And this (unclear), bear in mind, as you said, this is a big deal in Indiana.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, basketball couldn't be bigger.
Speaker 1: I think I learned many life lessons which at the time, I didn't recognize them as life lessons, but in retrospect I realize that they were life lessons.  I mean one of the things that I remember is being ahead on some team at halftime by twenty points, and taking it for granted and losing that game.  Another we were, I remember being behind by twenty points at halftime and winning that game.  So that in a real sense, I began to develop a sense and an understanding that it's never over until it's over.  I mean that was one life lesson that I embraced very, very significantly.  The most important lesson I think of athletics for young people is the understanding that if you wanna get better, you gotta work at it, I mean that no matter how much you want it, if you're not prepared to work, you aren't gonna accomplish very much.  So that I--and I developed an understanding of many of the K-9 virtues.  I mean the thrill of the chase, the competition, the willingness to run, I mean the willingness to put all you have into it and to put it all on the line.  So that--
Speaker 2: The K-9 virtue?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and if--I mean that's what they were.  I mean, in a real sense that as a practical matter, I learned about corporations from playing basketball in Gary Roosevelt, the whole concept of team.  And the single most important philosophy that I came away with from that experience was always try and add value, that no matter where you are or what you do, you've gotta be prepared to add value to that transaction and circumstance.  And I learned that playing basketball at Roosevelt.  If you got put in the game and you didn't add value, you were gonna be taken out.  So that that attitude and notion, I began to formulate at a very young age in life, and it's, I have embraced that throughout my life.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, you were in some dramatic basketball games I heard--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: --just walking around the office here, people telling me that there was one game where you all lost by one basket or something, something that--
Speaker 1: Well, my senior year, we went down to the semi-state, I mean, and I gotta tell you, I learned an incredible life lesson from that.  I mean we were lean, and we were mean.  We were talented.  We were beautiful.  We were strong, we were fast.  And some little scraggly team from downstate Indiana beat us.  And they beat us because we took 'em for granted and didn't do what we should have done.  I mean, and you gotta understand that had that--that one third of the City of Gary, Indiana went downstate with us.  I mean so the notion that we were the heroes, the conquering heroes, and embraced that, the whole notion that we were gonna bring back the title.  And we got careless.  We got careless and we got cocky, and we got knocked off.  I mean and it was so--you gotta remember, you gotta understand what this meant in Gary, Indiana during tournament season, I mean in Indiana during tournaments.  I mean I remember people falling out on the floor crying.  I mean it was so, it was so terrible.  But I never forgot the lesson that if given the opportunity, you never take success for granted.
Story_ID: 78709
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that was your senior year [at Gary Roosevelt High School] .  Now, what else were you doing in your senior year besides playing ball or--
Speaker 2: I was in the Dramatic Club.  And I was working.  I always had a little side job, and we were always doing something.  I mean in terms of school, we were always participating in some kind of social activity and always putting things on, but athletics and being involved in the theater were very much the mainstays of my non-curricular activities.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how did you do academically in school?
Speaker 2: Again, I was an average student.  I mean I wasn't, I mean I was maybe a little bit above average, but academics was not something that I knew much about growing up.  I mean I was, I could read, I could write, and I could get by.  But there were people, I remember in high school who studied four or five hours every day.  I mean that was not a part of my experience.  That was not anything I knew to do or even understood.  I mean so that I was an average student, maybe a little above, maybe a little below, maybe a little above.  But academia was not a part of the fabric of what I understood was the important thing in life.  I knew that education was, but I didn't know what that meant at the time.  So the notion of getting a good education was very much a part of what we were raised to believe, but I didn't really know what that meant.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have any sense that you were gonna go to college, you know?
Speaker 2: Again, my recollection is that it was just a kind of natural progression that if you played sports at Gary Roosevelt, you would get a scholarship somewhere.  But I didn't have, I mean and it was always something that I just assumed I'd do but without a sense of direction, without a, without substance of that sense.  So that as a practical matter, it was just, it was just a natural flow from what my life experience had been to that time.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have anybody at this point that was, served a mentor to you or--
Speaker 2: A lawyer at the time, by the name of Freddie Work [ph.], who has since then become a judge and Freddie Work started talking to me about going to Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee].  And back in 1960, '61' [1961], Fisk was considered this ultra-academic environment, and I had serious questions about whether I would be able to cut it at Fisk academically.  And Freddy worked very hard to convince me to go to Fisk and to work at Fisk in letting me.  So, yeah. Freddie Work was kind of a guy who steered me to Fisk and did all he could to help me get there.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how did you encounter him?  He's a lawyer--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Through sports.  I mean it was through sports.  I mean everything at that time in my life was through sports.  Freddie had been a basketball player at Fisk and had seen me play and embraced me, and encouraged me to go to Fisk.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So he basically set things up for you to--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --get into Fisk.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's correct.
Story_ID: 78710
Speaker 1: Now, did you go on a scholarship?
Speaker 2: Well, you see Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee] didn't give athletic scholarships.  And I didn't know that until I got to Fisk.  And I remember going into the registrar's office or the, whoever the guy was, the bursar's office, the guy that handled the money when I first arrived at Fisk, and, you know, expecting to have my tuition paid for, my room and board paid for and perhaps a little bit of money on the side.  And I remember him looking at me, who--and saying, "Who are you and why are you here?"  I said, I'm, you know, Renaldo Glover, and I'm here on a scholarship.  He said, "Son, we don't give athletic scholarships".  Now, three years after I was at Fisk, they started giving athletic scholarships, but they didn't give 'em at the time.  So I went over to see our coach who said, who had recruited me.  "Where is my money?"  He said, "Well, son, didn't you bring any?"  I mean so that I had to scurry around to try and get some work, to try and get some loans.  I mean it really was--and I think it was more a function of my own naivete and not understanding that it, than being misled.  I mean my assumption was that that's what people did for Jocks.  And I had letters that when I'd go, when I went back and read them, didn't say what I thought they said.  I mean so I had to scurry around, and I remember Freddy [Work] sent me some money to get me some scholar--I mean to get me, help me pay some of my bills.  I mean so that was rough in the beginning.  On the front end, that was tough.  I mean so that I paid for my education through work-study programs and loans and a whole slew of other stuff.  And, again, my recollection is that three years after I started going to Fisk, they started giving athletic scholarships.  But I wasn't fortunate enough to get one.
Speaker 1: So you had to get a job?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that wasn't unusual because I always had some kind of little job, some kind of little activity on the side anyway.  But, yeah, I had to, had to work.  I had to get something to do to supplement my financial wherewithal, oh, yeah.
Story_ID: 78711
Speaker 1: But you had to practice for basketball too, right?
Speaker 2: Well, you see, the reality is that basketball as an organized activity became less important to me as time went on.  And I, I am told forty years later I'm still the highest scorer that ever went to Fisk University.  I was a terrific ball player.  But in terms of what was the driving force in my life, basketball was something I did because I was good at it, but it was no longer the end-all and be-all that it had been in Gary, Indiana.  By then I had discovered academia.  I mean by then I had began to think about other issues in life.  And I played for four years, and, again, I think that I--my record speaks for itself in terms of my accomplishments with the sports.  But I remember in high school, we would practice four or five hours every day in the summer; never did that in college.  I mean because I had to get a--I worked in the steel mills during the summer during my college years, and basketball was not the fun that it used to be.  I enjoyed winning.  I enjoyed being in the sport, but I began to develop other interests.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, were you as big a star in high school as you were at Fisk, I mean in terms of your playing ball?
Speaker 2: Totally different environment.  The, I was, I was "the" star at Fisk, but it was in a small pond.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Being on Varsity and being a starting player at Gary Roosevelt High School was being a player in a great, big pond, so that our facilities in high school were better.  We had more coaches.  I mean everything in high school was better than it was in college.  I mean so that as a practical matter, I was more of "the man" in college, but the fact is that it was a much smaller pond than it was in Gary, Indiana.
Story_ID: 78712
Speaker 1: Well, what did you decide to major in and what were your main academic interests in college [Fisk University in Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: I didn't know that I couldn't study.  I didn't know that I was not a good student.  And an English professor by the name of [Leslie M.] "Doc" Collins--it had to be within the first week or two of us being in school, asked us to write a paper, which I did.  And Doc said to me, you know, "Go home and write your parents.  Tell 'em you're coming home because you'll never make it at Fisk."  "What do you mean?"  He said, "You just, you're not ready for Fisk."  And I mean that was kind--that was an incredible epiphany to me.  I mean it was just an incredible reality that all of a sudden I was in an environment where somebody was saying to me that you can't cut it.  And I remember that very day he said that, going back to my dormitory room and saying, you know, maybe I should just go home.  And then decided, you know, I'm not gonna let anybody chase me out of here.  And for the next four or five months, it was the most incredible, emotional and mental experience that one could fathom.  I just exploded.  I mean I decided that all of a sudden I was gonna be a good student and worked like the dickens at it.  I mean, and I read everything, I didn't sleep.  I really went at this academic thing so that I went from, as Doc would describe, not being a capable student, that by the end of my first year, I was on the honor roll.
Story_ID: 78713
Speaker 1: Okay, so you buckled down and you started really engaging at Fisk University [in Nashville, Tennessee] then?
Speaker 2: I had three or four great professors, and I was a part of a community that was incredibly nurturing, incredibly nurturing.
Speaker 1: Who were these professors?  This is our history, and this--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, let's talk about Aaron Douglas was my Art teacher.  Theodore Currier was my History teacher and became, inspired me to become a History major.  I had Doc Collins who taught me English.  I had [Arnaud] Arna Bontemps who taught me English.  I mean so this was an environment where it really was an incredibly caring and nurturing environment.  So that as a practical matter, I had an opportunity mature as a student within this environment so that I can't say to you that I was some maverick out here doing it all alone.  I mean I had tremendous support from the administration--I remember my president at the time was Nathan Wright [sic, Stephen Wright].  I mean there were people who cared and didn't have any problem in manifesting their caring about what we were trying to do in life.  I mean so that I remember Gladys Forde taught us Drama. I mean there were so many incredible people there at that time, and equally as important, there were students who were so smart and so incredibly talented that just to be in that environment was just very, very significant to my later life.  The smartest guy I've ever met, I met at Fisk University, a guy by the name of Joe Lyle, and Joe Lyle--
Speaker 1: What's his last name?
Speaker 2: Joe Lyle, L-Y-L-E.  And Joe Lyle, Joe Lyle would always say stuff that I call the "wow" stuff, that when he would say it to you, you would say "That's the dumbest thing I've ever heard, Joe".  And a week later, it would hit you what he had said, and you'd have to sit down and say, just, wow.  I mean it was just amazing.  And I think that I learned a valuable lesson from Joe Lyle who said to me after my first year in law school--you know, "Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts] has ruined you."  I said, "What?"  "Yeah, Harvard has ruined you."  I said, "What do you mean, Joe?"  He said, "Harvard has given you incredible analytical skills but taken away your imagination.  And if you intend to lead a full life, you've gotta be prepared to be creative and be imaginative.  You have to live a life that allows you to be--to go beyond the analytical."  And it was a lesson that in my business and in my profession, I never forgot.  So that Joe Lyle, without ever knowing that, gave me one of the most significant life lessons I could ever have.  And there were people who were so smart, you wondered how they could walk around with the brains they had, their heads should have just been too heavy.  I mean this was--I'm telling you.  It was--we had so many incredibly, phenomenally gifted people, who could sing, dance, who were academicians beyond compare, who were incredibly brilliant beyond compare.  So that having had the privilege of being a part of a student body of that caliber with the professors who were committed to our development in a nurturing environment, Fisk University was just phenomenal, just phenomenal.
Story_ID: 78714
Speaker 1: Now, some of the--you came along at a time when, it was just after the sit-in's, I think, right, and--
Speaker 2: Never--no, I was there during the sit-in's in Nashville [Tennessee], yes.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about that experience?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wish I could.  I mean I really wish that I could tell you that we were all up in it.  We had a fellow by the name of [MH] John Lewis who was very much a part of that, the Civil Right initiative.  But we as a body politic and as a group were really more insulated and insular from a lot of that.  I mean it really was the initiative of the school [Fisk University in Nashville, Tennessee] to train us to be whatever we wanted to be and to educate us.  But really, without discouraging us, really not push us as kids out in the middle.  I remember going to one demonstration in downtown Nashville.  But the Civil Right Movement was something I didn't--and I think many other people didn't embrace until much later in life.  But it was important that we have the, the nurturing experience at Fisk in order to enable us to deal with many of the problems with which we were confronted later.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we interviewed [HM] Nikki Giovanni not long ago.
Speaker 2: Nikki was, Nikki was a--I think Nikki spent a year there when I was there.  She only spent a year.  And then--
Speaker 1: She went away and came back.  That's what she said--
Speaker 2: And she may--that may be right.
Speaker 1: She was actually kicked out while there in school and had--and came back later.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, she was there, and I don't remember when she--but I do remember Nikki having been there one of the years I was there.  But I do remember.  But she was not this, this great international poet at that time.  But she was there too.  I mean we had incredible minds, I mean incredible.  And if you look at what some of the people did.  I mean Ron Brown's wife went to Fisk.  I mean [HM] Colin Powell's wife [Vivian Johnson Powell] went to Fisk.  You can't go any place in the world where there isn't a Fiskite doing something very exciting and very significant, so that in a real fundamental sense, that nurturing environment where you had so much incredible talent was very, very inspiring.  And it was there that I began to have, develop a sense of black history when--it was there that I began to have a sense of [HM] John Hope Franklin and Arna Bontemps and Aaron Douglas, who, unfortunately, I had no sense of the economics of black Art, but I was exposed to it.  And I mean I--who is it?  Cullen--
Speaker 1: Countee Cullen (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, it was John Cullen [ph.] [sic, John O. Killens] who wrote, I forget--we had, man, we had people coming in talking to us and as a part of that environment who were just spectacular.  I mean people that later in life, I'd said, wow, I met him or I saw him.  That was a phenomenal experience, phenomenal experience and in many respects, once again, because we were a predominantly African American school, we, we occupied every facet of the society so that we had black leadership, black followers, I mean black good guys, black bad guys, so that we were all over the spectrum, so that we developed a sense that if you had the character and talent, you could be successful.
Story_ID: 78715
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you go to any of the history conferences?  I know that the Association for Negro Life and History--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Nah, I didn't do any of that stuff.  I didn't do any of that stuff.  Man, I was trying to survive.  Shoot, I was trying (laughter) to get out of there alive.  I mean in retrospect everything was going on that I really wish I had taken advantage of, but just didn't know.  I mean, again, Aaron Douglas gave me, personally, two of his pieces of art.  And--
Speaker 1: You still have them?
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, they didn't go with the decor of an apartment that I had in New York, so I gave 'em away.  Now, don't, don't, don't beat me.  I mean I--don't beat me, don't beat me.  I mean Arna Bontemps autographed a dozen books and somehow they got lost in my various life moves.  John O. Cullom was the author that I was thinking about--
Speaker 1: John O. Killens.
Speaker 2: O. Killens.
Speaker 1: Killens.
Speaker 2: Killens, autographed a half a dozen books for me and I don't know where they are.  I mean so that I never appreciated the significance of maintaining those keepsakes or their value until much later in life.  But the very fact that I had those experiences was significant to my developing a sense of myself.  And I remember reading about the Great Debate between DuBois [W.E.B. DuBois] and Booker T. [Washington] and having some semblance of an opinion on that.  And in many respects, they were both right.  I mean and I think the flaw that we, as a people, have made is not appreciating that they were both right.  We believe that it had to be one or the other.  But that was, that's a whole different subject matter.  And I remember reading about Marcus Garvey and Ralph Bunche, I mean and, I mean there were examples after examples of our participation in global history that was very important to my development of a perspective about life.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I can imagine, that's a powerful environment.
Speaker 2: I mean it was, I mean, and again, it wasn't simply the teachers.  It was who the students were.  I mean, and it was just amazing.  And, again, at the time, I didn't understand that, but in retrospect, I could just say, wow.  I mean we all were there together.  We were all struggling together.  We were all eating that rotten cafeteria food and begging for saltine crackers at night.  I mean we were, I mean it really was, it may have been the best time of my life because I was with people who cared about what we were trying to do, and in a real sense, we were all struggling in one way or another.  And there was a sense of esprit de corps and comradery that was real.  We had fraternities and sororities and in many respects, we were incredibly innocent to the world issues and world problems, didn't know anything about having to pay income taxes.  I mean it really was a phenomenal experience and a very fun time.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you think the major difference was the intellectual, the high level of intellectual activity going on amongst the students and do you think that made the difference between that experience and the experience you had at Roosevelt?
Speaker 2: Well, we had a lot of very smart people at [Gary] Roosevelt [High School in Gary, Indiana].  But in terms of my own interests, it wasn't until I went to Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee] that, that I decided, I came to believe--I came to embrace academia as something that was important to me.  It wasn't that we had smart people at Fisk and not smart people at Roosevelt 'cause there were a lot of very smart people at Gary Roosevelt.  I mean it really was a good school.  But it wasn't something that I embraced as my own until I got--I went to Fisk.  So that having all of those people striving and struggling in that way to achieve was helpful.  But we had the same, same situation at Roosevelt, but it was more my lack than Roosevelt's lack.  And by the time I got to Fisk--and I never will forget it, when [Leslie M.] "Doc" Collins said to me, "just call your mom."  Go home.  You'll never make it here.  You'll never be a Fisk student.  I mean then I was just traumatized by that, and that was a major life experience, a major life episode for me.  And I wish I could say in retrospect, okay, I decided okay, and now, I'm gonna be a good student.  It didn't happen that way.  I mean I got mad and I went on a tear.  I mean so it wasn't--I refused to cave in because I was twenty points behind at halftime.
Story_ID: 78716
Speaker 1: How did you end up going to Harvard [Law School in Cambridge, Massachusetts]?  What did you do after Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee]?  Did you go right away or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went straight, I went straight from Fisk to Harvard.  Harvard came down to the University, the law school came down to Fisk looking to recruit some African American students.  And my history professor, Theodore Currier, really encouraged Harvard to take me as one of the applicants.  And so that out of my graduating class at Fisk, I think there were three of us.  There was the Phi Beta Kappa, smarty, smarty guy.  There was a guy who was, he had good grades and who was a government type.  And I had, as an athlete, I had good grades, and I was an athlete type.  So that as a practical matter, Harvard was, I assume, unsure of what type of blend of talents and abilities would survive and do well at Harvard.  I mean so they took all of us.  I mean, and my first-year class at Harvard, I think there were 11 or 12 of us.  And if you look at, kind of the, the comp--who we were and what we were, we were all very different.
Speaker 1: And these were black students?
Speaker 2: Black students, that's right.
Speaker 1: Out of how many?
Speaker 2: Right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: In law school?
Speaker 2: Maybe 500.  And as it turned out, all of us graduated.  All of us did fairly well.  And, again, that was a--from Gary, Indiana to Fisk was a quantum leap.  From Fisk to Harvard was a quantum leap, but the leap from [Gary] Roosevelt [High School] to Fisk was more of a quantum than my leap from Harvard--from Fisk to Harvard in part because by that time, I had learned how to be a student.  I had learned how to study.  I had learned how to approach academia, but it was an awesome experience.  I mean it was tough.  I mean, and all of the stories you hear about the law school are true.  I mean it was vicious environment where they took no prisoners, where they beat you up a lot, and if you ask anybody who went through that experience, coming out of the law school, you came away believing, "I can do anything if I can endure that".  And I remember my very first class at the law school--many of us hadn't even bought our books yet.  We walked into a class, and the professor walked, opened the book, called on a student.  And he was so nervous that he threw up and got up, got up to leave and the professor said "If you leave, don't ever come back."  I mean, and that was my first academic exposure at the Harvard Law School.  I mean it was a tough environment.  It was tough, and I lived in the dormitory my first year, and if some guy down the hall got a book, the whole floor went and got that book.  And if some guy down the hall stayed late, everybody stayed late.  I mean so the notion of sleep, the notion of rest was an anathema.  I mean it was all, it was all gong ho and being sure that you never allowed anybody to know more than you or to work harder than you.  And I learned the lesson of relativity in law school.  I was, I lived across the hall from a guy by the named [Emanuel] "Manny" Rouvelas who was a good friend.  And Manny and I were sitting around one day, and he said--he was Greek, he said, "You know, I'm flat broke."  And he was sitting at his desk working on his finances.  And I had $20.00 in my pocket, and I figured okay, Manny, I'll lend you 10 [dollars].  Then he says, with his back to me, I'm down to $1,100 in my checking account.  And I'm thinking, you know, that's interesting 'cause I've never seen $1,100 (laughter).  I mean the notion of being broke with $1,100, I mean somehow that just struck me as very bizarre.  But then I began to understand that much of life is all about what your experiences are and your base.  So that for Manny, $1,100 was being broke.  Eleven hundred dollars for me would have been more money than I'd ever seen in life.  So that in a real sense, I began to, to organize and have a sense that relativity is very much a part of who and what you are.
Story_ID: 78717
Speaker 1: I mean let's go back and talk about my experience from, from the time that I realized or I was told that I couldn't cut it as a student at Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee] to later on.  I mean I took that on as a serious challenge.  I mean I said, I am gonna do this.  I mean, and I'm gonna really, really take this to, take this seriously and give it my best shot.  And in the process of doing that, I had an incredible number of, of epiphanies, that all of a sudden academia and knowledge and learning and reading and writing became incredibly vital to my sense of self.  And in the process of doing that, I became--I began to realize that it was important for me to continue to grow.  And it was through that experience that I could never get enough.  I would find myself, for example, sitting in a room, and I had to be reading something.  And if all there was, was an aerosol can, I had to read the can.  I mean it really became a kind of voracious hunger that I had to go and do that.  So that as a practical matter, it wasn't simply becoming a good student at Fisk--and I wish I could, I wish I knew what it was, I wish I could bottle it and sell it, but it became an important fabric, a part of the fabric of who and what I was, that I wanted to be, I wanted to know, I had to know.  So that I think, as a practical matter for me, it was I shot through the roof because I just had to know.  It was all about, again, going back to my formative years as a student, we were always trying to figure stuff out.  And through Fisk, I developed the tools by which to do that.  So that temperamentally and from a personality perspective, my formative years in Gary [Indiana] were exactly consistent with my years at Fisk, but Fisk had--gave me the tools by which I could do that.
Story_ID: 78718
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did you decide to go to law school in the first place?
Speaker 2: I mean I had thought, I mean you gotta remember now, this was at a time when, if you wanted to be a black professional, you could be a lawyer or a doctor or a preacher or mortician.  And of all of the possibilities, lawyers, lawyers--being a lawyer sounded like the best option for me.  And my history professor really encouraged me and pushed me to do that.  I mean I had no idea that I wanted to go be a lawyer.  I mean I had no idea--because I didn't know what lawyers did.  I mean I didn't know anything about the law.  But he encouraged me to go take the test, the LSAT.  He encouraged me to go interview with the Harvard [Law School in Cambridge, Massachusetts] recruiter.  He encouraged me to actually go to law school.  So in that sense, I mean once again, it wasn't that I woke up morning and said, okay, now, I know what I wanna be and do in life.  It wasn't like that at all.  It was just a natural progression.  I went from Gary Roosevelt [High School in Gary, Indiana] to Fisk University [in Nashville, Tennessee] to Harvard Law School.  And it was more me taking advantage of an opportunity than any well-thought out plan.  Now, when I write my memoirs, I'll say it was all pursuant to some master plan, but the fact is (laugher) that it was--
Speaker 1: I hope they don't see this tape.
Speaker 2: I see, that's right.  We'll destroy the tape later.  I mean it was a function of me having been presented with an opportunity and seizing that opportunity.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, you know, did you ever think about becoming a historian?
Speaker 2: No, I--I didn't--the answer is, no.  I never thought about that.
Story_ID: 78719
Speaker 1: All right, so you're on the Harvard [Law School in Cambridge, Massachusetts] campus.  You were telling us about law school the first year, the competitiveness--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --the intensity.
Speaker 2: And it transcended race, transcended ethnicity, transcended gender.  I mean it was, it was all about competition.  I mean, and, you see, I had the advantage of many of my peers because it was important to much of that grouping that they try and make "Law Review."  It didn't interest me, didn't matter to me.  So I was able to survive that environment because a lot of the stress and a lot of the things that caused them stress were not important to me.  What I wanted to do was have a good experience at the law school, learn as much as I could, and get out of there, so that it was never--I never had an interest in teaching at the law school.  I never had an interest in being an academician in that environment.  So that, I mean I'm telling you it was incredible.  We went to class in the morning, had lunch, went to class in the afternoon, and then everybody went to study.  I mean it was one of the most, it was at that time for me, the most rigorous academic experience I ever had.  I mean everything you did was about learning something today that you didn't know the day before.  And it was competitive, it was vicious, and the professors enjoyed that.  I mean they beat us up, we tried to beat them up.  And it didn't matter who you were.  It didn't matter what you were.  It was, we were all treated like minions and pion's, and I remember Dean [Erwin] Griswold who was at that time Dean of the law school or in one of our first sessions, saying to us, "Look to the right, look to the left.  By the end of the year, one of you won't be here."  I was kind of traumatized by that.  But, again, for me it was having the academic skills.  What I needed in that environment was an acceleration.  So I went from, I went from Fisk University [in Nashville, Tennessee] to another experience--another epiphany and another kind of transformational experience where Fisk had given me the tools.  But I had to accelerate.  So the notion of spending five or six hours every day studying, rising to eight hours a day studying.  Once you got in that mode, it was all insane.
Story_ID: 78720
Speaker 1: I mean you went to class, you ate your meals, you slept four or five hours a day, and you worked, you studied.  I mean that's what, that was the totality of that experience.  And work didn't come easy to me.  There were guys who could read this stuff, who knew this stuff and who were just good at it.  I mean, but the notion of corporations and taxations and all of these issues, they were fantasies to me.  I didn't know anything about this stuff.  But there were guys who grew--who had youthful experience where this was a natural part of their life.  So that they understood these issue much better and quicker than I did because I didn't know anything about corporations or what they were.  And I remember having this incredibly intense, listening to these incredibly intense debates in these classes by people who were having real-life experiences.  I mean so that in a real sense, that didn't come easy to me, which meant I had to simply work harder.  And you couldn't--when I say work harder, it wasn't simply putting in more hours than these guys because that was impossible.  But it was being more intense.  It was about, about really opening up and trying to grasp what was going on.  And in that sense, it was a phenomenal experience.
Speaker 2: It sounds like it.  Is it true that people act, sabotaged each other's work.
Speaker 1: I didn't have--I never had any experience of that.  And maybe it was going on, but nobody cared enough about what I was doing to try and sabotage anything, but I have heard stories of that.  But it didn't, never happened to me.
Speaker 2: Those are the stories I think are the craziest about that.
Speaker 1: But, again, you gotta remember, there was a core of guys who expected to be "Law Review" and at the top of the class.  Now, what was going on at that level of competition, I have no idea.  But I didn't care to be on "Law Review," don't know that I could have been even if I cared to be.  But as a practical matter for me, it was simply learning as much as I could and getting my degree and getting out of there.
Speaker 2: So you didn't probably notice much about Boston [Massachusetts] when you were, or Cambridge, rather--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I learned a lot, I knew a lot about Cambridge.  After my, not my first year, but with the--in the following two years, I spent a lot of time learning that community, being around in that community because then after my first year, I moved into an apartment.  I mean so I came to know Cambridge and Boston fairly well.
Speaker 2: It seems like the experience was so intense, all the studying that you were doing--
Speaker 1: You know, and the truth is that the first year there was so much to learn, and fundamentally, what we had to learn was how to think like a lawyer.  And in the second and third year, it was more about the accumulation of knowledge of a subject matter.  But once you'd mastered the ability to think like a lawyer--and you don't master it, but once you had, once you became comfortable with that approach, then it was simply then, after that, it was simply a function of absorbing knowledge.
Story_ID: 78721
Speaker 1: Now, what is "thinking like a lawyer"?  What is the difference between thinking like an ordinary person and thinking like a lawyer?
Speaker 2: I think the real key as I look back on the law school [Harvard Law School in Cambridge, Massachusetts] experience is being able to deal with the pieces, but never lose sight of the whole.  Without emotion, with detachment and with intellectual integrity and clarity.  And that, those words sound fuzzy, but they're really not.  I mean as a practical matter, if you think about, if you were to see a lady or a person get hit by a car on the streets, most people would say, "Oh, my God, isn't that terrible?" and have kind of an emotional reaction to that tragedy.  Thinking like a lawyer, your reaction might be "Okay, now, who's a fault (laughter)?"  I mean so that--I mean, in a real sense it is to eliminate one's biases, prejudices and emotions from every analytic situation--from every situation and to approach it with analytical integrity and objectivity that takes time to achieve.  And you'd be surprised at how many assumptions we make in our thinking.  You'd be surprised that if I were to say to you, "What is the color blue," what that would mean?  I mean that triggers all kinds of reactions in your head.  If I were to say to you, "Give me a definition of love?"  I mean that would trigger all kinds of reactions in you that come from a source that may be totally irrational and non-analytical.   So that as a practical matter, thinking like a lawyer is the ability to be absolutely unbiased, unprejudiced and purely intellectually honest in your approach.
Speaker 1: Now, when your friend--
Speaker 2: Joe Lyle?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Lyle--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --told you that you were analytical and yet not--had lost your, and yet you had seemed to have lost your imagination,--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --what did he mean by that?
Speaker 2: By the very essence of analytics, you can't make quantum leaps.  You can't go from one to five if you're analytical.  You've gotta to go, one, two, three, four, five, and if you look at human creativity, human creativity is driven by quantum leaps, jumping beyond what you know, jumping beyond the obvious, jumping beyond the next step.  So true creativity is having the ability to go from one to five, without going through two, three, four.  So that by definition, lawyers are taught to build foundations and to build steps one at a time.  There is a kind of coherency to the logic that is required to be a good analyst.  But the truly creative people have the ability to go from one to five without going through three.  And that, and that defies the very essence of analysis and logic.
Story_ID: 78722
Speaker 1: I just said, being around smart people was exciting, and I knew--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I mean being around smart people is very exciting, and it was exhilarating.  I mean it was uplifting.  It was--and that was true at Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee].  It was true at Harvard [Law School in Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I mean, and I think that you couldn't be in that environment and not want to know more.  You couldn't be in either of those environments and not want to aggressively grow and develop.
Speaker 1: Okay, now after law school--well, tell me about graduating from law school?  Was there ever a time when you thought you were not gonna make it?
Speaker 2: No, I mean I, I mean the critical year was the first semester.  I mean if you got through the--I mean the critical time was the first semester and then the first year.  And after I got my grades the first year, and I passed all my classes, then I came to realize beginning my second year that what was left was the absorption of knowledge.  And I didn't have any real fear of that.  And I left in June [1968]--did not go back for graduation because by then I had been elected the Executive Director of the Law Students Civil Rights Research Council in New York [New York City, New York].  And that, that Spring the council was developing a program that required my presence in New York.  So that I didn't go back for graduation.  So that once I was done with my final exam at law school, I was outta there.
Speaker 1: Now, did your--now, was your mother Mattie Cora Bullett] still living?
Speaker 2: My mother was still living.  She came to New York to spend time with me the summer following my graduation and had, was very agitated that I didn't go back to, with my cap and gown--
Speaker 1: I wondered how she would feel.
Speaker 2: She was very agitated that I didn't go do that, but by then, I was ready to move on with my life.
Story_ID: 78723
Speaker 1: Now, at this juncture [1968], had your father [Paul Glover] resurfaced at all?
Speaker 2: No, my father died when I was 17, 18 years old.  He is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So he didn't--
Speaker 2: He was not a part of my family.  I mean we didn't grow up in his environment, and in addition, then he passed when I was a senior in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, you said he and your mother split when--
Speaker 2: When I was in my formative years.  You know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Nine--
Speaker 2: Yeah, nine or ten.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a pretty long time to be around.
Speaker 2: But they were, I mean it, it--
Speaker 1: But he wasn't, he was there, but not there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And they were always off and on.  I mean, and so that it wasn't that we had this idyllic childhood that at some point was breached.  I mean he was off and on.  He was here, he was not there.  They were breaking up.  They were not.  So that was, that was an incredibly, not a very stable situation from the very beginning.  So when it was, when the breach finally occurred, it was not a significant thing.
Story_ID: 78724
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now you're at--now, what is the--
Speaker 2: Law Students Civil Rights Research Council was an association, law school organizations that, whose principal job was to provide summer interns for various Civil Rights activities during the summer.  So that the Research Council developed, raised money and would send interns into various circumstances throughout the country during the summer to participate and facilitate the Civil Right Movement.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is what year?  We're in 19--
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969], all right.  This is right after the death of Dr. King [Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Yes, I mean, and I traveled all over the South, all over the Deep South in my capacity as Executive Director of that organization.  And I worked with some of the leading Civil Right and Civil Liberties people in the country at that time.  Eleanor Holmes Norton, who was associate director, I believe, legal director [associate legal director] of the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] out of New York, and I had tremendous disagreements.  And I remember one year, she defended George Wallace's right to give a speech and have a program in Shea Stadium [New York City, New York], and I found that so offensive.  But she was a true Civil Libertarian.  I remember working with Fannie Mae [sic, Lou] Hammer, down in, down in Mississippi, and a woman who had such incredible dignity, I mean who was "them" and "those", but boy, when Fannie Lou spoke, I mean you listened to Fannie Lou Hammer.  So that I had the opportunity and experience of working with a lot of the, at that time, leading figures in the Civil Rights, Civil Liberties Movement, including [William] Bill Kunstler, and [HM] Vernon Jordan, I didn't know well, but we worked with him.  Roy Innis and a whole slew of Civil Right leadership at that time.  As a young man and as a first-year graduated law student was a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and you're, now, you're fairly young.
Speaker 2: I'd just gotten out, I was 25, 26, coming out of-- [Harvard Law School in Cambridge, Massachusetts], but, and I mean it wasn't like we were peers.  I mean they were the big guys and we were little kids.  But the fact is, that the opportunity to watch and see a lot of them was just phenomenal.  And I became immersed, and that was at an important time in the anti-war movement with Vietnam, so that we ultimately got all involved in the anti-war movement, I mean, and I gotta tell yah, that was quite an experience for me.  And I spent two, two years--two and a half years being involved in that directly.  And it was just life changing in many ways.  I became very much aware of macro issues concerning ethnicity, concerning class, concerning economics.  And that became a very real thing for me.
Story_ID: 78725
Speaker 1: And justice issues were in the news quite a bit there.  I mean that's when people were, that's when the trial of The Chicago Seven was going on--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yep, I came out here for that.
Speaker 1: The murder of Fred Hampton.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, I came out here [Chicago, Illinois] for the '68' [1968 Democratic National] Convention.  And I saw a Chicago policeman push a nun with his nightstick, and decided I got no business here.  I jumped on the first thing out (laughter) of here.  I was, I hate to admit it, but I was gone because I realized that if a Chicago police in my view who was basically Irish--
Speaker 1: Irish Catholic.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Irish Catholic would push a nun, then I don't have any idea what he would do to me, and as it turned out, I was spot-on in getting out of here.  So I was around during that period, and I saw a lot and learned a lot.  I can't tell you about it, but I knew a lot.  And, you know, we were so incredibly innocent and so incredibly naive because we knew things were wrong.  We, we knew we were trying to do something.  But we didn't know what was wrong, that the whole concept of racism, the whole concept of discrimination, the whole concept of bias was substantive, was real, was oppressive and was venomous.  But even the words we used.  Who is the enemy?  The enemy is "The Man."  What in the hell is that?  I mean, and so that after two years directly involved in the [Civil Rights] Movement, I came to realize that we needed to know more about how all of this stuff worked.  Was there some grand conspiracy that some people were sitting on Mount Olympus putting together that somehow were designed to oppress or were there or was it a little more complicated than that.  And I began to think, well, maybe the reality is that people make small decisions every day which in the aggregate lead to egregious oppression.  But then how do you fight that?  How do you deal with that?  And I dare say that we didn't--I didn't know, and I dare say that many of the people with whom I was on the front lines with didn't know.  It was easy to assume there was some evil cabal that once we identified them, that we could beat them and things would be right.  But I think that we've spent a lot of time, a lot of money and a lot of sacrifices were made, and a lot of courageous, valiant, important people got wasted.  And I think that a lot of it was misdirected.  I mean Bull Connor down in, in the South.  I mean George Wallace, I mean all of these people were real, tangible enemies, but as we now have seen, addressing some of these issues didn't fundamentally change the lives of the vast majority of our people.
Story_ID: 78726
Speaker 1: Were you dealing with a Bull Connor or [George] Wallace or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I spent, I spent some time in Bolivar County, Mississippi.  And we were down there working to elect the first black county official in Bolivar County, Mississippi.  And the night he was elected, the word was out the Klan [Ku Klux Klan] was coming to kill us all.  And I remember being under a porch, an elevated porch in Bolivar County, Mississippi with men and women who had rifles and pistols.  And I'm thinking, if these guys show up, there's gonna be a blood bath down here.  And I just wanted to be a little lawyer.  But I learned, I learned about the fact that a lot of people embrace, this is very serious.  And they were not about to be intimidated.  And I saw courage in a way that I'd never seen before.  I saw a kind vibrance and fiber and integrity that I had never seen before.  These were people whose everyday lives were affected by what was going on between themselves and their local community.  We were kind of gadflies and when stuff got too hot, we left.  And these were people--and I remember seeing sharecroppers coming out of the fields, to vote for the very first time.  And I remember standing in, on the side of a hill, I mean with just tears to see these people who their whole lives had endured that kind of drama and trauma and oppression, coming forth to exercise their right to vote and feeling such tremendous pride in the courage and dignity and integrity of what I saw.  I mean it was an amazing reality.
Speaker 1: A transforming experience.
Speaker 2: It really was because I then began to see that it simply was not about a car or a house or about things.  It was about integrity.  It was about human dignity.  It was about commitment to causes beyond one's self.  And these were people who were making tremendous sacrifices, who when stuff got too hot didn't have an option.  I mean, and that's not to diminish or belittle the people who went north from the North, who went south 'cause a lot of people got killed and made sacrifices.  But these were people who didn't have choices, who chose to exercise their right and were prepared to stand there and deal with it head on.  And you can't help but, but appreciate and respect that.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) they were going into the unknown basically.
Speaker 2: That-
Story_ID: 78727
Speaker 1: You couldn't help but embrace and appreciate and see the dignity of sharecroppers who had known aggressive and overt oppression all their lives, walking through these red fields to vote for the very first time.  I mean these were men and women who didn't have options.  These were men and women who, no matter what happened in the election, had to go back to the field the next day to survive.  I mean so that as a practical matter for me, it just brought tears to my eyes to realize the courage and valor and integrity and dignity that these, that this demonstration of exercising the right to vote manifested.  It was just breathtaking.
Story_ID: 78728
Speaker 1: How long did you work for--I mean what happened at the Law Students Civil Rights [Research] Council?  How long were you there?
Speaker 2: I was there two and a half years.  It was an elected position.  And the leadership rotated.  So that I was elected for a certain term, two terms, and then it was time for me to move on.  And I decided, coming out of that experience that it was important for me to know how commercial and corporate America worked.  We had a tremendous number of activists, Civil Right lawyers who were doing Civil Rights stuff.  I mean like [HM] Elaine Jones has become significant in many respects.  We had all kinds of brilliant, smart people on the forefront of the Civil Right legal endeavor that I decided that my highest and best use and what was most comfortable for me was to come and learn how corporate and commercial America really worked.  So I decided to come home to Chicago [Illinois] and joined a law firm.  And in joining that law firm, it was important to me to learn how to be a good lawyer.  And through that initial experience and a number of other law firm experiences, I think that hopefully, I've accomplished that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what law firm did you join?
Speaker 2: I joined Antonow and Fink [ph.] and spent, I believe, about a year and a half there.  And from Antonow and Fink, I went to a smaller firm, Overton Schwartz and Yacker and spent, I believe, two years there.  Then I went to CNA Financial Corporation, spent a couple of years there as a corporate counsel.  And then I went to Isham, Lincoln, and Beale where I stayed for twelve years.  So that as a practical matter, what I, what was happening is that I was getting more and more of an exposure to how real decisions get made in terms of the business world, the corporate world, and the commercial world.
Story_ID: 78729
Speaker 1: Okay, now, were you the only black lawyer in these situations most of the time or were there other--
Speaker 2: No, I was pretty much it.  I mean, and I was, I mean it was interesting because I never took any significant pride in being "the first" or "the only" because as a practical matter, I knew men and women who were just as capable and talented as I was who happened to be black, who were not there.  I mean so that I never got caught in the trap of thinking that was for me so significant 'cause I knew many people who were just as capable and talented.  The truth is that none of these were, a few of them were really great social experiences.  I mean I didn't meet many people I wanted to go hang out with or have a beer, but they were phenomenal professional experiences.  And I, I encountered the biases and views of so many people who--and took advantage of the, of the biases and views of people who believed that, that I was not very smart.  And it, and it's amazing, I mean the notion of being the invisible man is real.  I mean I can get on elevators and people will talk in front of me.  I mean, who were going to negotiate a deal with members of my firm.  But they would--they had no problem in talking in front of me and would say what they were really interested in seeing accomplished and say it in front of me as though I was not there.  And then when--I had one experience where I was in a courtroom where we were ready to start negotiating a settlement, and nobody asked who I was, and I didn't say who I was.  So that the other sides were just talking in front of me, and when the judge walked in and said, okay, "I know you guys are ready for a settlement."  Said, "Well, we're waiting for this Mr. Glover fellow, and as soon as he gets here, we'll be able to negotiate."  And the judge looks at me, and says, "and who are you, sir?"  I said, "I'm Mr. Glover."  And these guys have been talking thirty minutes with me sitting in the room.  I mean it was, and, and when they, when the lead lawyer turned around, I said, "No, no, no, you don't even need to go there.  Don't even need to go there."  This is the deal.  The deal is this.  I mean so that there were time and time again, the, the inherent biases were one of two.  Either I had to be incredibly brilliant in order to be there or nobody could accept the fact that I had a right to be in the room.  So much of my professional life was evolved around being sure that I added value every time I went in the room.  I mean so that in a, in a real sense--I mean this was all personal to me.  I mean this was all personal, that every time I went into a room, I went to war.  And I took no prisoners.  I didn't expect to be given quarter (unclear).   And I practiced law that way.  And I believe that that was fair game.  I played honest, played fair and played open, but it was war.  And it was a lot of fun.  I mean, and I came to realize that I enjoy seeing things grow.  I enjoy making things happen.  I enjoy seeing things develop and evolve, so that I ultimately found the groove and niche because when I came to realize, is to take an idea, make it happen and then watch it grow is very much a thing of joy to me.
Speaker 1: Okay. I mean now, what specific things are you talking, I mean--
Speaker 2: Businesses.
Speaker 1: Businesses?
Speaker 2: Businesses.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I mean I did, I was the lead lawyer on the Three First National building [Three First National Plaza] representing Jerry Hines.  I mean I can't tell you the satisfaction professionally that I could sit in One First National every day and watch that building come up.  I mean that was, I mean it was just incredibly amazing to me.  I mean and I have, I have and worked with any number of companies and entrepreneurs and black and white businessmen who I've helped hopefully, them in development of their businesses.  That's been a lot of fun for me.  And over the course of my professional life, I've come to realize what really gives me a lot of pleasure and pause is to take something and watch it and help it grow.
Story_ID: 78730
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your volunteer experiences too, and you've served on a lot of boards--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and committees?  So tell us about those?
Speaker 2: Well, I believe that it's important that you always try and give back to--and I don't mean that in a cliche-ish sense.  I mean in a substantive sense, that there are organizations--we have in our world and in our communities so many important, substantive problems, that there's nothing you can wanna do that you can't do that in some way helps.  So that I have always had a sense that I wanted to involved in something that was attempting to address some facet or nuance of the problems confronting poor people and minorities.  So that over the course of my life, there's not a significant organization that in some part or another I haven't in some way been involved with.  I mean from the Girl Scouts, the Boy Scouts, the City Colleges of Chicago [Illinois], I mean in a real sense, I've always had an attitude and view that you ought to contribute what you can.  And what I've discovered over the years is that my highest and best value is not only contributing dollars, but also contributing expertise.  Now, I currently sit on the Board of Trustee of Fisk University [in Nashville, Tennessee], and that, to me, is a natural.  That's just a given.  Given what I believe this Fisk experience did for my life, I mean it would be criminal not for me, to not wanna go down there and try and be supportive and helpful.  And I think that's a responsibility, and I think it's a duty.  Life has been very good to me.  My, my experiences have been extraordinary in many respects.  And I believe I have a responsibility.
Story_ID: 78731
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell me about your involvement with the City Colleges of Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No good, good deed goes unpunished (laughter).  I was excited about working with City Colleges because the thought of being in the room with all of these smart people just kind of excited me, so that when I got involved with City Colleges--
Speaker 1: This is in the '80's [1980s], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, '80's [1980s], when I got involved with City Colleges, what I came to realize fairly quickly, is that any and all problems confronting that system were easily soluble in terms of understanding what to do.  The real problem was in having the courage and the political muscle to make it happen.  So that there was never a problem or a time when we felt we didn't know what had to be done.  It was always a function of do we have the muscle.  And do we have the capacity to--and the courage to make it happen.  Now, so in that sense, I began to deal with the kind of political constraints inherent in any kind of public office that it wasn't difficult to know what to do.  It was--the difficulty was in building a constituency to make it happen.
Speaker 1: Now, give me an example and--
Speaker 2: One of the continuing problems we had at the university--in the system was that employers kept complaining that they didn't know the, that the capacity of our certificated graduates.  They didn't know what they were capable of.  And my view, in a very kind of offhanded, cavalier way, I said, "Look, why don't we test people coming into the system, test them while they're here and test them before they leave so that when, when one of our certificated graduates gave an employer a certificate, he or she would know exactly what that student, a minimum that that student was capable of."  And all hell broke loose.  I mean, I mean I had opened up a can of worms without having any idea of the history or depth of this discussion.  What kind of tests was I talking about?  It was--was it gonna be culturally or ethnically biased?  I mean and the whole notion of accountability, that many people reacted to.  This was an attempt on my part to, to in some way impose upon the union accountability.  And I would take the position.  "The problem is our faculty is not being paid enough.  But if we pay them more, then we'd have a right to demand accountability."  And all hell broke loose.  I mean it was a constant stream of what I would regard as no-brainers.  But every time I stepped on somebody's tenderness, there was a visceral, violent reaction.  And, you know, the truth of the matter is that we--I, we lost in our culture, the embrace of education.  I don't know when it happened.  I don't know where it happened.  But in my generation, it was drilled into us that if you wanted to get ahead, you had to have an education.  I mean I remember begging people in this city, in our community to come to school.  We'll make it as easy and as simple for you as possible.  As a matter of fact, I remember taking college presidents, academicians, professors, administrators, into the housing developments to enroll people.  I mean just come to school and that program would only modestly successful.  And what I think that spoke to me about is the loss of fundamental belief in education as a way out.  I mean that, no matter what we experienced as young people, we had hope.  It may not have been very smart, but we had hope.  There was a fundamental, positive attitude that if you tried, you could succeed.  And I, I--in that City College experience, came away with a sense of what I call the "dead eyes."  I mean I didn't see a sense of hope, a sense of vitality, a sense of I can do this.  I mean it was infinitely more an attitude of defeatism.  And that was very, that was very traumatizing to me, very traumatizing.
Speaker 1: Now, there was, here was a scenario that I learned about in Chicago [Illinois] in the '80's [1980s] where students would go to say, Kennedy-King [College] or Olive Harvey [College] or some place and register and get financial aid, a certain financial aid check and never come back again.
Speaker 2: Well, you see I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(unclear) that kind of thing going on.
Speaker 2: I mean, that was a long--
Speaker 1: Kind of speaks to what you're talking about.
Speaker 2: But that was a lot, I mean that was about how do we scam somebody short term to get some small-term benefit.  I--
Speaker 1: But they ruined their opportunity to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean and the fact of the matter is, if some time later they wanna go to school, they don't have access to those resources.  I mean, but again, I think that speaks to--it speaks to something so fundamental that I took the position that if you can't read and write, you ain't got a chance in hell in America.  I mean you just ain't got a chance in hell, unless you're a seven feet--got the feet of James Brown, I mean you just ain't got a chance in hell.  So that for us, it was about how do we take this little hidden jewel in the city and make it available to people who needed it the most.  And I gotta tell you, I was, I was greatly disappointed that more people didn't see it as we saw it and take advantage of it.
Story_ID: 78732
Speaker 1: This question was, you know, well, you said that you, in retrospect, looking back at this Civil Rights Movement, that we made a crucial mistake by not getting the entrepreneurs involved in the core it--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --and you said--expound on that?
Speaker 2: Look, as a practical matter, one of these, one of the most important institutions in any thriving community is commerce.  You've gotta have commerce that exists and thrives within any community, and ours is no exception to that rule.  We invited the ministers, the sociologists, the lawyers, to help us craft the Civil Right Initiative.  What we didn't invite in my view was the entrepreneurial class who would have been able to educate us about the consequence of dispersing through integration.  Consequently, if we look at our communities today, there are very few thriving African American businesses and we are the only initiative in the history of this country that has said to an outsider, namely, white corporate America, we are a terrific market.  Come on in and take our market.  Every other ethnic group says, if you're gonna come into our community, you come in as my partner.  But you don't come in simply to offer me a job.  So in a real sense, I think we--many of our economic dynamics today emanated from the fact that we don't have a thriving black middle class within the black community.  We've got a lot of us who are professionals and who have businesses.  But with, if you look at the core black communities today, there just aren't very many thriving black entrepreneurs.  And the fundamental reality is that we now have more external patriots in our community in the entrepreneurial positions than we have our own people.  So that as a practical matter, I think that in retrospect, we would have been prudent and smart and smarter to say, let's invite the people who can help create commerce, who can help create wealth.  Without wealth, no initiative, no matter what it is, is sustainable.  And we find ourselves, historically, in my lifetime, over and over again, being in the position of having to start from scratch.  We can't build on generation to generation, and in my lifetime, there are generations that are worse off than their forbearers.  We've never had that experience in America before.  So that in a real sense we have not learned from our history, and we have not learned to take advantage of our successes so that as a practical matter, we need to begin to build foundations that our children and our children's children can build upon.  And in order to do that, in order to think, act and operate trans-generationally, you've gotta be in a position to have access to commerce and wealth.
Speaker 1: Well, that's, I can understand that, but how do we get access to commerce and wealth.  I mean isn't, aren't politics a part of getting that access?
Speaker 2: Politics is not a part of--no, no.  Politics in my view--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: By politics I don't just mean voting and so forth like--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but the government, the role of the government is to protect the wealthy.  I mean that's what the government, that's what governments do.  So that obviously, you will need the support and benefit of access to political power.  But at the end of the day, it is about the creation of something of value that people will give you money for.  I mean, and we have, if you look at what [HM] Earl Graves has done in terms of his [Black Enterprise] BE 100, we have successful entrepreneurs.  But in terms of the number of opportunities that impact our community directly, we just don't have many.  And what a corporate America is about to discover and it's on the cusp right now, is that there is no greater market in the world than the urban market.  Corporate America has gone all over the world looking for new markets, and what they're now beginning to realize is that urban America is probably the best market left in the world that's really untapped.  If you look at the black community, it's in, in many instances, it's like a war zone.  There just aren't, there just--there's not a lot going on in these communities commercially.  And Corporate America is about to invade again.  And my view is Corporate America wouldn't go to China, wouldn't go, wouldn't go to any country in the world and not think, let us have local partners, not local jobs, but local partners.  When they come to the urban community, we need to develop a position that says, "you don't come into our community without one of our partners, without one of us as your partner."  And I think that that's how you begin to negotiate relationships on a parallel basis and begin to accumulate wealth.
Speaker 1: I got you.  And that's what I meant by political (unclear)--
Speaker 2: But, again--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You have to organize people to be able to take that stand and--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --and then to be able to make it mean something.
Speaker 2: I think that's right.  I think that's right.
Speaker 1: Otherwise, we, you know, we're  the-
Story_ID: 78733
Speaker 1: See, the--we have learned how to win elections in the course of my lifetime.  But how do you govern.  Being the mayor is a wonderful thing to be, and I loved, adored and respect the genius and talent of a [Chicago Mayor] Harold Washington. And Mayor Washington did more to change the psychology of many of us than any single individual.  But that's just a job (laughter).  It's a powerful job, but it is a job.  So that I think that in many respects, I love [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson.  Jesse in my judgment has done more to impact people's belief in our capability than any single individual.  But, but Jesse--the hardest thing to be in my view is a leader out here without an economic underpinning.  And it's hard to be an aggressive leader if you don't have a commercial/economic foundation.  Now, part of the reason that I admire Jesse so much is because Jesse has stayed in this game, at the forefront, taking all this heat without the kind of economic infrastructure that I think he's entitled to.  And if you look throughout our history, look, Paul Robeson died impoverished.  I mean look at time and time again, we see our historical, social, political and religious leadership with, out here operating on the forefront, without economic and commercial infrastructure.  So that once they get whacked off, they're gone.  So that it appears to me if we look at history as a guide, we would be prudent to say, we need to develop a capacity to have our own commercial infrastructure so that we can support the kind of leadership that we deserve.
Story_ID: 78734
Speaker 1: Now we started a discussion--this discussion kind of grew out of the discussion on the City Colleges [of Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --trying to serve people opportunities they didn't seem to even want.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: You know.  And, so was that like--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I, I, you know, I can't--that's a bit more cavalier than I mean it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know that it's they didn't want it.  I think it's more, it's deeper than that.  I think it's an opportunity they didn't perceive as being helpful to what they wanted to be and do in life.  I mean if you say to somebody, "Look, you gotta go to school for two years or four years," that's a long time to somebody who may not have shoes on their feet or may be hungry.  So, and in many instances, what I found is that there was a sense of hopelessness, that nothing I do was gonna change.  There was a sense of fatalism that I can't do any better.  And so it's not a question in my view of people not wanting it.  It's a question in my judgment of whether they perceive this opportunity as something that could and would make a difference in their lives.  And I think that at the end of the day, I see a kind of despair that I've never seen in our people.  I mean I see a kind of what I call, again, "dead eyes," where there isn't a vitality.  There isn't a sense of hope.  There is not a sense of I can do something about it, that I don't, I--in my lifetime, we used to have, but we don't think we have that anymore.
Speaker 1: What do you--can you imagine a solution for this?
Speaker 2: Well, again, I think you take small steps, small steps.  And I think that in my judgment, we have to commit to a, a moral--and that sounds funny coming from me, but a moral fiber.  And then before we do anything else, develop a commercial and economic infrastructure to support that.  Then we can begin to control, I think, a semblance of our own destiny.  I mean the truth is, I think that in every instance, we have been right on the issues.  In every instance, we've been right on the merits, but so what?  Being right is not enough if you don't have the wherewithal to make change.  And I think that in part, what we've come to realize without economic power, you can't make any change.  Being right is not enough.  I mean having people discriminated against is wrong.  Having people treated in an oppressive fashion is wrong.  Having people treated with bias and prejudice is wrong.  But so what?  I mean if you don't have the ability to affect how other people live or don't live, then it doesn't make any difference that you're right.  So we have spent in my generation an entire time learning how to be right.  Now, we have to learn how to make a difference.  We don't need dreams anymore.  We need plans.  We don't--and I'm not, and that's not to diminish our history of dreams.  But we now need to say, okay, we know what's wrong.   We know what we're dealing with.  Now, let's develop some substantive fundamental plans that, that is within our grasp to accomplish.  And I would start with, we need to focus right on our ability to develop commercial infrastructures.
Story_ID: 78735
Speaker 1: Okay, now, are you familiar with--well, there was a man who was killed by this sniper a few months ago--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: He founded something called the Monti Network [ph.].
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Well, what do you think about that?
Speaker 2: I, look, and again, there is no initiative that is wrong.  I mean these problems are so pervasive, so complicated, so hard, so deeply engrained, I would never discourage any initiative or anybody in the way they choose to try and be supportive and helpful.  So that I don't think there's any--there is never a wrong answer.  The question in my view is, is--are there other answers that could be helpful.  And I think that there are.  So I don't, I don't ever, ever disagree with anybody who says this is the way I wanna address some of our issues.  That's fine.  But we've gotta begin to think in terms of how do we support our children and our children's children so that they don't start from the same place I started from.  And you gotta have the--and that has nothing to do with, with success or not.  It has to do with a frame of mind.  How do I make my children better off than I am?  How do I position their youth so that they can use it in a way that they will be smart about what happens?  And all of that assumes that, that there is a commitment to children and our children's children that allows them and us to make long-term decisions.  And maybe I don't buy the Mercedes this month.  Maybe what I'll do is buy a Hyundai or whatever it is, and be sure that I've got college tuition for my children.  Maybe what I'll do is not go to the night club tonight, but I'll stay here and read with my children.  I mean there're all kind of ways on an individual personalized basis, that we begin to make commitments to our children.
Speaker 1: I hear you.  I hear what you're saying, but are you, do you think that-- I mean how do you--you're talking about like a value reorientation I guess in a lot of ways.
Speaker 2: I think that's right.  I think that in some way, when I said, it's kind of funny to hear me talk about morality, but you gotta get back to that fundamental moral fiber that says, here's what right, here's what's wrong.  Here's where we wanna go.  And I think--look, at the end of the day, who can make long-term decisions for us?  It's not about the next election.  It's not about the next convention.  But who, what body politic do we look to, to make long-term decisions?  And what are those long-term decisions.  What sacrifices are we prepared to make today so that our children and the children of our children are better off.  So, and in a sense you're right.  It is about values.  It is about commitment.  But, but at the end of the day, if we don't begin to position ourselves to be able to make long-term decisions, then we're always gonna be bouncing back and forth.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, it seems like it's almost like the chicken or the egg or--
Speaker 2: Well, and, look, and my response to that is, you just start.
Story_ID: 78736
Speaker 1: I mean and people--I've heard over the course of my life so many times people say, well, if you don't know the solution, then, then we aren't gonna go.  And that's nonsense.  The fact of the matter is, you just go.  I mean sooner or later, we'll figure it out.  Once we, once we (laughter), once we get on the road, we'll figure out where we're trying to go.  But you gotta start a process that says, "Number one, let's begin to develop commercialism within our own community, and let's support our entrepreneurs.  Let us begin to say to corporate America, you wanna deal with our community and make money out of our community, then here are the people or the consortium of people with whom you must partner."  Then it appears to me, we've gotta talk about social institutions.  We've gotta talk about being supportive of the churches.  We gotta talk about being supportive of those agencies and organizations which help us develop a kind of moral bearing.  And, and once you build--we are the only people in the history of America that attempted a significant, political, social upheaval without economics.  No other, no other people in this country have ever done that.  And no matter how good or bad cultures have been, everybody has started with the basic premise, you gotta have, you gotta have access to, to commercialism and access to funds.  And we're out here saying to so many people, "You know we're right, so give us money so we can continue this fight."  And the minute they cut us off, then the initiative dies.  Something's wrong with that approach to problem solving.
Speaker 2: I agree, I agree.
Story_ID: 78737
Speaker 1: Who can argue, but I'm saying it's almost like, it's still back like how do you--I don't wanna keep running over the same thing.  But if you don't have the, if you've lost the, lost the values that would create this economic stretch in the first place, how do you get back to start and if you, and if you--when you close ranks and say, well, this is my community.  These are--and if you're gonna, if it's outside of the community, my community, they have to follow these rules.   How do you close ranks on an atmosphere where we're being taught every day that we shouldn't disperse, and not--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, now, see, in a very, in a very real sense, this is the same kind of conversation that occurred in 1910 between DuBois [W.E.B. DuBois] and Booker T. [Booker T. Washington].  I mean in a real sense, we are now frozen in a historical prism, that we've been arguing about for the last decade--I mean the last century.  And you do it through leadership.  You do it through the development of a core of people who are prepared to lead, but who we are prepared to support.  I mean never should a black leader not know if he or she has got a retirement plan.  I mean never should a black leader be in a position where they know that if they get whopped off, they ain't gonna starve.  I mean if you look at--what we have allowed to happen to our leadership, it's criminal.  I mean how can you not admire a guy like [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson?  How can you not admire a guy like Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]?  I mean these guys were out there taking these poundings with no assurance that there was gonna be anything for them at the end of the day.  So that when you say to me, how do you start this process?  Through leadership, through leadership, and a commitment--I mean I would say that you give me a hundred thousand people who'll say that I'll give $10.00 to be sure that a [HM Reverend] Willie Barrow has got a retirement plan, to be sure that a Jesse Jackson has got a retirement plan.  Then it becomes a very different kind of ballgame.  Then it becomes a reality that our leadership is truly our leadership because our leadership knows that we have the will, capacity and commitment to be sure they're gonna be okay.  We need to be a, (laughter) a black leader means you gotta fight the white community, you gotta fight our community, and there's always the risk you're gonna be cut off with nothing.  That's unacceptable.  How can we expect our leadership to be irrevocably loyal to us when we haven't demonstrated we will irrevocably loyal to them?
Speaker 1: It seems like the qualifications for leadership should be having followers (unclear), I mean to really be a real leader, you should have some people you represent, I guess?
Speaker 2: I think that's fair.  I think that's fair.  I mean, and, and implicit in your statement is, who decides who's our leadership?  And that's a fair question, and I mean that's beyond my ability to even respond to.
Speaker 1: Well, there's a connection, and the connection was maybe (unclear)--well, we--on this we shouldn't get into, that deep into that, I don't think.  But there's a connection between, you know, leadership and followership, and it's a process that--
Speaker 2: Again, I don't disagree with that.  And I will leave to people like you the development of the process for creating leadership and I'll work on being sure that when you've done that, that they have the ability to survive.
Story_ID: 78738
Speaker 1: Now tell me about TLC Beatrice [International Holdings]?
Speaker 2: [Reginald] Reg Lewis and I went to law school together [Harvard Law School in Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And my two-year stint in New York [New York City, New York], a young lady by the name of Loida Nicolas [Loida Nicolas-Lewis] came to work me as my secretary [at Law Students Civil Rights Research Council], who-- and Loida was a lawyer.  I didn't know it at the time I hired her.  But she was, and I introduced Reg to Loida on a blind date.  And they got married.  And I left New York and came to Chicago [Illinois].  Reg stayed in New York to practice law and eventually started doing transactions, mergers and acquisitions.  And in 1987, acquired all of the international operations of Beatrice Foods that he designated as TLC Beatrice International.  So at that time, he must have had, I don't know, maybe 90 companies in 40 or 50 countries around the world.  None--he had no businesses here in the U.S.  Reg took over that enterprise, and, unfortunately, he died in 1992.  Loida became initially Chairman of the Board of the business.  Reg owned 51 percent of the company.  Loida became Chairman of the Board in '93' [1993] and decided in 1994 that she was also gonna become CEO.  And in the course of that transition in their lives, she was also having written the book, Reggie's story of "Why Should White Guys Have All the Fun?"  And Blair Walker, who was the author of that book, Loida wanted him to talk to me, to interview me about both my experience with Reg in law school and the experience of having introduced the two of them together.  And I let Blair interview me.  And then Loida invited me out to spend the weekend talking about what she was doing, and what I was doing and eventually asked me to become one of her personal lawyers.  Within a matter of months, she then asked me to become one of the lawyers for the company.  And then within a matter of another few months, she asked me if I would come in and serve as General Counsel to the company.  And I agreed to do so on the condition that I would stay for a year, help stabilize things, and then I'd come on back to Chicago to my own life.  And I've been there now for ten years (laughter).  And it has, it was just--it had every element of a major soap opera that one could fathom, intrigue, treachery, money, big time international business.  I mean I've done deals all over Europe, and a significant part of Asia, at the highest level, at the lowest level.  I've trekked through factories.  I've trekked through castles.  I mean it has been just an amazing experience professionally and personally.  And back in 1999, Loida and the other shareholders decided it was time to create liquidity for all of the shareholders.  So the company voted on a voluntary liquidation.  So I think to date, we've distributed to the shareholders about $470 million with a few more pennies that we're trying to squeeze out.  And I was invited to serve as president of the company, starting in 1999.
Story_ID: 78739
Speaker 1: For purposes of identification, what, what brands does Beatrice--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, no TLC Beatrice owned the largest snack food business in Ireland.  It owned the third or fourth largest ice cream business in Spain.  It owned the fifth largest food, grocery, wholesale and retainer in France.  So it wasn't a brand.  It was a consortium of businesses, all related to food, whether it was manufacturing and distributing ice cream, whether it was being in the grocery wholesale, retail business, whether it was the manufacture of snack foods.  In some way, all of these businesses were affiliated and associated with food.  So that at one time, back in 1996, we owned more shelf space in the City of Paris than any other grocery retailer.  If you go to Ireland today and eat Tato Potato chips, that was our brand that we owned.  So that as a practical matter, it was a consortium of different businesses, and in Ireland--not in Ireland, but in Thailand, we had a bottling business.  In Belgium, we had a bottling business.  So there was no, no business synergies between all of these companies.  It was more a function of everything that was in the portfolio was a part in some way related to food, but it was all, in each jurisdiction in each country, it was separate businesses.
Story_ID: 78740
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, how has it--well, it's been exciting doing this or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I mean it was (laughter), I mean I've had the opportunity to travel all over the world, to do deals all over the world, to work with every kind of deal doer that one could fathom.  And I think that if 20, 30 years ago, I would have given a vital organ to have this kind of professional experience.  I mean it was, it had all of the drama, all of the soap opera, all of the treachery.  I mean it really was, everything, everything you've heard about international transactions is true.  I mean it's all true.  I mean foreign languages, foreign treacheries, I mean, foreign governments.  I mean everything you've heard about international transactions, it's all true.  I didn't know that.  I mean and so that I'm in Paris [France] negotiating a deal with people who spoke French.  I mean so, the whole concept of working through interpreters.  I mean and I did a deal in Italy through an interpreter who was deaf.  I mean so that as a practical matter, it was all, it was all amazing.  And some of the stories are just incredible.  Some of the people are incredible.  And through it all, under Loida's [Loida Nicolas-Lewis] leadership, I mean it all seemed to come together and work.  So that as a practical matter, she is a very spiritual person, a very religious person and a good person.  I mean her fundamental philosophy has always been, be fair, just "be fair."  No matter the consequences, treat people right and be fair.  And that has stood us extraordinarily well in all of our activities and transactions.  And in a real sense, she has been the engine that drove this bus, and it's just been amazing, just amazing.
Speaker 1: Now, Beatrice is worth, I've heard--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: At one time we had sales of $2 billion, yeah, sales of $2 billion.  And, you know, the truth is, all you do is add zeros (laughter).  We didn't confront, except the language issue and jurisdictional issues, any problems that any entrepreneur in any community didn't have.  All business is local, and the fact that, the fact that it was international means nothing because at the end of the day, whether you have a grocery store in Woodlawn or South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] or along the Champs-Elysees in Paris [France], all business is local.  So that in a real sense, it was exciting.  It was fun to travel.  It was fun to do deals internationally, but at the end of day, it was all about business.  And whether you sit in a conference room in Chicago, New York [City] or London [England], it doesn't make any difference.  You're still in the conference room.  So that while much of that, much of the travel component sounds exotic and exciting, the fact of the matter is, that was hard work.  What was exciting was doing deals where on an international scope, where currency came in to play, where who, what political party was gonna take over in France became significant.  Where the farmers and unions in France have a whole different style and approach than the unions in the U.S.  That was exciting and fun to learn about.  And it really was.  It really was absolutely amazing.
Story_ID: 78741
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sir, what would you see at this point as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Legacy.  I have no idea.  I mean I think, I think that, that I have tried to live a life where I've never stopped growing, and so that part of the reason I'm grappling with your question is the very essence of legacy means that it's finished, and you look back on it.  I don't think I'm finished yet.  I don't think I'm done.  I mean I think that as a practical matter, I'm still being cooked.  So that I, it's hard for me to talk in terms of a legacy because hopefully, I just haven't stopped changing and growing.
Speaker 1: What are some of the things that you still want to accomplish?
Speaker 2: I don't think I describe as things so much as I wanna continue the attitude and approach of growing.  I mean I want my children healthy.  I want my children well off, and I wanna continue to try and be a good citizen.  But most import--but equally as important to me as all of that is to continue to push, probe, expand, know more today than I knew yesterday.  I mean so that in a real sense I think, the joy of life to me is knowing that tomorrow I can figure something out that I can't figure out today.  But my responsibility obviously is to take care of my family and my children and to be sure that they are in a position to take advantage of whatever I've accomplished in life.  But in terms of myself, I just simply wanna continue to push the envelope and continue to grow.  I mean I don't ever think people should ever, should ever stop growing.
Story_ID: 78035
Speaker 1: At this juncture, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Chuckle) I think as a person who gave it his best shot, who didn't leave any of it left behind, that I would like to have my children and my children believe that whatever I tried to accomplish, I tried--I gave it all I had and all that I could.  And I did that in the context of never selling out what was important to me.  So that I want them to understand that whatever you regard as important, you never violate and within the context of the way you chose to live your life, whatever you choose to do, you go flat out, like a bat out of hell and never give up and never surrender.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you, sir.
Speaker 2: Thank you.  All right.
Story_ID: 78036
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  You can start right now.
Speaker 2: That is my 29-year old son [Reynaldo Glover, Jr.] when he was 12 years old, so that was back 16, 17 years ago.  It was taken at a restaurant, and I think the name of the restaurant was "The Contiki" [ph.].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And your son's name?
Speaker 2: Oh, Reynaldo Glover, Jr.  I had paid for him, so I--(laughter).
Speaker 1: This is Jermaine Jackson who had come to visit our offices in New York [New York City, New York], and he was gracious enough to take a photograph with me.  He was there in New York doing business of some kind and stopped by the offices of TLC Beatrice [International Holdings], and I jumped at the opportunity to take a photograph with him.  And this was done, my recollection is about in the year 2000.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.  Next photo?
Speaker 1: That again is my son, Reynaldo Glover, Jr.  This was taken, I believe, back in about 1980 [1990].  The man to his right is [HM Eugene] Gene Sawyer who was then the acting--who was then Mayor of Chicago [Illinois].  That was during my tenure at City College, as Chairman of the Board of City Colleges of Chicago, and we were there celebrating a groundbreaking for a new, a school within the City College system.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Very good, next.
Speaker 1: This is also done in 1980.  This was taken at Harold Washington College which was a part of the City College system.  [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson had agreed to come give a speech about the condition of the union, and as you can see, Mr. Jackson's sitting immediately behind me and to my right.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: That, too, is my son, Reynaldo, when he was eight years old.  And to his left is then-Mayor Harold Washington was one of his idols and icons and one of my good friends.  And Harold was mayor when this photograph was taken, and it was taken in his office on the fifth floor [Chicago City Hall], and my son was the first person who told me that he believed that Harold Washington was gonna win the election as mayor, and he was incredibly preciant in that opinion and view.  And he voted for him in the school election at his school, and Harold always embraced him and embraced me.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next, Larry.
Speaker 2: This is a page out of my 1961 Yearbook, and this is me when I was lean, mean and a playing machine.  And I played Varsity basketball for Gary [Indiana] Roosevelt High School.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next photo.
Speaker 2: And, again, it's an action shot taken in 1961 when I was a Varsity basketball player at Gary Roosevelt.  God, what a pretty jump shot I had.
Speaker 1: Well, did you have a nice jump?
Speaker 2: I was beautiful.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next photo?
Speaker 2: So you were at Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee], the all-time scoring--
Speaker 1: Still, 40 years later--
Speaker 2: High school senior yearbook photograph, and I believe this was in 1961.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.  That's it?
Speaker 2: Oh, the big one.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This was taken, I believe, four years ago.  [HM] Colin Powell had been invited by Deloitte and Touche to give a speech at one of their regional conferences, and a number of the partners who were then serving as the accountants for TLC Beatrice [International Holdings] knew that I regarded him as somebody of significance, and he was one of my idols.  So they invited me to attend the luncheon and gave me the opportunity to chat with him briefly, and to meet with him.  In the course of his speech during this luncheon, Colin did nothing but convince me that he was absolutely spectacular and somebody who should be admired, and I, I relish the opportunity that I was given to have a chance to meet with him.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, very good.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's a terrible, don't do that one.  That's a terrible picture.  What the hell was I smirking about?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Well, if you wanna do this one, you can go ahead and describe it.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, this was "The Gary Post-Tribune" wanted to do a story on me once I had become President of TLC Beatrice and came over and spent a little bit of time with me, learning about, a little bit about me and about the company an did a two-page story about me and the company.  And it was just a fabulous experience.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And let's see, that's 1996.
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-six [1996], that's correct.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Income tax day [April 15].
Speaker 2: Yeah. Wow.
