Story_ID: 191430
Speaker 1: So, my name Racine Tucker Hamilton and I am the interviewer; Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  Today's date is Wednesday, August 25, 2004, and this interview is taking place in Baltimore, Maryland.  Now if you would--for the record, please tell us your full name including your middle name and spell it?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My name is Jessie Gladden; my middle initial is my maiden name Benjamin.  So my name is Jesse Benjamin Gladden.
Speaker 1: And could you spell Jesse for us?
Speaker 2: J-E-S-S-I-E, and Benjamin is B-E-N-J-A-M-I-N, Gladden G-L-A-D-D-E-N.
Speaker 1: Would you please tell us the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: I was born December 11, 1930, in New York City [New York].
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a retired supervisor having taught for thirty-something years.  And I retired as a educational specialist for the Baltimore City Public Schools [Baltimore, Maryland].
Story_ID: 191431
Speaker 1: Now if you will--the next couple of questions are some People magazine-ish type questions just to kinda help us get to know you with the processing (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: To help us learn a little bit more about you.  So you can give me short answers to these questions that'll be great.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I like fish.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Let's see anywhere that's warm unless I think New York.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying do you have one?
Speaker 2: Absolutely (laughter) that's my favorite saying--
Story_ID: 191432
Speaker 1: Now Ms. Gladden [HM Jessie Gladden] if you will let's talk a little bit about your mother (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Starting with her name and where she was born and where she grew up that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Okay, my mother was born in Jackson, North Carolina.  That's a very unusual name Louvalia L-O-U-V-A-L-I-A, Louvalia Rawles R-A-W-L-E-S, but people called her Lou, and so she was known to most people as Lou Rawles.  And she came from a hard-working family modest means they had their own farm they were farmers.  When she married, she and my father moved to New York, where I was born.
Speaker 1: Did she ever share with you any stories about growing up in Jackson?
Speaker 2: Probably she was the oldest--yeah she--her father died when she was twelve.  And she had to help her mother who was very young, and her mother had nine children.  So she was like the mother--a second mother for her sisters and brothers.  Well, she had six sisters one of the things that she told me maybe not when she was young necessarily.  But one thing she told me that I always remember she said, Jessie, when you get married two things you must remember.  One don't marry a fool and don't do all the loving, and that's a great philosophy for a person who taught herself to read and write and I did that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: So your mother taught herself to read and write?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did she do that?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure because when she went to New York she always wanted to be an entrepreneur.  She opened up a little restaurant in New York City in the early '30s [1930s].  And it did very well.  She stayed there in New York--we lived in New York for twenty years.  And then she moved back to Jackson, North Carolina where the farm is, and she stayed there because--in New York because that's where she could make a living.  She could make money to buy the farm that she bought.  She and one of her sisters and brothers bought that farm that we now own.  We currently own that farm and when she got enough money after twenty years as a domestic worker and having worked in her own little restaurant, she went back to New York, North Carolina, opened up a little store.  And it was a grocery store and so we--she farmed and ran her store and built a home.
Speaker 1: Do you know, how she and your father met?
Speaker 2: Well he was from that area and that's--they met probably in church.  She never mentioned that how she met him because my stepfather raised me so.
Story_ID: 191433
Speaker 1: Where is Jackson, North Carolina?
Speaker 2: It's in northeastern section of North Carolina eighty miles below Richmond, Virginia.  It's the farming area and at that time many--there were many sharecroppers.  I tell you when my mother [Louvalia Rawles] told me I was going I was getting ready to go into junior high.  I was ending the sixth grade going into yeah, six grade when we were--when she was going to leave New York [New York].  I thought I was gonna die if she took me to the farm 'cause I had never been--I didn't live there I lived in New York.  And I was accustomed to streetlights and all that sort of thing and not a big farm.  I didn't know what chicken--I didn't know how to I'd never seen animals running around.  We was in New York when you want chicken you bought it--I saw chickens that had legs and everything else.  But I think that was the best thing that ever happened to me.  And I--she's dead now my mother died early.  But having moved out of Harlem [New York, New York] where I grew up was the best thing that ever happened to me because I never saw a black teacher.  Never saw a black doctor even though I lived across the street from Harlem Hospital [New York, New York].  It should've--Harlem Hospital should've had black doctors but when I went south, I saw my teacher.  I saw my first black teacher.
Story_ID: 191434
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this how would you describe your mother [Louvalia Rawles]?
Speaker 2: Very direct, very organized, clear in her speech, she knew what she wanted she was a leader definitely a leader a born leader.  Would have or has been made a significant contribution had she had the opportunity as she was growing up.  But she grew up in the days of segregation.  But nevertheless when we moved to North Carolina, my mother had the nerve in the '40s [1940s] to register everybody who came to our store in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  And that was a brave thing to do in those small--in a small farming town.  When it was a hotbed of racism.
Speaker 1: Did she suffer any repercussions as a result of that?
Speaker 2: Not really because one, our family was well known, two, the family lived there for so many years our history is deep in there.  And there were many white people who not only knew her and would have supported her, you know, in her efforts. They support us for many reasons (laughter).
Story_ID: 191435
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your father starting with his, his name and where he grew up?
Speaker 2: My father, my father grew up in North Carolina also but as I said my parents separated when I was nine months old.  So I didn't grow up with him I grew up with my stepfather.
Speaker 1: Well can you tell us a little bit about your stepfather his name?
Speaker 2: My stepfather was Hubert Allen, H-U-B-E-R-T, A-L-L-E-N.  And I think that he was the kind of man he was the kind of man that protected women.  He loved his children my sister--I have two sisters and a brother he was a hard worker.  And that--and I'm talking about New York now when we lived in New York he was a laborer on Wall Street down--they think he was a longshoreman.  And he always taught us the value of money in that day ten cents was a lot of money 'cause you a buy a loaf of bread for five cents, and that was my allowance ten cent.   And I always was told go to school get your education.  Well, my family said that anyway most of my family would say that to my mother's sisters.  We had a sense of community in North Carolina, and I thought that was another way of living.  And my stepfather would take us to places in New York with him.  I know that he had to strain his budget to do it.  We always went to Coney Island; we always went to Orchard Beach in the summer.  We, we went where the children should be going Staten Island, Radio City Music Hall those kinds of things.  They saw that they saw to it that we had opportunities to see more than just what was in Harlem.  Not that Harlem didn't have a great life 'cause I lived right down the street from the Kennedy Center.  I did not know that I live down the street from Kennedy Center until I was grown, and I went back to Harlem.  But I think that my years in North Carolina I spent--I finished high school down there.  I went to college there, and that was a turning point in my life.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your stepfather?
Speaker 2: Very kind, resourceful, strong personality.  He had integrity.  I think my value system was shaped the lot by what he said.  He used to say "let your yes be yes and no be no" and I understood that.  So and always "live--try to live by what you say and do what you say you're going to do."   And I think that's why today I can almost hear him speaking from the grave (laughter).
Story_ID: 191436
Speaker 1: Ms. Gladden [HM Jessie Gladden] tell me what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: I must have visited my grandmother [Mary Etta Rawles] or somebody when I was two years old.  And I remember that because I--and I knew it was in North Carolina, it wasn't in New York (laughter).  I know that we visited, that I didn't want to stay there, but we stayed for a while.
Story_ID: 191437
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your grandparents did you--could you tell us their names (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And did you spend a lot of time with them?
Speaker 2: Every summer, every summer my grandmother--well my grandfather died at the age of thirty-three.  So, you know, I really never knew--I never met him my mother [Louvalia Rawles] was only twelve when her father died.  However, my grandmother was living on that very farm that my mother was trying to buy.  My mother her sister her brother went to New York work hard in New York to pay for it, and they did it.
Speaker 1: And what was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Mary Etta Rawles, R-A-W-L-E-S.
Speaker 1: Tell me about her.
Speaker 2: My grandmother was about five feet tall, 5'1" maybe, and very adamant.  When she said move, she only wanted to tell you that once.  And you moved she could look at you, and you moved (laughter) she--after she said it she was very religious.  She took us to church my grandmother had twenty-five grandchildren.  Most of us lived in New York when we would go down every summer because I'll parents had to work, and there was no one there to take care of us.  So, her house was like summer camp and schools in New York closed at--in June.  The last day of school the next day all of us were on our way down to North Carolina to my grandmother's little farm two room house.  And here we were, and my grandmother made us wash our clothes she taught us how to work.  She taught us manners and all of us from New York were mostly good girls grandchildren like to talk all--we could talk, we talked, and we talked a lot.  And but she would tell us you don't talk when older people are talking.  You and--you respect older people and you and if we didn't know what respect was she showed you what it looked like and what it felt like (laughter).  And she only had to tell you that once she took us to church, and we sat there from sun up to sun down if necessary.  But we learned a lot she cooked everything she, she made everything bread--we bought bread, and she made it.  She did all those kinds of things we were able to see.  And I, I still like to smell bread cooking.
Speaker 1: Did you spend any time with your, your stepfather's [Hubert Allen] parents at all?
Speaker 2: No they were from--no his parents were dead.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 191438
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestry and your origin do you know if your?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I can go back to maybe the sixth generation with my family.  My daughter did her undergraduate thesis on our family history.  So my--I--my grandmother [Mary Etta Rawles] that I'm talking--telling you about was married to Douglas Rawles [ph.], who died at thirty-three; his son, my uncle, his son died at thirty-three and (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: What did they die of?
Speaker 2: Tuberculosis was at--during those days there was no cure, you know, till the early '40s [1940s].  So many people at that time died if they didn't die from the influence of 1919 I believe they--it was tuberculosis which was like currently cancer.  We were very proud of our ancestors because Douglas Rawles's father, Ned Rawles [ph.] was a member of the, of the North Caroline General Assembly.  And he was also a schoolteacher that's is my great-great grandfather.  And then his father--his wife I'll say Ned Rawls wife the picture that you saw over there.  You have her picture--you have a writing there about him when he was in the North Carolina legislature.  She his wife Ned Rawles wife was the daughter of a Confederate General 'cause this is during slavery he married her.  And I--he--we lived in Jackson [North Carolina]; the Statehouse was in Raleigh [North Carolina].  And Ned Rawles had to ride on mule or buggy all the way down say maybe three, four, five hours to get to the General Assembly.  And what was interesting he was the schoolteacher in our area in that area at the time.  And he decided he was going to run for, for a delicate in North Carolina.  And they stuff the ballots and so he lost.  But he ran again and won and so when my daughter did her master's thesis she went down, and she researched our family.  That's why now we can go back we can't go, pass General Matt Manson, who was the man that owned our family.  We did go that far we know that he was the person that owned the family.  We know his history, but we don't know, you know, can't--we can't we can't tell from whom he got my, my ancestors.  Because on the census track when she was doing--when I looked at the census track General Matt Manson you can find his history right here in the libraries.  He owned the slaves, but they didn't give them names they just said boy, you know, two boys, twenty girls and what have you.  But what's interesting about the slave records that we researched was the fact that the most valuable property that the slaves masters had was the slave that he owned.  I looked at some of the records if a woman were childbearing she was more valuable than one who wasn't young boys were more valuable.  Young boys like 15, 16 were more valuable, but it was frustrating to me.  When we went to the archives to try to get past that generation to look at the census tracks and the only thing they had down there was two boys, three girls, one woman.  So if I saw that he owned three women, I don't know which one was my ancestor 'cause there was no name.
Story_ID: 191439
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about what family life was like for you growing up in New York [New York] what was it like?
Speaker 2: Okay well I stayed there--I grew up in New York from birth till the sixth grade and like any child I was very happy.  I had a very happy life I thought that was the best of all worlds I mean, I knew nothing else I didn't know anything else other than New York.  My teachers were kind to me.  As a matter of fact, I really didn't--race wasn't a problem.  I knew it was a problem later on because everybody in my class was basically black, of course, I went to school near Spanish Harlem [New York, New York].  So I had Spanish kids I had a few Jewish children.  Then, of course, mostly black but by the time I was ready for junior high school my mother [Louvalia Rawles] was moving out of the city and I went south.  But for the most part, I enjoyed New York 'cause we had recreation, we kids--we lived near the playground.  As I said, I lived near the Kennedy Center.  And the Kennedy Center was there for kids who urban kids who were we were the poor (laughter).  And you could go there and play games they had Christmas parties.  And, and my summer vacations was spent with my grandmother, and I was always home there was always somebody in my house.  My, my parents were always home when I came from school there was somebody there so I, I was very blessed I had a strong family because my mother had five sisters in New York.  And they all acted as if they were our mothers if any child wanted anything or need anything from any of the sisters the other sisters gave it to them.  We had a sense of--we loved our family, and we still do.  And we have family reunions now; just came back and we go down there every summer to North Carolina to our family reunion.
Speaker 1: Can you kindly describe your block or your community for us what was the name of the street that you lived on when you were (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: I lived 63 W. 133rd St. (Laughter) I'll never forget it that was the place from which I moved.  And I thought the end of the world had come when I was going to live forever on a farm.  And--but I found when I got down there I made friends.  You know, but it was--everybody--well the community was your block.  I knew most of the people in our block, and but we didn't know everybody in your apartment.  New York is so--rather what do want to say impersonal in a sense.  But because we lived there so long once you live on the block a very long time everybody knew you.  We didn't have drugs as you have now in New York City.  I wouldn't want to live in New York now my brother never moved, never left he still there.  But people looked after the kids everybody on the block would--they knew us, and they would look after your children.  But I think I'm not sure because remember now I was about twelve, eleven or twelve years old when we were getting ready to move.  But I think my mother realized that the city was changing somewhat.  But if she were alive today she would say she could've live there even (laughter) even then but the people--my next-door neighbors the people downstairs.  We knew everybody in that building in that apartment building.  I lived in an apartment building, so you knew everybody.  And I knew nothing but apartment living other than going south.  But I was more fortunate in a sense then some kids because we did have somewhere to go during the summer.  We lived with my grandmother and the land was ours, so we, we were pretty fortunate, and I never wanted for anything.
Story_ID: 191440
Speaker 1: Tell me Ms. Gladden [HM Jessie Gladden] what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up. You told us one smell already.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Did I yeah, my grandmother [Marry Etta Rawles].
Speaker 1: The smell of bread breaking and bread baking.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh what--and well in, in New York [New York] the sound of kids playing in the street we had--they would block off streets.  The police department would block off streets for children to play in the streets.  And they'd open the fire hydrant you could, you could sort of run.  And, you know, when it got hot you could run in the water as it came out the hydrant, and they do that now sometimes.  And I think what I most remember the playground that was down the street from our house.  Then they had all kinds of games of when I came in after school I could go down to the, what I know now is the Kennedy Center.  I called it the clubhouse, and we play games, and I'm with my friends we played dodge ball, we romped in the water.  I had--I guess, and I like to skate we would--we could do that.  The sounds I; I liked most and the smells I liked most in North Carolina, because I was still a youth, my mother's [Louvalia Rawles] store 'cause we moved.  And she, she opened a store immediately when we moved to North Carolina we had a little grocery store.  And I call it now little juke joint 'cause she had one of those jukeboxes.  And I can--it's always very pleasant for me to remember some of the old songs.  That were played in the '50s [1950s], the '40s [1940s], '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] now.  Because people would come to the store on Saturday nights.  And they would dance, and they would play games.  My mother--I, I can't remember, but there was a little game that people would come and punch out little holes.  And they could if you get three apples or three oranges together, you would win something.  And we had one of those, and my mother taught people a bit about politics in a sense.  She told 'em you had to go vote, vote most people afraid but she said you gotta vote, you gotta registered to vote, and she did it she registered to vote.  And then many foods that we had in our store like spaghetti people didn't have that in the stores although I found that Blacks were very active in the South.  In my view as I got older I understood they owned their own land they owned their own cars.  Very few did that in New York; they knew that they had to either go to college or to the cotton patch and most of them with the college (laughter).  Everybody was on their way everybody told the children, "You gotta go to college you gotta go to school," and that's what we did.  We went to school and that I mean, when I go to my homecoming now kids-it's still the same thing education was important.  In New York, on the other hand, you could get a job in New York as telephone operator some of them got a job like that, and could make a living.  So I don't know that kids have--when I was growing up they were encouraged to go to college.  But there was no question I was going to college in North Carolina 'cause that's what they were going that's what the people were going to do.
Story_ID: 191441
Speaker 1: What was your, your stepfather's [Hubert Allen] thoughts about the move?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah--well he would follow my mother [Louvalia Rawles] to the end of the earth; he didn't care.  It was fine with him (laughter) he was that kind of man just fine.
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your elementary school first in New York.  Do you remember the name of it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I went to public school [P.S.] 68 [New York, New York] and then I was transferred from there to what was going to be my middle school public school [M.S.] 119 [New York, New York].  I should tell you though for a while when we move to North Carolina I couldn't adjust so I had to come back a little later on.  But I liked my--back to my elementary school.  I liked my elementary school because as I said my teachers were loving they were kind.  They really were, and I loved the fact that they read stories to us, and I was a good reader I was always a very good reader.  And the stories that they told me I was sitting and eating I'd sit on the floors.  And they would tell the stories so passionately and interesting.  My--and I loved Ms. Salem  now--I this is a young age because I started school at four years old.  But I remember Ms. Socom was one of my teachers Ms. Salem was one of my teachers in elementary school.  And those were happy day because I liked one she read to us, and I liked somebody to read to me because I wanted to learn to read well.  Two we always had a little break in the morning.  We had milk, and we had graham crackers, so I liked that they did that down there, there.  And I--after that school I started the school PS 119, and that's how New York schools were labeled by numbers.  I didn't stay there very long only for the sixth grade because my, my mother was moving then to North Carolina.  Then I went South, and I had my first black teacher.
Speaker 1: Did you have dreams and aspirations during elementary school?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah always knew I was gonna do something (laughter).  After--to stay in my family you gone something I always knew that.  I, I'm told when we at our family gatherings see my family would gather around eating in a minute.  I was told that I, I always taught people.  I was always the teacher because I had my sister who was--I have a sister who's now deceased she was three and a half years younger than I.  And I had a cousin about the same age so when we moved to North Carolina the three of us were very close.  And my grandmother had oh about 100 little chickens.  Little bitties, that's what she called them.  And if one of them died I had my cousin and my sister to sit on a little bench while I preached his funeral.  And we buried the little chicken in a matchbox (laughter).  So, and I--then I would teach them and I would after they after we had the funeral we'd go to school.  And I would teach those two and I said--and make-up stories.  I made up this story called Eperella [ph.] now I know it was based on Cinderella.  But they remembered it even today my cousin, my sister's deceased.  But my cousin tell me, Jesse, you remembered that story you made up Eperella, and we used to sit there and listen to you talk I said yeah I remember yeah.
Speaker 1: And what did you think you wanted to be when you grew up?
Speaker 2: I always want to be a teacher well I always want to be a teacher.  But then a little later on when I saw so much poverty I guess.  I didn't know it was poverty, but I know that's what it--I said I'm gonna be a social work.  So I can give everybody what they need but I didn't realize you couldn't do that (laughter).  That it was a process but after that, then I realized I really wanted to teach.
Story_ID: 191442
Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends in elementary school?
Speaker 2: It's hard to remember I can only remember one girl Marinas [ph.] oh and another girl Monsey [ph.] these are New York [New York] people.  I remember them I couldn't tell you where they are because New York was very mobile, and it's so large.  You can't--I miss that fact 'cause my husband [Elzee Gladden] now--my husband, on the other hand, could tell you right here in Baltimore [Maryland], who was his teachers.  And he had friends us from his elementary school.  That's unheard of in New York you can't remember who was your elementary--I didn't I don't know I really don't know.
Speaker 1: And what type of student were you in elementary school?
Speaker 2: I was a good student I was in the one class, you know, they, they labeled the class as one.
Speaker 1: And what type child were you during this time?
Speaker 2: Very compliant 'cause I always wanted to be I wanted to be--please my mother [Louvalia Rawles] 'cause I loved her dearly.  We were really the closest of friends.  And I always wanted to please her but I was also impious, you know, example I like sweet pickles, and I could always get the other kids to follow me for some reason.  And I would open up my mother's sweet pickles, and I would eat and pour water in it, so it float back up.  She wouldn't even know it I thought, but she did know.  Or if we wanted, wanted to do something I wasn't supposed to do like cook candy when my mama went out I would be the person initiate it.  Show everybody else how to do it and then I--when they wanted to tell on me, I would try to explain it in a very plausible way, you know.  I wasn't really gonna cook the candy, but the sugar was out there (laughter).  And then (laughter) I would say some things, and they'd say well I know who started it, it had to be [HM] Jessie [Gladden].
Story_ID: 191443
Speaker 1: Ms. Gladden [HM Jessie Gladden], let's talk a little bit about your family's experiences in church.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the church you attended?
Speaker 2: I attended and was baptized in Central Baptist Church [New York, New York].  And I but I lived across the street from Reverend R.C. Lawson's church [Greater Refuge Temple, New York, New York].  One of the most noted ministers in Harlem.  And we often visited Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.]'s father's church [Abyssinian Baptist Church, New York, New York].  And I remember one Sunday my mother [Louvalia Rawles] took my sister and myself there this man, there was a man sitting two rows ahead of us, and I thought my mother was engrossed in the sermon so she wouldn't notice the fact that I told my sister, "Let's tear up this and let's see if we can hit him on the back of his head" his head was bald.  So we rolled em up and made spitballs, and we just plucked them and the people--and we started laughing.  And put our hands over so my mother couldn't hear it, but people kept looking around and finally my mother saw us laughing.  She pinched us so hard the tears were flowing.  But I knew we couldn't cry out loud people looked back these are the little girls that were grinning, and now they're crying.  But she said when she said she saw us she pinched my leg pinched my sister's leg.  And we were just crying but we sat straight, we sat tall, and we wiped those tears, and we stopped plucking that man on his head (laughter) to with that spitballs.
Speaker 1: Did, did you all attend Adam Clayton Powell's church often?
Speaker 2: Only on occasions, you know, if something special happened.  And I was young so I really--I'm sure that--'cause my mother was very active in voter registration, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] kind of things.  And Powell was getting ready to go to Congress I believe, and she was always registering people to join the NAACP or to vote and that kind of thing so I'm sure we did.
Speaker 1: And what was some of your experiences like at your church, were you very active in the church?
Speaker 2: I was just a little usher.  And oh yeah, I--some reason another the ministers would always or the ladies in the church would always say well get a little girl let her, let her read a poem.  So and I have a poem that I remember they gave me, and I, I was so small, so short but I remember a poem about a friend.  A friend is one who's always true; a friend will suffer pains with you, a friend will help you along the way to make your life happy and gay.  Now I was about five or four but I knew that poem.  And I always looked younger than I was 'cause I was small.  But I might have been seven.  But people probably thought I was about four or five years old, and I said that little poem.  I never forgot it that poem is about seventy years old.
Story_ID: 191444
Speaker 1: Ms. Gladden [HM Jessie Gladden] I meant to ask you this earlier would you please give us the names of your siblings and their birth order including yourself?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My sister Estelle [ph.] is my, is the oldest.  My brother Ernest [ph.], who lives in--my sister, Estelle lives here in Baltimore [Maryland] she's the oldest of the group.  My brother Ernest is next who lives in New York, and I'm the next child and then of course my sister that's deceased was the youngest.  But almost everybody thought I was youngest because each of my siblings my one brother and two sisters very independent, very self-directive and that kind of thing.  Although I was self-directed I didn't mind (laughter) listening to other people but I knew that if I listen to them I could, I could probably convince them to do it my way.  But that's the kind of--they were strong, and they still are they're very much leaders.  But my and my youngest sister everybody thought I was the youngest because she just didn't she say Jessie likes to be petted, pet her don't pet me (laughter).
Story_ID: 191445
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit now about junior high school when you move to (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: North Carolina.
Speaker 1: North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What's the name of the school there?
Speaker 2: Ransome School.
Speaker 1: Could you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: R-A-N-S-O-M-E, Ransome School.  It was different; (laughter) it was so different when I first went down there they'd laugh at the way I talked 'cause they said I talked funny.  And that's what I thought they did talk funny.  But and then they said my sister talked even funnier 'cause she could not say all words clearly, and they didn't understand that so they said oh well her sister talked worse than she does.  But I thought--I'd like to hear Southerners talk I--but it was to me then it was sound funny to me quote unquote funny.  I found--I had my first black teacher, and they would let me read I like reading.  I found that the kids in the South knew math better than we did in New York [New York].  I understand now why because in New York you had so many different nationalities they stressed language in the city.  You had to; you know, know how to talk to each other.  My--in the south, it was just all black kids, and, you know, we were going to these one-room schools.  And, one or two rooms they had about three rooms maybe in the schools down there.  But the kids knew math better than I did.  But I could read, and I could write well.
Speaker 1: What were some of your favorite subjects?
Speaker 2: English, history any reading subject the social sciences.
Speaker 1: And now who's influencing you at this point in your life like around the junior high school years?
Speaker 2: My mother [Louvalia Rawles], my mother.  Well, she had an influence on everybody.  But she was so strong let me tell you; my mother won--had a country store, now we were about twelve miles from a, from a town.  And so the store was well-stocked and my family--also members of my mother's family had another store right across from us, so we had--we owned those two stores.  She wanted, she wanted to vote down there when we moved 'cause she voted all her life in New York.  And she had to stand in line all day to vote so she would hire two people to stay in the store because of we--my sister and I weren't old enough.  We had a beer and wine license she'd hire two women to run the store while--she said I'll take my lunch with me 'cause I'm gonna be up here all day.  When I get near to the voting line, they gonna tell me I gotta get to end of the line or something.  She said something's gonna happen but she voted, and she wasn't afraid.  She encouraged other people to try to register and vote.  I don't know how successful she was, but I know she was successful in getting people to become NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] members in that little country area which was really an achievement. Because those people at that time were only making something like two dollars a day on the farm and, a dollar a day, that's what it was on the farm.  And it was about two dollars to join the NAACP but they brought it up to that store, and they paid her.  And she kept telling them if you if you do this when something happens to you and you have to go you can call on the NAACP.  And I thought that was pretty courageous when I got older, I really did.  And she wanted a liquor license it was--they fought that liquor license.  They said, "Well she need not go to court, 'cause she not gonna win."  She went down there, and she did win she was determined, she was determined--
Story_ID: 191446
Speaker 1: And what was the name of the high school where you attended?
Speaker 2: Garrisburg--let me see I think it was Garrett--North Hampton County Training School [North Carolina] I think.
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like there?
Speaker 2: It was good.  I had a; I had a I think a very pleasant experience.  I, I--now most of the people down there were relatives now 'cause I moved--my mother [Louvalia Rawles] moved back down there where her farm was.  And everybody in the South is related if in a certain area.  You got cousins to the 15th degree, so everybody in the class was related almost.  And I even had one of the--one of my teachers who taught me French was my cousin.  And I was proud of that, and I did well in school.  I was, I was a good student.  Now I, you know, I wasn't no plays and (laughter) but I was a good student.  I was a solid student, a good student.
Speaker 1: And what was your dreams and aspirations now during high school?
Speaker 2: To go to college, I wanted to go to college, and I wanted to teach.  I and I thought I wanted to go back New York [New York].  When I was in high school down there all the time, I was in junior finishing up junior high school I still didn't like be--living down there.  And even though my mother had a store, there were people there all the time you could play the jukebox, you know, the jukebox with all the water run around looked real pretty.  I still didn't like it there.  And I wanted to go back to New York, and I call it a period of adjustment really.  So I had a--my oldest sister never moved south 'cause she married in New York, and she stayed.  My mother allowed me to go back to stay with her for a while.  But I missed my mother in the ninth grade I was I went back to and Watley High School was my high school, and I thought I was going to finish Watley.  But I did the ninth grade there, and I missed my mother so much.  You gotta understand I had been down the South now for a while.  And I was probably learning to adjust, but I don't know why my mother let me go back, but she did she let me go back.  And I that was the best experience, and when I left Watley, I said I've got to go home.  And I went back to North Carolina and finished high school down there.  And probably would have been salutatorian of that class.  I recall when they were going to select the valedictorian I knew the girl--one of those girls down there was she deserved to be the valedictorian.  But the class wanted me, and they told the teacher Jessie should be the valedictorian.  But the teacher said no she--you have to--in order to be the valedictorian or the salutatorian you have to do four years.  And she was not here for the ninth grade all the ninth grade.  So the class was so adamant about that they said then we'll have a third ranking, student.  And to this day when I look at that book that's what I am the third ranked student (laughter).
Story_ID: 191447
Speaker 1: What were your thoughts about college where did you think you wanted to go to college?
Speaker 2: Well, now I had many cousins down there who went to college so.  And I have a cousin that now I've realized that this year after when I went down to my homecoming that she really was a mentor for me.  Barbara Bell [ph.] and when she went to A&T [North Carolina A&T, North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], and I did I went to A&T in Greensboro North Carolina I went there.
Speaker 1: And what year did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: Forty-eight, then '48 [1948].
Speaker 1: So when you were in when you were in high school were you thinking you wanted to go to A&T or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or were you thinking you wanted to go someplace else?
Speaker 2: I--that was it, that was the school I wanted to go.
Speaker 1: And so you went to North Carolina A&T, in 1948.  And what were your thoughts about paying for college and that kind of thing, was that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't, it wasn't difficult the first year or so because my mother still had the store.  We had a liquor license.  So it, it--the first year was really great.  I just had a--you know; I never had any problems for tuition.  And tuition wasn't that much, but and the regular salaries down there were very limited, and it was very low.  But this my second year the county became dry, which means that they outlawed liquor in that county couldn't sell anymore.  And so you don't make very much money selling cigarettes and food (laughter).  And most of the people down there were sharecroppers during that time.  And they were living on other people's farms, and commissaries they had food.  So that was a pretty rough time for a while there, until we adjusted.  And I, I got a summer job, and I went back to New York to work and, that's how I sort of helped myself out.
Story_ID: 191448
Speaker 1: What were your experiences like at A&T [North Carolina A&T, North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Well it's the first time that I had been away I had a lot of freedom to try to be a young adult.  And I, I liked A&T I enjoy A&T because I met many friends, and I always wanted to do my work.  And I did do that, and I was a pretty good student, you know, I didn't set the world on fire but I was a good student.  And made the dean's list several times, it took me at some time though to adjust.  The first year I really had a problem trying to adjust I'm a I was a child that stable, and I didn't like change.  And here was another change in my life I was coming like--it took six hours to get from where I lived too, to Greensboro by bus.  And I was away from my mother, and I, I really had a pretty hard time trying to keep my mind on my studies.  But the second year I adjusted better, and I was really popular I knew a lot of people.  And I became really very popular on the campus I think.  I, I (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Did you join many sororities or were you active in any clubs or anything?
Speaker 2: I did, I didn't join a sorority at in college.  After I found they were gonna hit you and my mother did hit me (laughter), I said no.  And they're gonna take you out to--they are gonna do the hazing was just really, I understand, brutal.  'Cause my roommate wanted me to join with her.  They left her at a few out at some Cemetery, and I said no and then the girls wanted you to comb their hair and do things for them.  Well, my mother had two people doing things for me, and I said no not gonna do that (laughter) I can't do that.
Speaker 1: What kind of activities were you involved in?
Speaker 2: I, I joined the--I really I joined the, I--a group that our chaplain had.  I was always sort of religious, religious bent.  And but I joined it because you might know, you might've heard of Guilford College [Greensboro, North Carolina] and The University of Maryland, I mean University of North Carolina Women's College.
Speaker 1: It's a all-girls university?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, these but they were white.  Guilford was white, and Greensboro, where I went to school, was a college town there were three black colleges and three probably three whites Bennett was there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: And is Bennett all women?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah they were right across the track from us.  Now I didn't want to go to an all-girls school because I like the fellas and the fellas liked me so I, I, I enjoyed that.  But Guilford my--our chaplain struck my attention because he wanted Guilford College and A&T.   Guilford is white, and Women's College is white he wanted them to form an alliance with A&T.  Now you gotta remember here this is, we're in the '40 [1940], '49 [1949], '50 [1950].  And everything was segregated, you know, the, the buses were segregated.  We use to walk downtown rather than to read the sign on the bus that says colored from the seat from the back and white from the front.  So at A and T we didn't do that we walked, if we wanted to go downtown to the Woolworth's store that first started the Civil Rights Movement, we went down there.  But we walked to that Woolworth.  But nevertheless the chaplain wanted to start forming alliance with Guilford College.  I'd never forget it and that really captured my attention because my mother had always been very active in trying to do things to integrate making things better.  So I joined that group, and we went to Guilford College, and there were some white kids now you remember this is around 1950.  There was some white kids who came they were interested too in forming an alliance with the other colleges the three black the three white, well the white kids served us some cookies and punch.  And the next meeting we went to was a letter from the president that said that they were violating the North Carolina segregation laws because we were eating together.  And we couldn't sit down and drink--I think gave us punch and some cookies.  The next time we went to Guilford the kids said okay we'll stand up.  So we stood up, and we--and I thought that was good.  What really was very inspiring to me--well I that was the group that was most interested in, and we did some things.  But we were not allowed to really formulate; it was too early.  'Cause the Civil Rights Movement didn't come until the '60s [1960] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But we did move, we did meet, but when my daughter finished Westin high school here it was Guilford College that was going to, that wanted her to come.  They wanted to give her a free ride (laughter) it was University of North Carolina that wanted her to come (laughter).  It was Duke University gave her scholarship (laughter), you know.  And I told her when I was at A&T I had to go through Durham [North Carolina] where Duke [University] is.  And when we got to Durham we had to get up and moved to the back for the students coming from Duke to sit down.  I said now Lacy you see you're on the president board and all that kind of thing.  So I say that to say there has been change; things have changed quite a bit.  And a lot of changes have occurred.  And I was happy that she wanted to go down to Duke really.
Story_ID: 191449
Speaker 1: So did you graduate from A&T [North Carolina A&T, North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] in 1952?
Speaker 2: I graduated '53 [1953].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-three [1953].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what did you do next?
Speaker 2: I came to ball--well now I had many relatives who lived here in Baltimore [Maryland].  When my mother [Louvalia Rawles] moved from New York [New York] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: And you (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I came here.
Speaker 1: Got a degree in what?
Speaker 2: Social studies, a social science in English.  I came here to take the teachers exam to get a job here because I tried to get a job in North Carolina.  But I don't know, it just wouldn't hire me, I, you know, my theory was I guess they said her parents got the store down there she doesn't need a job.  I said that, but I don't--no one ever told me that, you know, but I saw people around me getting jobs.  So I, I had enough family here in different places I said well I'll go to Baltimore this summer and take the exam, and I took the exam.  And they called me, and I got a job here.
Speaker 1: And what, what was your first job?
Speaker 2: My first job was at Charles Hamilton Houston Junior High School [Baltimore, Maryland] right here in Baltimore.  I taught World History, and I stayed there, I think I stayed there about maybe seven years, six years.
Speaker 1: Now did you go there right out of college in 1953?
Speaker 2: No, no I didn't, I stayed, I--what I did when I came out of college I tried to get a good job down there for couple years.  And I work at my mother's store I help my mother in the store.  And I would come here for the summer and visit relatives, you know, still seeking job opportunities.
Speaker 1: When did your teaching career begin?
Speaker 2: Fifty-six [1956].
Story_ID: 191450
Speaker 1: And how long were you at Charles Hamilton Houston [Junior High School, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: I was there, I was there about five years maybe.
Speaker 1: So until about 1961?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about, I guess yeah about, yeah about maybe '60 [1960] I'm not sure.  I'm not sure of those dates, but that's where I met my husband [Elzee Gladden] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Was he teaching?
Speaker 2: He wasn't there then, He--I came to that school in March of '56 [1956].  He came in September of '56 [1956], he was a math teacher.  He was right out of school.
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about how you all met.
Speaker 2: Well, I, I as, you know, as I said, I was in the school in March of that school year.  And he came in September of that same school year after summer.  And I met him as I walked into my room he was sitting on my desk, and I'd say get off my desk.  I don't want people sitting on my desk.  He said fine then I'll just put all my stuff in your closet, you know.  And I said no, no you won't he said yes I will because I'm a floating teacher and I'll be floating in your room every day because the schools were so crowded.  And they had just begun to integrate the schools.
Speaker 1: In 19' (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well.
Speaker 1: Fifty-six [1956].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah they, they made (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: So two years after Brown.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah they had just started to admit black kids to schools like Pauline Westin, which meant they skimmed off the--you know, our top students went there--
Story_ID: 191451
Speaker 1: But at the time that--when I first started [teaching at Charles Hamilton Houston Junior High School, Baltimore, Maryland] I had some of the best students in the city really.  One of my students is a judge in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  Because kids' parents were not too eager to send their children--be the first to send their children to these schools that had just integrated 'cause Baltimore had so many problems, you know, with integration.  But shortly after that of course when schools--when they schools were smoothly integrated your top students started going to these city-wide schools.
Speaker 2: And some of the top teachers in black schools too.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely.  Because it was around that time--and I got pregnant I took a leave of absence and when I wanted to come back I asked to go to Douglas which was a black school.  And my supervisor who was black said no, we're gonna send you to Pimlico [Middle School, later Pimlico Elementary/Middle School], which was an all-White school.  I said, I don't really wanna go there, she said yeah, but we need to send our best--we need the top student--the top teachers to go there.  We need our strong; that's what she use to term.  We need our effective teachers we need our strong teachers who can go there, and you can go and I did.  I went to Pimlico.
Speaker 2: What year did you go to Pimlico?
Speaker 1: I came--I stayed home five years so it must have been '60 [1960], maybe '69 [1969].
Speaker 2: And what was that experience like?
Speaker 1: Wonder--it was good.  I, I there, I went to a school, Pimlico Middle School is in a Jewish area, and I was the black teacher in the social studies department.  Because they had one, they--one would come at a time.  They had one, but she was being moved to another position.  And they--I followed her.  That was a great experience because first of all I hadn't at, at my old, old Douglas that's where the Houston Woods was.  That school I had to buy paper I had to buy things that I needed 'cause we never had enough resources.  But Pimlico, I had everything, everything I needed.  The school was bursting in the seams because the parents were not going to let their kids go to the--to another middle school.
Speaker 2: To integrating.
Speaker 1: That's right, (laughter) you got that right.  And so, that, that they were--the classes were larger and crowded, but the experience was excellent.  And I always sought to be innovative in teaching.  I, I had some of the very brightest kids in the city.  And I had them, I had them to go to [Johns] Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland] and had, I asked the--someone out there that I knew if I could bring my little ninth grade class to Hopkins.  And they got a--and it one of the students to teach them.  I wanted them to have that experience, and Hopkins had a computer telescope or something of that nature that would enrich what we were doing and we went there.  There were twelve Doctor's at Hopkins I have to give them credit.  They wanted the people to stay at Pimlico.  They wanted people to continue to send their kids there.  And I had most of those kids in my class.  But the people moved, the neighborhood changed, and they moved.
Story_ID: 191452
Speaker 1: But that was a good experience.  When they [Pimlico Elementary/Middle School, Baltimore, Maryland] had open, open house in November, American Education week they had to bring in the principal had to bring in chairs there were so many people.  And I thought they were all in my room 'cause all the parents were standing around the room just watching me.  I had--my niece was the black person in science.  She taught science; I was the Black one in so, in Social Studies, a friend of mine was the Black Teacher in English.  Well--and I wondered I said I wonder did they have this many parents visiting everybody's class.  'Cause I had them standing around the walls but the kids liked me, and I liked them.  And I think the reason I was able to connect well with those children was when I was in New York, I knew a lot about Jewish people because many of my--people in my family worked for them as in domestic workers, I had a few Jewish people in my class, and my uncle spoke Hebrew fluently, and he spoke Arabic fluently.
Speaker 2: How, how was that?
Speaker 1: In New York you'd learn everything you can do some (laughter) I don't know.  But 'cause he was from Georgia, but he lived in New York like forty years.  But, and he would when I lived in New York, he would try to teach us Hebrew.  And he would give us a piece of candy learning sweet he'd--if you learned something he'd give you a piece of candy.  So I didn't mind, he thought I had--I would go around, and he'd say, he would say--and he called me Bougy, "Come on.  Say, alef bet, gimel, dalet, he, vav."  Now this, it took LSD for me to recall that when I went to Pimlico.  But anyway I saw all these Jewish kids I start saying, "alef, bet" (laughter).  But and he would give me piece of candy, and I learn this Hebrew alphabet.  I learned to say quite a few; I would say, "(speaking Hebrew) hurry up."  I learned all the things that he taught me maybe I must have been about seven.  And here I was old twenty something, but when I walked into that class and saw all these Jewish kids, it came back to me.  And I started to--the kids were--when I say "(speaking Hebrew) hurry up, hurry up."  They would start sitting down, so they asked me, "What are you?"  And I said, "What do you mean (laughter)," you know, just.  And so one kid must have gone home, and I have a lot of little anecdotal things, one kid went home told the mama my teacher speaks Hebrew.  And so the parents, the Hebrew--the, the Jewish parents have what they call a sisterhood.  And they have meetings up in the church like we do in the Baptist Church Missionary, the women's group.  And so she told the child to, to invite your teacher to come and hear one of their speakers.  So I took my kids, I said okay.  The principal said fine, so we went up there to this beautiful Synagogue, and I took my class and when I walked in his mother was there, but she didn't pay me any attention.  I don't know who she thought I was, but (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: You couldn't be the teacher who was speaking Hebrew.
Speaker 1: Evidently, so I had them to sit down they sat down, and she came in and she asked them where was the teacher?  He says, "Ms. Gladden there she is;" she said, "Oh my goodness I," she said, "I thought you were Jewish (laughter)."  She said, "Let me tell you what happened.  My son came home, and he said my teacher speaks Jewish," and she said, "I just assumed you were Jewish that's why I told him to bring (laughter)."  And I told her a story of how I learned a few words.  And I went with some Jewish groups, you know, and one day I did that, and the guy, one of the Jewish fellows in there said to me, "You mixed up your Hebrew with your Arabic (laughter)."  I said I don't know I was seven or eight years old when I learned that, and I never forgot it (laughter).  But I say that because it was a connection for me, and I really enjoyed Pimlico.
Speaker 2: How long were you at Pimlico?
Speaker 1: I never stayed anywhere very long, I was there two years and I--or a year and a half, two years.  And I was promoted to department head and went to 130.
Speaker 2: Public school 130?
Speaker 1: Public school 130, that's right you're not from Baltimore.  Here in Baltimore, and that was all Black.  But they had to have an apart, a Department Head.  So I was promoted to Department Head.  And I stayed there a year and a half, and my supervisor said they need, the State of Maryland needs somebody to teach on television, so I went there for a year and a half.  I telling you I, I floated around, so I went--I taught on television a year and a half, a year.
Story_ID: 191453
Speaker 1: Actually let's talk a little bit about you taught for a show called 'Newslab.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little--how does--what was that experience was like?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My supervisor as usual she would come, Rose Kenny, whenever she wanted somebody to demonstrate something for department heads.  She would come and get me as a teacher.  And say we want to have a department heads meeting I want you to do this so she would do that.  And the next time I saw her she was coming to me.  And I said I know it's something else Rose wants.  She said, Jesse, they need a teacher, they wanna start a new program.  And it's gonna be out in public television.  I told 'em I got just the person for you.  And so you have to go well it's my supervisor I couldn't say no.  And then, you know, so I went for that year there were, there were two white students and one and me (laughter).  So and that must've been about oh two or 300 people maybe 100 or so people I don't know who apply for the job.  But, you know, how I really got that job.  Now my husband [Elzee Gladden] and my two children they were small we went out there for the interview.  And I didn't know what to expect it was something similar to this.  I didn't know what to expect, but I know Rose said go.  And I saw, and I had heard these people had applied.  And I just knew I said well, you know, they're not gonna take me I'm from Baltimore city and blah blah blah, you know.  So I got there, and it was my time to go into the room.  And you've been in television studios the room is small but it's closed.  When they closed the door, it sounds like no sound can come in.  And here's the floor man with his finger sticking out when the light comes on you speak.  And he had me in a circle had me stand in a circle when I called a light.  That was the only light in the room, but it was soundproof I believe.  And the guys up in that glass were watching me, and he said just stand just stand in that circle where the light is.  And I was standing there, and I said oh how long I'm gone stand here?  So from my left-hand side I--this man came out in a suit had a rose in his hand.  And he told me I want you to talk about this rose, and I started talking.  I said, where the bomb fell in Hiroshima [Japan] roses grow.  He said, stop you got the job that was the interview (laughter).  And my husband (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Wow!
Speaker 2: That's what my husband said when I--he said goodness, he said how did you do that, and I said I don't know.  He said my husband said I told you, you're the most creative thing these people seen.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: That's what I did I taught--he didn't even let me go on he just said I said roses grow.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  And let's see you did that for a year?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah I did that for a year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now--
Story_ID: 191454
Speaker 1: Some time in here you were working on your master's thesis weren't you in 1973?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, yeah I was going to school at night in the evening (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: So you were going to school in the evening (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yeah to get a master's (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: To get your master's degree?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and I got it in '72 [1972], '72 [1972] or '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: And where did you get your master's degree from?
Speaker 2: Morgan, Morgan State University [Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: In?
Speaker 2: And I got it in American history.
Speaker 1: And, (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: And (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about what you did with your thesis paper.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay I, I was in a class my professor was Dr. [HM] Roland [C.] McConnell he is now ninety-three years old.  I was in a History, American History class, and he said I want you to--we did a paper every week, and he said I want to get your papers ready for this week.  And I went home I had two small children then, and I told my husband I sat down that afternoon it was summer school, and I said wow I don't have a subject.  I don't know what to talk about now, so one of my husband's frat brothers was there, and he said why don't you talk about this guy at [Johns] Hopkins [Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland].  Now this is 1972 I think it was '72 [1972] or three [1973].  He says, why don't you go over there and talk this guy named Vivien Thomas he would be a interesting paper.  So I got up, I went over there and talked to Vivien Thomas, and I found him so fascinating--
Speaker 1: Tell us who Vivien Thomas was.
Speaker 2: Yes, Vivien Thomas was a, was a researcher at Johns Hopkins.  He was a--he did--he was working on heart disease shock, and he was trying to find the quote unquote cure for the blue baby operation.
Story_ID: 191455
Speaker 1: Tell us what was the blue baby operation and (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Babies who came--babies were born many times, I'm not a doctor.  But babies who would turn blue because there must have been an occlusion or blockage somewhere in the arteries that blood could not flow freely.  And they turn blue particularly babies, you know, light skinned babies.  And so that's what he [Vivien Thomas] was working on Helen Taussig was working on it.  Also, she was a famous doctor at [Johns] Hopkins [Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland].  And so I went up to his office, and I told him about this paper that I had to write and could I use him as a subject.  He says sure, I don't mind.  I found it so fascinating, that I said gee I went back and I wrote the paper that afternoon went wrote in one afternoon.  I wrote a paper on him and passed it over to Dr. McConnell [HM Roland C. McConnell] he said, [HM] Jessie [Gladden], this would be a great master's thesis.  And so I did it as a thesis and from that point on I went to see Vivien almost every day after school I was working then.  And I would go up maybe two or three times a week.  And start talking to him and I say, Vivien, you have got to write your work you've got to write about your life 'cause you doing some significant work.  And he had the--his office as the supervisor of surgical research was the only office of its kind.  And I said you--people have got to know about you.  At the time that I wrote about Vivien there were like three black students at Hopkins very few blacks at all.  And when he came as I talked to him, and I would worry him so much I said, please give--let me do something.  You gotta write a book about yourself 'cause nobody knew about him nothing had been written about him.  And so he said well I'm ma let you write about me, and that's how I start writing a thesis and then he read every word that I wrote he corrected every word.  And I think my enthusiasm infected him and eventually he did write a book about himself.  But when I finished because I gave him a copy, and I gave the school one because the school allowed me to go up there and read.  And he gave me his protocols a lot of his notes, and I know that what I wrote is what Vivien wanted because he read every word.  And I was--my professor Dr. McConnell said, I don't know whether we can do this Jessie because you're a history teacher major, I'm a history professor who's going to guide you.  I said Vivien will do it.  I said Vivien has taught doctors at Hopkins, and so I convinced him that it was worth it, and I could try.  And when I finished one day in my office I was by then I was almost getting ready to go to North Avenue.  North Avenue is the administration building in Baltimore City for the head of this school system.  I finished the thesis, and I was in my office one day in the school and a call came to me from Dr. Muller, who was the president of Hopkins.  His secretary said Dr. Muller would like to have a copy of your thesis I said why.  She said I'm not at liberty to tell you, and I said then I can't give you my thesis (laughter).
Speaker 1: I'm not at liberty to give it to you (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's right.  So she called back, and she said Dr. Muller asked me to tell you this.  They want to give Vivien a doctorate that was the reason I wrote I wanted Morgan to do it.  And I was so excited I Xeroxed that thing I said in a minute I will be over there after school, and I will bring it to you.  I--he said we want to give him a doctorate, but we don't want him to know it.  And we want to do it at the May graduation.  Well, this might've been saying the first of April or something like that.  And we, we don't want anybody to know it, we don't want him to know it.  I said oh no I said I'm happy because I want the world to know that Vivien exists and that Vivien lives.  Well, I, I would go and see Vivien but I couldn't tell him (laughter).  So graduation that graduation I think it was the '73 [1973].  That May, I took off from school.  And I was sitting in the audience 'cause Dr. Muller said we don't have any information on Vivien in one place other than your work, and so I gave it to them.  I said I told the man that at Hopkins when I took it to him.  I said I want you to sign this piece of paper that says you will not publish it.  And you will not take it any place other than here.  So he gave me a little tiny piece of paper now here I was so excited I just let him sign it and run on.  And 'cause Vivien had a copy of it anyway.  And Vivien was pleased with it 'cause much of it was his thoughts if you want to read it you can see I quoted him and he guided it so well.  As I and I told him I said, you know, I went all over the city everybody in the city after that I was called for Black History month.  I went everyplace talking about Vivien Thomas.  I even wrote to the black magazines, but they said it wasn't something, you know, at that time that.  Nobody knew about him, and they didn't know about me either.
Story_ID: 191456
Speaker 1: Do you think there are a lot of Vivien Thomases (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --out there that kind of escape the annals of history (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: I under--I yes, and it was the hand of God that I know about him.  A friend of mine was at Hopkins at the only black in his class.  And he said you should write about that guy 'cause you, you writing, so I did.  And Vivien was pleased though because nobody knew, nobody knew there was nothing out there other than a newspaper article.  And so what I did I wrote to some of the most outstanding medical scientists in this country.  Denton Cooley, I got a letter from Denton Cooley.  Alex Haller, which probably doesn't mean very much to you, but he was an icon at the hospital.  I wrote to Rowena Spencer I mean, everybody that was in that movie that was put on this year.  I wrote to them, and I have letters from these people.  And I ask them in the letter give me your perception of Vivien's work.  And I was doing it because I wanted people to believe this man, to know him, and to believe that he did some of those things.  They--one person's response to me--well I stand out in my mind that's Rowena Spencer although all of the doctors that I wrote to basically answer.  All the doctors that you would see in that film answered me.  But Rowena Spencer said this, she said Mrs. Gladden you must understand 'cause see I was questioning why he didn't move on up and all.  And she was saying, Ms. Gladden, you must understand that Vivien was black, and I was a woman.  And that all she said but she didn't have to say anything else, I understood what was not said.  And I kept her letter and I every day when I was doing the research I was writing to people everywhere because many of those people had left Hopkins.  Every day when I came from work if I saw a letter from a doctor it was like a detective story.  My husband and I would jump up and down and say oh read it, you got a response from Denton Cooley, you got a response from Alex Haller.  And so Alex Haller and what I did I walked around that hospital looking on the walls to see if there were other pictures.  Photos 'cause--I showed you his picture over there if there were other blacks I didn't see any black up there.  And I, I was willing to say at that time that the only his was the only picture of a black person on the wall on the hollow walls of Hopkins was Vivien Thomas.  And it's in--it's there now in their--what they call the emergency room.  But is the Blalock clinical lab, laboratory building but what was interesting about that was the night that he found that procedure.  I'm saying that he discovered that procedure the only two people in the laboratory 'cause the researchers worked at night.  And the doctors came around in the morning and, you know, ask what are they doing?  Well, that night Rowena was on she was white woman (laughter) he was black and so the two of them had the they had what you and I call the graveyard shift (laughter).  They were working that night, and he was in his laboratory and he called Rowena.  He said Rowena come here think I found something, come here and she went in there and she and the blood was flowing in this dog because they did experiments on the dogs.  And so the next morning when Dr. Blalock came to the laboratory and to make his rounds Vivien said Dr. Blalock I have something to show you, and he showed him what he did with the dog.  Well, you can read the rest is history.
Speaker 1: The rest is history.
Speaker 2: The rest is history.  He called the press, and the rest is history--
Story_ID: 191457
Speaker 1: Now, I still I tried to encourage Vivien [Thomas] to write his own book, and he did do that.  And since then there was a doctor at [Johns] Hopkins [Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland] who wrote a chapter on Vivien which is similar to what I had written.  But at that time I was so frustrated I used to send in my dining room almost crying because I couldn't get anybody to publish it, to talk to him, to do anything.  And guess what, one day a lady called me from Washington [D.C.] her name is Jan Juder [ph.].  And my husband [Elzee Gladden] and I had retired, and she said Mrs. Gladden my name is glan--Jan Luder, I'm from Washington.  I have Sparks television program or something and Sparks studio S-P-A-R-K-S.  And we were interested in your research, your research on Vivien Thomas.  Now this was like fifteen or twenty years ago soon as I--around that time, and we want to, we want to do a movie can we come over to see you?   I said yes you may; I said why couldn't you, why couldn't you--I said who told you about, about me.  And she said somebody at Hopkins, but she couldn't remember who it was.  So I said okay, she--I said well I have a copy of my thesis at Morgan but she said Morgan won't let it out.  And they don't let out the, so I told her to come over, so she came.  She came and had lunch we--Cross Keys is a place where you do a lot of businesses a place where you have lunch, and it's a hotel.  We went there for, for lunch she talked to me about it and same thing I'm basically telling you about Vivien.  And she--and I had some tapes I did the--I think am the only person that has him on tape.
Speaker 2: Cassette tapes?
Speaker 1: No they are that old-fashioned tapes you had, you know, not cassette but I had a Wollensak at that time you gotta remember that you so young (laughter).  They had these huge tape recorders and you in school.  So I had a school tape, and I asked him if I could interview him.  So I have him on tape, and I did an interview.  And the only thing she really wanted was that tape because Vivien is dead now, and there was one statement that she wanted and I didn't like it.
Speaker 2: What statement was that?
Speaker 1: He said he was talking I would, I asked him a question why didn't you go to college Vivien why didn't go to school.  He said I'll tell you why, I was going to go to Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee], but I put my money in the bank in 1929.  And the stock market crashed with all my money, in there and I couldn't get it.  And he said I was just colored folks mad (laughter).  But she wanted to the tape so she could hear that because I played the tapes for her.  And he said I was just colored folk may that was all.  I said well why didn't you go to college when you came to--when, when you left Tennessee with doctor--left Vanderbilt [University, Nashville, Tennessee] 'cause 'cause he went to Vanderbilt.  He was working at Vanderbilt for a while.  I said when Dr. Blalock came to Hopkins 'cause Blalock had been at Hopkins then went to went down to Vanderbilt where he met Vivien.  Vivien was a carpenter at one point, and I say that's a big story 'cause he did he made something that people around other countries use really and (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: What did he make?
Speaker 1: Made this apparatus it was an apparatus that was very essential in this blue baby operation that Ted Trolla [ph.] to follow he taught me a lot of work things like that.
Speaker 2: So was he self-taught?
Speaker 1: By working in the laboratory but he was just brilliant, absolutely brilliant.
Story_ID: 191458
Speaker 1: And that's why you referred to him [Vivien Thomas] as the non-doctor?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'll tell you I saw a newspaper article and they called him a non-doctor.  So when I, when I wrote my thesis, I called it 'Vivien Thomas: Black Non-Doctor' because he did not have a degree.  But you've heard of Morgan [State] University [Baltimore, Maryland] here I understand at least he told me that he did workshops there.  Vivien was a natural scientist.  Just--and I probably knew him better than most people 'cause I talked to him all the time.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: And he guided my thesis for that year.  And the God-given talent, just God given and nobody was listening to me, and I would come home and frustrate my husband.  And he said why don't you put those papers up.  I said I have to; I have to see if I could find--see we didn't have computers then, you know. Where I could look on the Internet and see who else was doing anything.  So I said I've gotta go to the library and stay all day and check things out and see if I can find anything on him.  I've found one book where--that someone had said I think it's was Blalock's book though it said he said oh Mark Ravitch, Mark Ravitch was Doctor Blalock's biographer.  Said that Dr. Blalock said when Vivien did a fix the heart 'cause they were doing heart surgery.  It looked like the hand of God had fixed it.  And I found that I was happy about that, I found that.  But there was nothing else out there.  And so I was again like my daughter I had more courage than sense.  I called the television station since nobody else wanted to publish write listen to me.  And I asked the black girl would she come over to meet me at the school at Hopkins, with no permmission from the school, Hopkin hospital and let's do a show on Vivien Thomas.  So I was just that so passionate about it I skip all the steps necessary to even take a television camera up there.  She working at the station did the same thing made me out in front a Hopkins she had a cameraman like you got this guy, this young man.  And we started up there we gone do the evening news (laughter).  Got to the door and Vivien was very stern.  He said you're not gonna, we're gonna do any television program.  I say why not, he hadn't told he hadn't told anybody at the hospital, you know.  Now that I'm older I was a supervisor I now understand he put us all out, put us out(laughter).  Anyway, I'm standing spend on the street looking up at the 12th floor--why?  And so I called her recently, I said do you remember the day we went over there we were gone do this show.  And I hadn't even asked at the hospital could we do it (laughter).  She said yeah 'cause I had the cameraman (laughter).  Oh geez, so that was the end of that.
Story_ID: 191459
Speaker 1: So after you get your master's degree, you moved into administration?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about what you were doing.
Speaker 2: Okay, when I got my master's I stayed in the class for a while, but I was then promoted to a specialist.  And it's like a supervisor in social studies and what we did, we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Where is this, Baltimore city schools?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Baltimore city schools.  My boss was Dr. Samuel L. Banks well-known around the world probably.  I was his assistant.  I develop curriculum; I observed teachers, I did evaluations, I worked--served on the boards.  I served on the multicultural education board for the taste of Maryland.  I served on many state boards, you know, had things that had to do with education.  When we did the citizenship test I served on committees for that, just numerous committees.
Speaker 1: And so when did you become the supervisor for the social studies curriculum?
Speaker 2: Probably 1977 around that time.
Speaker 1: And how long?
Speaker 2: Until, until 1992.
Speaker 1: And you retired?
Speaker 2: I retired, yep, and did a lot of out--I had so many jobs.  I just did, I was chair of the book committee for the city for social studies.  I chaired the homeschooling for socialist ISI.  We wrote, we wrote much of the materials for citizenship education.  Just whatever we needed in education whatever we needed in the areas of curriculum instruction I demonstrated lessons.  I demonstrated new techniques in teaching, teaching thinking skills, individual teaching all.  Whatever was recent out in education.
Story_ID: 191460
Speaker 1: What were some of the changes you noticed during your twenty-year tenure developing curriculum?  What did the curriculum have to change according to the time?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, one of the things Dr. Samuel L. Banks was the person that was responsible for, for making our curriculum and social studies more diverse.  He headed a committee to restructure it because if--you were too young but when I came through school, you didn't see any black faces.  You--very little information about blacks other than maybe Harriet Tubman and Frederick Douglass.  But Dr. Banks was head of the committee that changed the curriculum in Baltimore city to be more inclusive.  And I, of course, when I came on, and we did that and we--I represented him at the State.  And we wrote the multicultural guidelines for the State of Maryland I was on that but that was the change.
Speaker 1: What was the changes you were noticing you seen in terms of students and curriculum what were some of the bigger changes you were noticing?
Speaker 2: Well, the thing that I--in terms now instruction let's, let's just break it down.  I'll break it down.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: The curriculum (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: The curriculum that I just mentioned we became more diverse.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: We now didn't just talk about George Washington and Thomas Jefferson, but we talked about Blacks and women who made a contribution in the curriculum.  And we didn't stop at the World, Second World War we, we continued.  In instruction some of the changes I--we did more individualized instruction.  We did more team teaching we utilize much of the research from the universities.  We had partnerships, we had workshops with the people in counties in the counties cross country, you know, that kind of thing.  We stressed thinking skills rather than learning a bunch of facts for the facts sakes.  We wanted youngsters to think about what they're (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Moving away from rote--?
Speaker 2: That's right exactly, we wanted, we stressed communications skills, we stressed writing skills.  Because America, you know, believe it or not, we listen to what you say and how you say it.  So those were some of the things that we stressed.  And, and instruction and we did individualize instruction.  We did group instructions 'cause children--we did learning styles.  Some children, learn one way some learn another.  Some children, learn best by themselves some learn better in groups.  So we wanted children to live, learn and become lifelong learners because they had to learn to solve problems,  we did decision-making.  We wanted them to learn how to, you know, we asked open-ended questions like for example if I were to say to you how important is it to you what other people think of you?  You gotta think about that, you know, or if I said to you what does respect look like, and I got that from my mother.  What does it what does respect look like to you, what does it this sound like and some kids can't answer questions like that if they don't see it in the book.  The answer has to be in the book.  But there--you have to utilize your own resources and the type of teaching that we did.  We want our teachers to be creative, and I enjoy it, I still do. I volunteer now one day a week.
Story_ID: 191461
Speaker 1: And I know that you wanted to talk a little bit about your husband.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Dr. Elzee Gladden.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So tell us tell us a little bit about his career here in Baltimore [Maryland] City [Public] Schools as an educator?
Speaker 2: I, when his story I almost cry.  He was the youngest of eighteen, he had thirteen brothers he was the fourteenth boy.  He did his homework by a street light.  He at times, when their lights were not on, and he lived--his house was in East Baltimore.  Where there was an outpost in front of his house, If they didn't have light in the house he did his work by the light in the streets.  But determined to do it, and he went Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] he was a graduate rather, he went to elementary school here.  He was born in Chester, South Carolina.  His parents came when he was in elementary schools second grade first or second grade, so he was in Baltimore all of his life.  He went to Dunbar High School [Baltimore, Maryland] and became the first graduate of Dunbar to become their principle.  He was the first African American to supervise all teachers in the city 'cause when I started you have black supervisors and white supervisors, white teachers and black.  He when they integrated the supervisory staff he was the person in mathematics and the first person to receive a doctorate from Northern State University he did so many.  And he was like one of the--he was the kind of principle who wanted children to learn.  And he saw them as his own, you could walk into Dunbar high school you wouldn't hear any noise because he didn't allow noise.  And no fights never a had fight that kind of thing (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: He would actually refer to the kids as his son or daughter?
Speaker 2: Yeah that's right, that's right.  And he turned around schools he went to the--if a school needed somebody to turn it around he did it.  They send him to Harford Heights, which was a school for kids who had special needs.  He turned the school around.  He was the first black male to go to, to be the principle of an all-girls school which is white, turned it around.  They having problems he'd turn that around.  He went to Garrison, and one of the things they did a Garrison Middle School children fight, used to fight he--they stop fighting.  He offered Latin he say he thought Latin was important for kids to have and learn, and that was true.  Because if you have any Latin you can attack words better you understand, and I know that for a fact.  He wrote a grant for Dunbar when he went there as for a--sense Dunbar was located near Hopkins he said there should be some kind of partnership.  The way they did I think it was Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], or one of the schools had a partnership with the high school near them.  He wrote this grant I think it was $165,000 the president came to school we went to Washington [D.C.].  When I think Barbara Bush was--came to lunch because the president couldn't come.  We spent the day over there at the White House.  And the hotel where they put us up only fourteen principles in the nation received that, and Elzee was a direct, very strong, very bright, very smart person.  When he received the letter that we were going to attend this White House conference for the weekend they told every--all the fourteen principals they could not bring a spouse.  But my husband wrote back and said then I'll send my assistant principal they said bring your spouse, so that's why I got to go with him.  But he was innovated, and [Johns] Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland] and Dunbar did have this program that he started, and it was going on (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: They started their own partnership?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And it was doing very well but my husband died, and he, he retired he left in 1992.  The program had been enforced about two years and when he retired it just wasn't anybody take program and then he died.  So I was sorry about that because they were doing such do good things with Hopkins.  And I thought Dr. Faisal [ph.], who was Hopkins person liaison with him, was very pleased with the program.  I was just sorry that the program didn't start.  Because my husband made it clear, he felt that if you had a high school down the street from Hopkins.  Then there should be some children who from Dunbar, who could go to Hopkins medical school and become doctors.  And he made it clear that he did not want those children to empty bed pans, to make up beds.  He wanted kids were able to take biology courses, chemistry courses, physics courses, and enroll in Hopkins.  And Hopkins got their first I think student to enroll in their med [medical] school but he transferred and went to Pennsylvania (laughter).  But at least Elzee got him in there before he died.
Story_ID: 191462
Speaker 1: Ms. Gladden [HM Jessie Gladden] I wanted you to tell, tell us a little bit about the scholarship program [Elzee Gladden Foundation Scholarship] that you all award in your husband's [Elzee Gladden] name.
Speaker 2: Right, the--my husband's fraternity, the Sigma Phi Sigma fraternity, with Charles Mills as their president decided when my husband died that they wanted to have a scholarship program in his name.  And so every year in October we have what is called a prayer breakfast in which we have people to come.  And they contribute, and they buy tickets, and we have a speaker.  And we use the money from the scholar--from the breakfast to award for more scholarships to children young people who plan to go to Morgan.  And for four years and we've done that ever since he died and my husband dead ten years.
Speaker 1: And are these students who are like stellar academic (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Not really but these are students we know who needs just a little push, and we know that they'll be successful and these are the students.  Of course, now there are students that probably are the star arises stars but usually they get scholarships.  Those types students get scholarships from all over the country.  But there are some children students who may be a B or, you know, a B student or strong C+ who need just a little help and that's where we can fill in the gap.
Story_ID: 191463
Speaker 1: Ms. Gladden [HM Jessie Gladden] when you look back at your life what stands out the most to you and why?
Speaker 2: When I look back I realized that I was very blessed to have parents and a family that supported my every goal.  I and I, I've spoken into churches around the--I've spoken in churches for Women's Day and all the occasions done it quite frequently.  And I usually tell the people to whom I'm speaking the congregation that if nothing else you do remember your three F's.  Your faith in God, your family and friends and these are the things that will support you.  And the legacy I'd like to leave is that I have made a contribution to somebody's life.  To redeem my time on earth and to help those persons who help me that's what I'd really like to leave.
Story_ID: 191464
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: I, as my--my husband [Elzee Gladden] used to say don't ask are those kind of questions she's creative she just ramble on and tell you 1000 things.  Right now I am hoping that and saying to teachers saying to the churches the African American churches I want you to adopt one class.  I've read, and I've seen churches say we adopted a school we gave him a luncheon we gave them a closing affair.  That's not good enough for me I want accountability I want results.  And I think if every church in this city in your city and cities across this nation will adopt just one class.  One class of kids classes now are small twenty, twenty children and follow those children from grade six through elementary through middle school up to the eighth grade.  Kids drop out of school mostly at the ninth grade so if a church would follow those kids right on up through to high school.  It would make a--of vast difference, and I know that and so right now (laughter) that's my passion that's what I'm preaching (laughter).  When I, you know, my daughter's a senator in the state Maryland State General Assembly.  And I go with her to quite a few churches and organizations, and I'm saying, "What church do you go to I go to?  So well how--what do you think you would do you think your women could adopt this one class just one class?"  "Well how we going to do that, Ms. Gladden?"  "Well, what you do see the principal ask the principal can you do it with one class.  Get a teacher that's interested ask the parents to come to a meeting with you.  Tell those parents you got eight friends one of whom will come to the school once, one day in one week.  So if you get four people and if they come one day one week that's four weeks."  Just four people to come and check on children who didn't have what I have.  I've had a great life.  People cared about me.  And I want somebody to care about these children.
Story_ID: 191465
Speaker 1: Do you ever wish you would have chosen a different career path?
Speaker 2: Not at all. No, not at all.  I think I was cho--everybody has a gift and everybody a talent.  You might not--I didn't know that my talent was teaching until we had a usual Thanksgiving dinner with my family.  And I said, you know, I keep hear people say everybody has a talent I don't know what mine is.  And everybody at the table in unison said well, Jessie, you know you a teacher you were teaching when you preached the chickens' funeral (laughter).  When you had us sit down and listen to these stories that you made up (laughter) your talent.  And so and, you know, and I went, and I started to reflect on that, and I said, you know, everywhere I've been I got the job.  When I started teaching (laughter) when schools were not integrated down at this first my first teaching assignment.  There were two students from [Johns] Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland] who came over with their teacher to talk to my principal and ask him could those two students be my practice students.  And my principal said she just got here, and they said yeah, but the supervisor said he want these two kids these were two white boys schools weren't even integrated.  And my principal said we can do that right now, so I started looking at things like that.  And then I start looking at how I was moved through the system.  I said maybe I was meant to teach because my supervisor she says, Jessie, I want you to demonstrate this for so and so, you know.  And then when I went out to the television station they had to be they had to be something in that when I was going for a written interview.  I thought were maybe an interview of this nature and the man said that's all right cut she got the job.  So I say that, and then I went to I became supervisor of Baltimore city and had many opportunities I went to the United Nations school to observe that school.  And some of things that they were doing their--I've done.  And, and I went up--I would go with my daughter, and I look at what they're doing across the state now I'm looking at different schools.  But the most impressive thing I have seen was the--a Jewish group has adopted a class one school, one class.  And I went to their closing exercise, and they called they said we adopted this class.  And I said what school is it Northwestern all-black but they had those children in the synagogue and they were given their closing reception I said I can do that.  And always said I can do this when I see somebody else do something I can do that, and that's what I'm doing now this passion now.  I am trying to convince churches do your mega church but don't forget our children.  So if I can get eight people four people to help me, that's one person per week to visit the school that's all it takes.  That's all it takes just four people to say, "Yes Ms. Gladden I'll go up on Mondays and ask the teacher," 'cause I've already outlined the three things I want 'em to do.  And asked the teacher how is so and so how's the student doing his academics, attendance, and behavior.  And I was talking to a lady yesterday she called me to beg me to tell my daughter to help her do something.  That's why I'm getting them now 'cause they want Senator Gladden do something.  So I said look remember the two A's and the B academics, (laughter) attitude-behavior and attendance.  So I said that's all you gotta do take a few minutes, and I'll write the forms and all you have to do is check it off.  If this child has made a sixty because we're gonna check them every quarter.  If they made a sixty this quarter at the beginning of next quarter, hopefully, they'll make seventy that's progress.  And we can make a difference, and we don't have to give the school a whole take--say I'm ma adopt this whole school, and we gone give him a closing at closing luncheon.  We want results we want to be able to account for what you've done we want accountability.  I'm not there yet as a matter of fact it took thirty years for somebody to do something with Vivien [Thomas], you know.  Jan Luder [ph.] did something with Vivian I had when I had my lawyer send her a contract she didn't sign it.  So but this year Jan Luder came up with the movie, and she sat in that room with me and we had lunch.
Story_ID: 191466
Speaker 1: What haven't you done yet that you'd still like to do?
Speaker 2: This--what I haven't done is to get churches involved with the school that's my passion that's my project this time that's my project because every goal that I've had I've been pretty fortunate God has blessed me and it has come to fruition.  I wanted my kids to finish school, and they did.  And I wanted to be able to share what skills I have with other teachers, and they do I've done that.  And wanted to be a good mother and a good citizen, I think I am.
Story_ID: 191467
Speaker 1: What would you say is your proudest accomplishment?
Speaker 2: Having my children (laughter) really raising two really good citizens.  And the reason I said that it wasn't easy for me to get pregnant.  I had to have major surgery seven years trying to do it (laughter).  As so to get them through school and to and they're still making a contribution that the idea that you have to give something back, and it has, they're doing that I think.
Story_ID: 191468
Speaker 1: What advice do you have of those who are interested in pursuing a career in education?
Speaker 2: If you want to do it, do it.  And my motto is answer the question I ask you.  What does it I mean how much how important is it to you what other people think of you.  So if they don't want you to teach, answer that question.
Story_ID: 191469
Speaker 1: And how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As one who tried to make this a better world than what I found it.  And really I just hope I that I have helped somebody specifically that I made a difference in somebody's life and made a contribution in my area in, in history.  You know, sort of off the record I guess but I've taught kids who used a lot of profanity in the class you probably heard em.  Rather than to tell them sit down don't--you not do that I try to teach them another word.  The kid, kid, came past me one day he said oh S, you know.  I said the word hold three fingers up the word is defecate.  Now you say defecate eight times because scientists say if you can give that word to go across to convolute those little ridges in your brain you will remember it.  He stood up there defecate, defecate, defecate.  I said now the three fingers mean if you say it correctly you gone use up all your fingers but if you got a finger left, you know, you left out a syllable.  So he goes down the hall defecate, defecate, defecate.  And I said it's the same thing, I said amma gonna you how to use profanity.  I'm ma teach how the curse clean you could use it in church okay.  And all the words they have I don't fuss with them, and I'm volunteering I just teach em how to say it better.  So when I go to school, they say here come that old lady she could teach you some good words.  Hey, tell him how to say, you know, copulation.  Say well yeah copulate I said sure I'll teach what it mean.  That's that's what I want I went to Giants Monday to the store Giants food store.  I heard somebody say across the aisle vacuous bunny.  'Cause I wouldn't let my children call each other dumb you have to say vacuous.  And the lady said the, you know, I'm a schoolteacher now but I never forgot that (laughter) she said I'm a teacher too (laughter).
Story_ID: 191470
Speaker 1: Ms. Gladden [HM Jessie Gladden] is there anything else you'd like to add that perhaps we didn't touch on?
Speaker 2: I don't think so (laughter) other than the fact that I, I think, you know, I really my husband [Elzee Gladden] and I my husband used to say our marriage was made in heaven, and I really believe that we had a great marriage.  And almost everybody used to say that because we were both in the school system we both had to go to supervisors meetings administrative meetings I'll say.  And sometimes what I will go in the door first people was say hi Gladdens they didn't even see him they say somebody would say well it's just her they say he's coming in, and it was true that same thing in church.  So when he died it was well no people say well that's, you know, they had a good marriage, and we did, we did.
Speaker 1: How long were you married?
Speaker 2: Thirty-seven years yeah, thirty-seven years.  And if I had to give any advice on being married don't have these children right away (laughter) 'cause I tried for seven years (laughter).  And I think that's why we got so close didn't have interference.
Speaker 1: And would you give that same advice to your daughter and to other young women that your mother gave to you?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: About being married?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I do that now my minister's son got married recently, and I told him I said look don't marry a fool and don't do all the loven.  That's a great philosophy 'cause when you marry somebody who doesn't love you they do anything to you.  And if he's foolish (laughter) don't put your money in the bank with him (laughter) get separate accounts (laughter) and see it doesn't really my matter so my daughter Lisa just feel like the world is hers she can do many things, you know, my son too.  He's-so--. And just treat people the way you wanna be treated, treat 'em right that's all.
Story_ID: 191471
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my husband Elzee Gladden and myself we were going to the senior prom.
Speaker 2: About what year is that?
Speaker 1: It's about 1970s in the '70s [1970s].  That's Lisa; that's Senator Lisa Gladden (laughter).  And she is in junior high middle school probably (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: And what year was that taken?
Speaker 1: She was probably what in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty [1980], mid, early, late?
Speaker 1: Late '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Late '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Yeah that's it.  That's Mark, my son that was gee that was probably that was at his senior prom too.
Speaker 2: What year do you think?
Speaker 1: I think (laughter) I'm gonna with his high school (unclear) I guess would probably say in the, in the mid-'80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Mid-'80s [1980s]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah.  That's my mom my best friend everybody needs a good friend.  (Off-camera discussion) ready.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's my mother everybody would call her Ms. Lou.
Speaker 2: And could you tell us her name again?
Speaker 1: Her name is LouValia [Rawles].  My mother's name was LouValia most people couldn't say it, so they called her Ms. Lou.  And that picture was taken of her--she was here in Baltimore [Maryland] I'd just done a hair around 1955.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  That's our retirement that's my husband Elzee and my daughter Lisa and my son Mark.  That's our retirement dinner snow on the ground so deeply, and people still came in 1992.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I can tell you this one is Aunt Alice in 1986.
Speaker 1: Okay, oh yes that is Aunt Alice (off-camera discussion).  That Aunt Alice who died two years ago at the age of ninety-three she was everybody's mother in our family (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: What's her last name?
Speaker 1: I, Alice Sedka S-E-D-K-A.
Speaker 2: And that was taken in 1986?
Speaker 1: Yeah just about.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's my little son Mark and myself and aunt Beverly.  Beverly is a very good friend of mine.
Speaker 2: What's her last name?
Speaker 1: Beverly Bates who lives in Florida her son and my son were born on the same day but her son died.
Speaker 2: And what year was that I'm taking you back?
Speaker 1: Yeah 1964.
Speaker 2: No this picture.
Speaker 1: Oh no oh I'm sorry I thought you meant the birthdate.
Speaker 2: Yeah no ma'am?
Speaker 1: Oh about four years ago.
Speaker 2: In 2000?
Speaker 1: Yeah around 2000.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Who is that?
Speaker 2: That's you.
Speaker 1: Oh (laughter).
Speaker 2: What do you know about what year that was?
Speaker 1: (laughter).  I'm trying to see what did I do (laughter) and have to (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: It looks fairly recent though.
Speaker 1: Probably is I'd have to see it closer.
Speaker 2: You want me here I'll hand it to you.
Speaker 1: Yeah let me see it (laughter) I said who is that (laughter).  That is ridiculous Jessie (laughter) I'll tell you I don't know where I was.  Oh this is at a fundraiser for Lisa.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh and it was taken probably and nineteen this is what is this 2000 probably 2001.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Two thounsand one at a fundraiser for Lisa.
Speaker 2: Just tell us again that that one was taken 2001.
Speaker 1: This one was taken this picture was one of my daughter's fundraisers in 2001.
