Story_ID: 23666
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my name is David Garrison.  That's spelled D-A-V-I-D, G-A-R-R-I-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: A nickname?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, so, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay, I was born October 27, 1975 in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Sir, what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: I am associate professor and chair of physics at the University of Houston, Clear Lake.  And also, I have a joint appointment with the, as associate professor at the University of Houston in physics.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: This is August 15, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in the physics teaching lab of University of Houston-Clear Lake.
Story_ID: 23667
Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight questions I am asked to ask everyone that only require a short answer.  And the first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No.  I pretty much, I, you know, I've gone from really liking steak to liking seafood to, you know, just, now just trying to eat healthy.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Mostly like blue or red.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Anywhere that's warm with a beach.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I have on my, I have a quote from Einstein on my email, which is "If we knew what we were doing, we wouldn't be calling it research, would we?"
Story_ID: 23668
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but I'm gonna ask about 'em separately so we can keep 'em straight.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Then we'll put them together.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, her name is Christine Garrison or Christine Draine Garrison.  That's spelled, Christine, and then Draine is spelled D-R-A-I-N-E, and Garrison is spelled the same way.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Christine, with a "C" or a "K"?
Speaker 2: With a "C".
Speaker 1: A "C", okay.  C-H--
Speaker 2: Yeah, C-H-R-I-S-T-I-N-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in January 24th, 1940, and she was born in Mississippi.  I don't think they were in an incorporated town.  I think it's near, near Lexington [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them or what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well, I know, well, I have a lot of aunts and uncles on my mom's side.  They had about a dozen kids.  All the boys were older than all the girls.  And, you know, they were farmers.  They grew up in the country where they were mostly African American, but part Chickasaw [Native American].  And, you know, they, I think mostly going back several generations in Mississippi.  A lot of 'em moved up to Chicago [Illinois] over time.  So I have many aunts and uncles and cousins who live in Chicago and still live there.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have any idea how long the family's been in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Oh, they moved up to Chicago in the, I think it was in the 1960s is when they started going up there.  So it was--you know, I know all the, most of the girls moved up there, and I think I have one aunt who stayed in Mississippi.  And then several, you know, like several members of the family all moved up there.  And mostly, it was, you know, better work opportunities.  Down in Mississippi at the time, the only thing they could do was work as domestics.  And my mom, you know, she got her degree and did nursing.  And so she worked as a nurse until she retired.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother go to school in the South?
Speaker 2: She just went to high school in the South, and, you know, through high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know the name of the high school she came out of?
Speaker 2: No, I do not.
Speaker 1: So she did, so she served as a practical nurse then what we (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she mostly worked in nursing homes.
Speaker 1: Did she go to any kind of a nursing school because usually--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she went to nursing school.  She got, you know, she got her certification.  She didn't get a Bachelor's degree.
Speaker 1: Now, did she go to a nursing school in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you know where?
Speaker 2: I don't remember where.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you know what hospital she worked at?
Speaker 2: No, she worked in nursing homes.
Speaker 1: In nursing homes, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so she worked in several different nursing homes between the time she started nursing and when she finally retired.
Speaker 1: Was that what she really wanted to do or did she have any--
Speaker 2: I think that's what she wanted to do.  You know, I don't know any other--you know, she's, she's gotten involved in a lot of other things over the years like, you know, she's one of these people who initially didn't wanna touch a computer.  And then after she discovered eBay, she actually started her own online store, and she would go out and find antiques, find, go to estate sales, resale shops.  And she, she was really good.  She could find a hat or something like that for .25 cents and sell it on eBay for $300.
Speaker 1: That is pretty good.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and she, you know, she had a very good eye for finding valuable stuff.  Also, she had, has an incredible green thumb.  The other day she was complaining about how bad the soil is here in Texas, but she's managed to cover every inch of her backyard with plants and works on 'em, maintains 'em every day.
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of her family history, going back, did you know your mother's parents?
Speaker 2: No.  No, they died before I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay, and they were farmers in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And were they sharecroppers or did they own their own land?
Speaker 2: I think they owned their own land.  I'm not sure though.
Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories about, that go back to the days of slavery or Emancipation or--
Speaker 2: I know, I don't think it's on her side.  I think it's on my dad's side.  We had at least one relative that fought in the Civil War.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, on her side though right now, any stories that you--
Speaker 2: I don't know many stories from that.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, any family stories about the move to Chicago or--
Speaker 2: No, no, it was, it was--a lot of it was just the individuals moving up there.  My grandparents on that side, they stayed in Mississippi.  And I think they just encouraged their, their kids to leave.
Speaker 1: Now, they moved in the '60's [1960s], that was during the Civil Rights struggles in Mississippi--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --and [Andrew] Goodman and [Michael] Schwerner and [James] Chaney were killed right after Emmett Till was killed.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: A lot of trouble all over Mississippi--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --lynching's, burning, beatings, people trying to vote, that achieving success, you know, that eventually did, you know, turn over the segregation system.  Are there any stories about that that they talked about?
Speaker 2: I know a little bit about my, you know, some of my uncles that actually fought in World War II [1939-1945].  And, you know, they've had, they had some run-ins over the time.  I had one uncle who actually, you know, let this Freedom Rider stay at his place, and, you know, they didn't get incredibly involved in a lot of that.  But, you know, they did have a few run-in's.  They had a few incidents where people didn't wanna hire 'em, you know, and they, they--like I have uncles who could fix and repair anything.  But, you know, it was a matter of just finding work down there, still was tough.
Speaker 1: Now, that's an act of considerable courage to let SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] volunteers or Freedom Riders stay at your house.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's a gift that keeps on giving when they leave, then you're still there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So that is something to be proud of.  Well, let me, did your mother talk about growing up in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Talked about it a little bit.  You know, she didn't, she doesn't talk about a whole lot of that.  She, you know, did talk about, you know, having to deal with some segregation and having to--and also, they, they grew up pretty poor down there.  So they, you know, they knew they had to make their own stuff.  And for them, I think it was, you know, they were, it was normal, but it wasn't, it wasn't good.
Speaker 1: And they knew things could be better (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they knew things could be better.  They knew they had a lot more opportunities, and I think that my grandfather on that side, he just didn't want his children working in somebody else's house, taking care of their kids.
Speaker 1: Did your grandfather initially move the family to Chicago?
Speaker 2: No, he wasn't, he never moved to Chicago.
Speaker 1: He encouraged them to go?
Speaker 2: He encouraged them to move.
Story_ID: 23669
Speaker 1: Now, go to your father, and give us your father's full name?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's Millard Garrison.  M-I-L-L-A-R-D.
Speaker 1: The same, Garrison.  And no middle name or anything?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay, no nicknames?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It's very unlike Mississippi, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, he, he grew up in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: He didn't, he was not from Mississippi.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born October 23, 1941.
Speaker 1: In Chicago?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, in Chicago Heights, Illinois.  It's right near Chicago.
Speaker 1: Now, what do you know about your father's side of the family?  Did they have an origin outside of Chicago Heights?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, they, father's side, went back, we had some people trace it back further.  You know, like on my mom's side, I think the furthest anybody chased it back was to the, the Chickasaw, but my father's side, they traced it back to Madagascar.  And family migrated, came to America in eighteenth century.  And I have, where there's, I know part Cherokee on that side.  And mostly, they started off in North Carolina, and family--I don't know how exactly all the details, but moved to Tennessee, part of it.  And my granddad was actually born in Tennessee.  And he moved up to Chicago.  I'm not sure when he moved up there, but I think it was probably in the 1930s 'cause he was actually born around 1916.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what is your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: Oh, his name was also Millard Garrison.  He was the first Millard Garrison.  My father was junior.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was, he was an auto mechanic and ran his own auto maintenance shop up there in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Was in Chicago Heights as well?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was in Chicago Heights.  He built his own house and built a big garage and, you know, repaired cars out there, did a lot of auto body and auto repair.
Speaker 1: Now, the Madagascar thing, now, this is, now this is unusual, and I think a lot of people would not suspect that a person who has, an African American would have ancestors coming far away as Madagascar on the East Coast of Africa--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --on an island, you know, well, like a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, basically.
Speaker 1: --a big island off the coast.  But I've heard this story now about five times.  People, I heard it last week, somebody had a story about their family coming from Madagascar.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: Now, yeah, there're several people in Chicago, I mean people who have origins in Arkansas, Louisiana usually talk about Madagascar, I mean the ones I've heard of in four stories.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so that's an unusual thing.  And somebody, you know, who watches this in the future needs to know that we have other people in the collection that say the same thing, 'cause very few people can point to a country of origin on the continent of Africa or even a region and say well, I know my people are Igbo or Yoruba or from Nigeria or from, you know, but people are saying, four or five people who said they're from Madagascar.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So, it's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's interesting.
Speaker 1: So, it's a unique sort of thing.  So, now, well, are there any stories passed down on this side of the family about the end of slavery or, or--
Speaker 2: Like I said, I just know, when my parents, when they did the search on Ancestry.com, they found one relative on my dad's side that fought in the Civil War.  And--
Speaker 1: Would this be like a great, great--
Speaker 2: I think it's either a great, great grandfather or like a great, great grand uncle or something like that.  I'm, I can't remember all the details on that.
Speaker 1: Do you know his name?
Speaker 2: Nah, I don't.  But we could, you know, I have to look that up again sometime.
Speaker 1: And do you remember where he might have fought, I mean what part of the country?
Speaker 2: Nah, I don't remember exactly where he fought.
Speaker 1: Thousands, hundreds of thousands of black men fought in the Civil War.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, so your father was born in Chicago and your grandfather like moved the family there in the 1930s.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So we inherited the Cubs fan gene from him (laughter).
Speaker 1: Cubs fans, huh.  Chicago Heights, from what I understand is closer, actually to the Sox, the White Sox, on the South side, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, but, my granddad just couldn't (laughter).  It's a thing people don't understand.  It's like if you're, you know, you're in Chicago.  You're either, you're Sox or you're Cubs and you really can't change these things, even though they don't win (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.  This is true.  So, now, what did your dad say about growing up in Chicago Heights?
Speaker 2: I think he had a pretty typical childhood there.  He actually, he did a lot of stuff that a lot of black people didn't do at the time.  And he went to Bloomfield High School [sic, Bloom High School], I think that was the name of it.  And after that he, he got involved in aviation, and he, you know, got his private pilot's license.  He was really interested in flying, and I remember every time--he'd tell me stories about how he would, he was really smart, and he would apply to all these college programs.  And he would get accepted, but then every time they saw what he looked like, they would send him a letter saying that, well, that school burned down.  And unfortunately, they can't admit him.
Speaker 1: Now, these are airplane schools?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, these are--well, he, what he did was, he ended up ultimately getting his certification, aircraft, airframe and power plants and became an aircraft mechanic.  So, and during the '60's [1960s], he was also, he was in a, fought in Vietnam.
Speaker 1: Was he in the Air Force?
Speaker 2: No, he was actually in the Army.  He was a Huey Crew Chief so he flew helicopters.  Matter of fact, there's a, the battle of the la Drang Valley, you know, at the beginning of the Vietnam War, he was, he was in that.  And they actually made a movie about it with, called "We Were Soldiers" with Mel Gibson.
Speaker 1: Now, these are, a big helicopter, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he was a, yeah, they were--well, what they were, troop-carrying helicopters.  They were, and they were gunships.  And they went over, he--after he went in, he was a member of the First Air Calvary.  And they were really the first time that anyone had ever used helicopters in combat, used these gunships.  And so they would fly troops in and out, but then, they actually used the helicopters and went on the attack with 'em and were able to use those against the troops.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think their maneuverability over the jungle and sort of thing (unclear) Vietnam.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so he was over there for a year.
Story_ID: 23670
Speaker 1: So did he [Millard Garrison] spend very much time in the army?
Speaker 2: He was there, he served his time in Vietnam, and I think when he could get out, he got out 'cause while, he'd met my mom [Christine Garrison] right before he went off to war.  And--
Speaker 1: He was drafted?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and they would write each other back and forth.  And, you know, and then after he got back, that's when they got married, and they moved in together, and they actually were living on the base and everything.  And he said that at one point my mom said, you know, she kind of liked the, the whole military life and didn't mind if he stayed in.  And he said, no, I'm getting out of here soon as I can (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: Yeah, actually, they met through my aunt, who I guess was friends with my mom.  And she's the one who had introduced them I think, you know, and I think it was something like if he had left a day earlier or something like that, they would not have met.  And then also while he was over in Vietnam, he had a lot of close calls.  He, you know, found, you know, go off on a mission and come back, and there was a bullet hole where his head would have normally been.  And, you know, and he talked about, they actually were, you know, using these helicopters and they're flying the colonels around.  And he actually mentioned one story about where they, where they had orders to take out elephants because they were being used to pull heavy artillery by the Vietcong.  And he talked about actually killing an elephant which sounded like it really took a lot more than people would think, actually; had to use rockets and everything.
Speaker 1: The first story I've heard about that.  But I guess that (unclear), it's true--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And also finding tarantulas in the latrine and things like that, they're not really pleasant.
Speaker 1: Did he talk about the, some of the politics of being over in Vietnam?
Speaker 2: He didn't really talk a lot about the politics of it.  He just, you know, I guess when they were there, they were mostly just focused on, you know, doing their job and leaving, especially at that point in the war.  It was really close to the beginning of the war.  And, you know, they had, they were really the first real combatant unit to go over there.  And so they didn't know at the time how it was gonna drag on or any, any of the other stuff involved in it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he would have been over there around 1960--
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965], '64' [1964], '65' [1965], something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, really started to break out as a war.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your parents--now, when did they get married?
Speaker 2: I cannot remember off hand.  I think they got married in 1964.  I wanna say it was either '64' [1964] or '65' [1965], I can't remember offhand.
Speaker 1: And they got married in Chicago, I take it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, or I believe it was in Chicago.
Story_ID: 23671
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' [Christine and Millard Garrison] personalities and their looks and their dispositions and their talents, their--how they walk and talk, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Both of 'em really.  My dad, like I said, my, my granddad was a mechanic.  My, my dad was an aircraft mechanic.  And so I grew up around this really mechanically inclined family.  I mean, you know, we knew how to fix stuff.  We, you know, we were able to, you know, we were always working on our own cars, always, you know, fixed stuff, repaired stuff, built stuff.  You know, we didn't throw anything out that could be fixed.  And so I got that on my dad's side.  And then on my mom's side, actually, a couple of my aunts are teachers.  And they were really big in education, although nobody, you know, very few people in my family had ever had a college degree.  And I'm actually the first one, like we're in the first generation to graduate from college.  And so, on my mom's side, I remember when I was growing up in Chicago and every year there was a teacher's strike.  And so she would essentially home school us.  And, you know, teach us things, go through lesson plans, things like that.  And we would actually go, you know, they'd take us to the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago and learned a lot about science.  So, you know, I learned a lot of stuff like.  I wasn't, you know, my mom, since she was nursing, she was more, and, you know, and the plants, she's more on the biological side.  And I, you know, that wasn't really me, but I did learn a lot from her.
Story_ID: 23672
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory was probably being at a hospital where I was always in the hospital because I had asthma.  So I was, you know, constantly there.  And so that's what I kind of remember like when I was really, really young.
Story_ID: 23673
Speaker 1: Now, you, your family moved to Missouri, you know, kind of early on, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I was about nine years old, eight or nine years old when we moved to Missouri.
Speaker 1: Alright, so, well, describe like where you lived in Chicago for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when we lived in Chicago, it was--
Speaker 1: Or Chicago Heights?
Speaker 2: No, we lived in Chicago--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the South side of Chicago.  So we were, you know, my parents had bought a house which, you know, it wasn't a big house.  It was kind of typical in the South side of Chicago.  And, you know, we had a nice neighborhood.  It was pretty much an all-black neighborhood.  You didn't, you know, not, not really the most diverse place.  And it was just a typical, you know, city neighborhood.  Everybody, you know, everybody on the block seemed like, you know, they knew who everybody's kids were, and so it was, you couldn't really act up because even your neighbors would spank you.  And, you know, we, I don't know.  It was, it probably, it was a lot safer than it is today, I think.
Speaker 1: Where was it?  What street?
Speaker 2: One hundred eight [108th] and Halsted.
Speaker 1: One hundred eight [108th] and Halsted.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so everybody had like their little house, backyard and, you know, we'd play with other kids our age, and, you know, it was just, that was, I don't know.  I guess it was pretty typical at the time.  And then when we moved to Missouri, it was completely different.  It was, the place my parents bought in Missouri, it was in a ranch-style house with about three acres of land.  It was a lot bigger than a city lot.  And it was about half an hour West of St. Louis, so it was still pretty country at the time.  And so it was a lot of undeveloped land, a lot of space, you know.  We, we actually had a lot of wild rabbits running around our house.  We had deer coming in and eating some of my mom's garden.
Speaker 1: Now, did you all move because your father was, had a job there?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he got transferred.  He, originally, he was working for an airline called Ozark Airline.  And Ozark was bought by TWA [Trans World Airlines], and TWA was bought by American.  And I haven't been following, but I think American got bought by somebody else now.  But, yeah, they, he, basically was in the same company, but it just kept being bought out by different groups or different people.
Story_ID: 23674
Speaker 1: All right, so you were saying that, you were talking about Ozark Airlines being bought by TWA [Trans World Airlines] and TWA by American, and sort of, you said your dad's [Millard Garrison] position, you know, he had the same position, but it changed ownership.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had, he changed--he was basically at the same position.  He was a mechanic.  And he was certified in airframe and power plant, which basically meant he could work on any of the problems that the planes had.  And what's happened since then, a lot of the time, is they would just hire more specialized people who could only work on certain things.  And they would pay 'em less money.  So this is kind of one of these industry changes that happened over time.  But he managed to actually retire early from the airline.  They--my parents were really good with their finances.  They paid off their house in Chicago [Illinois] early.  They paid off their house in Missouri early.  So they were very good with their money.  And they, after they retired, they just moved down here about a year ago.
Story_ID: 23675
Speaker 1: So considering both the South side and considering the house in Missouri where you grew up, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, actually, it was even wider than that because one advantage of having a dad who could work for an airline back then was that you could fly anywhere you wanted.  So we got to travel a lot, and we went--I think before I graduated from high school, I felt like I'd been everywhere in the United States.  The only thing that was sort of keeping us from just really going everywhere was my mom [Christine Garrison] was afraid of heights, and she didn't really like flying that much.  So, but we would go, you know, to different places.  And at one time my dad [Millard Garrison], you know, since I was into airplanes, he was into airplanes, we actually went on a little vacation to the, the aircraft, The Air Force Museum in Dayton, Ohio.  And it was just a really interesting, incredible sight.  It was one of those things that if you're not into it, you probably wouldn't enjoy it much.  And we've gone, you know, flew out to San Diego [California] just to go deep sea fishing, and, you know, we, you know, went to Florida a few times.  And so it was really just a matter of, if you can go anywhere you want, you don't have to pay for a plane ticket, what are you gonna do, where are you gonna go?
Speaker 1: So, any other sights and sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I can tell when I was in Chicago [Illinois], I remember lots of snow, and I remember, I remember it was cold.  But at the time, you know, you've got thicker skin and so it doesn't feel that cold.  And I remember being probably three or four years old and looking up and seeing snow mounds that were twice my size.  And then in Missouri, I get there, and in the wintertime it'd be really cold and icy.  And then in the summertime, it would be as hot as here in Texas.  So it was, it was very green, and also I did get to see some things in Nature, Missouri that I just had never seen anywhere else, like when a tornado is coming and the sky turns green or when--every year, there was a, there was a farm--it was owned by the Busch family, the people who made Budweiser and Busch beer.  And they had a, a lake on the farm.  And every year when the birds would migrate from down South, they would all stop there.  And I don't mean like, you know, five or ten birds.  I mean millions, enough to basically black out the entire sky.  And they would fly in, and they would all like come and land and drink at this lake.  And so they would form a landing pattern, and they would swirl around like a huge tornado.  And it would take 'em hours, and people would be out there all day watching 'em land.  And, you know, it's just something that I've never seen before.  I'm sure somebody recorded it, and there's a tape on YouTube somewhere, but its' a really amazing sight.  And then after they would land and they would drink and they would rest, then they would take off again.  And you'd see them reversing the pattern and taking off, and also I remember when we had a major flood there.  And driving along this bridge, and I look, and the same farm, and I would see this, see somebody out in a rowboat, rowing out to an island, and it kind of looked like a Norman Rockwell painting, till you look closer at it, and you realize that the island's actually his house.  And it's covered with, surrounded by sandbags, and the lake wasn't there a few weeks ago. So just really interesting sights that you see up there.
Story_ID: 23676
Speaker 1: You started school in Chicago Heights or--
Speaker 2: Chicago.
Speaker 1: In Chicago.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mount Vernon Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you get a chance to go to preschool or kindergarten?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to Head Start in Chicago, can't remember the name of the program.  And then I, I went to elementary school at Mount Vernon, and it was, you know, inner-city school.  I remember when I was in kindergarten, we once, I think we had a fire drill or something like that, and they lined us up and sent us out of kindergarten.  And we came back, and literally the place was burnt.
Speaker 1: So, actually, so it was a fire?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a fire, and I don't know, you know, how it happened or what happened, but I, so I started elementary school there in Chicago.  And then I moved to Missouri and I continued elementary school there at Mount Hope.
Speaker 1: Now, what do you remember about school in Chicago?  Did you have a favorite teacher or--
Speaker 2: I don't remember who my teachers were.  I remember, I don't know, it seemed like the school was really run down.
Speaker 1: Did you get much science education there?
Speaker 2: No, no, I think, the most science education I got in Chicago was going to the Museum.  And we would go to the Museum of Science and Industry.  We would do some of the summer programs there.  And that really made a much bigger difference to me than stuff we were doing at school 'cause it felt like in school--and this was the same situation in Missouri, that we would start off, and they would introduce addition, and then later on they'd give you subtraction and multiplication and division.  And then the next year, it felt like the exact same thing.  And it didn't feel like we were ever making any progress.  It just felt like, you know, we're trying to, they were trying to make sure that every kid, even if they weren't trying, would get the same amount.  And it just felt very slow.  It wasn't until high school that things kind of sped up for me on that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the name of the high school--I mean the school in Missouri?
Speaker 2: Oh, Mount Hope Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, you got two "Mount" schools.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, Mount Hope Elementary School.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was about, it was located about a mile from our house.
Speaker 1: Now, I'm pretty sure the school in Chicago was segregated in the sense that they're all black--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I mean our whole neighborhood pretty much was, pretty segregated.  The whole South side of Chicago--Chicago's a very segregated city and still is.  But, you know, when I got to Missouri it was totally different 'cause it was mostly white students there.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what do you think the percentage of black students would be at Mount Hope?
Speaker 2: Less than five percent.  So it went from close to 100 percent to about less than five.
Speaker 1: Now, was that an adjustment you had to make or--
Speaker 2: It was an adjustment.  You know, I, I think, what I did a lot when we moved to Missouri was just kind of tagged around with my big brother, and, you know, followed him, did what he did.  And that was sort of the best way to figure out how to even live in this totally different environment.
Speaker 1: Okay, but did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Well, I liked science and I liked math.  And like I said, it wasn't--I don't think the education was really much better in Mount Hope [Missouri] than Mount Vernon [Chicago].  It's just that some of the problems that I could see that they were dealing with in Mount Vernon as far as crime and things in the area, weren't nearly as bad in, you know, in Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I think that my, as far as the teaching and stuff, I still got really kind of bored with how a lot of the math and science classes worked there.
Speaker 1: So had you been exposed to a higher level or you're just, you picked it up so fast that you--
Speaker 2: Well, what happened with me was, I, I remember I got bored, and I just kept going.  And it was just, never seemed challenging enough.  And then when I was in high school, I actually had something interesting happen where I was able to feel a little bit more challenged.
Story_ID: 23677
Speaker 1: Now, did you go to a junior high school or did they--
Speaker 2: We had a middle school there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was a different transition.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the middle school?
Speaker 2: It was Fort Zumwalt North Middle School.
Speaker 1: All right, so was that any better than the elementary schools?
Speaker 2: It was better, well, the, there was, there was a few things we ran into in Missouri was really different from when we were in Chicago.  One was, when we first got to Missouri, and we're going to elementary school, the people in our elementary school, they didn't want us on the bus.  They didn't wanna let us ride the bus so my mom and I, she had to drive us.  And a couple times we actually would just walk.  And like I said, it was about a mile walk.  And then when I went to middle school--
Speaker 1: Now, when you say "they" didn't want you on the bus, are you talking about the students or the parents?
Speaker 2: No, the administration.
Speaker 1: The administration.
Speaker 2: The school district, whoever was running it.  They, they claimed that it was all full and that they could not, didn't have any room for any more students on the bus route.  And I think my parents kind of fought with 'em until they finally let us do that.  But we didn't have nearly as much of a problem with the students.
Speaker 1: So you think they were trying to discourage you from going to school in the area--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --by telling you, you couldn't get the bus?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  I, I get that feeling.  And then, when I was in middle school, you know, it seemed like everything was going well, and then I found out about the gifted program.  And they basically, you know, I asked about getting in it, and they claimed that I was not qualified because I wasn't smart enough.  And they said that they had, you know, put an I.Q. test inside of one of the standardized tests and that I didn't score high enough.  So I wasn't eligible.
Speaker 1: Now, is this--did they actually do that or is that, did they just say they did?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  But, you know, I'm, looking back on it now, the whole thing is kind of suspect.  But I mean otherwise, it was, it was a pretty decent experience.  I don't remember a lot of teachers specifically there, but, I mean I was, I was already kind of getting a reputation among my other classmates, it's like, one of the best students as far as science and math in the whole school.  And that continued all the way up through high school.
Speaker 1: Now, was your brother involved in science and math too?
Speaker 2: He, he wasn't really interested much in school.  He wasn't a very serious student.
Speaker 1: All right, so did he eventually go to college?
Speaker 2: He went to college briefly, later on.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he didn't, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --wasn't really academically oriented.
Speaker 2: No, no, he, yeah, he was more interested in other things.
Speaker 1: And what about your sister?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she, well, she ended up majoring in accounting later on.  And then she got her MBA, and she's, kind of went into the whole business world.  And so she was, she was very good academically, really talented.  And actually, with her--she was in high school when we left Missouri.  She's about six years older than me.  And so she--when we left Chicago.  And so she was in Whitney Young High School--
Speaker 1: She was gifted.
Speaker 2: Yeah, same school that [First Lady]Michelle Obama graduated from.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she was gifted if she was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and so she was only in high school for, I think two years in Saint-- in Missouri before she went off to college.  And, you know, since we could pretty much fly anywhere, you know, the college search for her was fun because she got to go and fly different places and check it out.  And she ended up going to FAMU, Florida A and M [University], where she was basically, ended up going to school with a bunch of people she went to school with in Chicago.  So for her, it was almost like she'd never left.  She's like, the same group of people.
Speaker 1: Okay, that sounds like a Whitney Young arrangement --
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: --the students actually decide where they're going to hook up.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So,--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember when I was in Chicago, I looked forward to one day going to Whitney Young, but it just never happened.
Speaker 1: Now, Whitney Young was the number-one rated public school in Illinois for many years.  I think the last couple of years, it's the number one school, period, you know.  So, I mean to be on that track and then to go to kind of an ordinary school in an ordinary program--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and, you know, that was, I think she didn't, you know, I think she just kind of looked at, when she was in Missouri, as a kind of temporary thing for her 'cause she knew she was gonna go somewhere else.  And, you know, and I saw some of the things that they would do at Whitney Young when we would go, and they would have like parents' night, and they would do bridge building and stuff like that.  And I thought, you know, that would have been a great place to go to school.
Story_ID: 23678
Speaker 1: But your experience at Zumwalt Middle School, it's Fort Zumwalt North High School too, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I went to the high school after that middle school.  And, actually, it was, it was interesting 'cause the high school was actually located, basically, in a cornfield, and since then they've--I was just there last week, and they've, they've built a lot over it since I graduated.  There's like a, I think the police department is located right across the street.  They built a second high school, private school, right up the street from there.  There's a, a minor-league baseball park, past where we used to drive to go to school and a ton of houses.  So they've really developed that entire area.  But when I was there, it was, you know, it was, the school was actually smaller then because when I was in high school, in band, they built a brand new auditorium, and we got to perform in it.  We were the first people ever to perform there.
Speaker 1: All right, now, did you--so you played an instrument?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I played trombone in the Jazz band.
Speaker 1: What attracted you to the trombone?
Speaker 2: Well, I think part of it was, you know, with asthma, there's, kind of limited in activities I could do.  And, you know, one thing I learned, when I was in middle school, I actually spent a summer at National Jewish Hospital in Denver, Colorado.  And I, you know, basically, I was having problems with my asthma, and it was just spiraling out of control.  And nobody could figure out what it was.  And so they were kind of a specialty hospital.  And I was there, and it was like a bunch of kids also there, and they were all having the same kind of problems.  And, you know, so I was there for six weeks.  And a lot of time growing up, especially with a nurse as a mom, I learned a lot about asthma.  And I probably know more about asthma than a lot of people who were in medical school learning about asthma because I learned, you know, all the little things, all the triggers, all the, how it works, what's going on inside your lungs, things like that.  And so when I was growing up, my mom, she got us in swimming, and part of the reason, in Chicago not a lot of people swim because not a lot of backyard swimming pools.  But one reason I did swimming was because that was the only exercise I could do that would not start an asthma attack.  And also it has the bonus of increasing your lung capacity.  You learn how to breathe and control your breathing.  And playing a wind instrument also does that, where you learn how to breathe better.  And throughout high school, my asthma was basically controlled with the theophylline which is--actually, throughout college too, which is chemically about the same as caffeine, but it somehow has an effect to help with your asthma.  But if you get an asthma attack, it's still really bad.  And so I learned that by increasing my lung capacity, then being able to breathe more efficiently and knowing how to handle an asthma attack and not panic, I could be in a situation that, like most people would be panicking because they couldn't breathe, and I'm performing 100 percent normal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, when I was in high school, I played football, and I actually, you know, could actually start having an asthma attack, and I could still finish off the series and then go off the field, take a few hits of my inhaler and I'm perfectly good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Probably, you know, the wind instruments perform better.
Speaker 1: So what position did you play on the football team?
Speaker 2: I was a linebacker.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, inside linebacker.  It actually was one of those things that kind of happened by accident where I, I didn't know what position to play.  My brother played one year, and I just decided, well, it looked like fun.  And then I really wasn't doing that well at anything, and then they just kind of put me temporarily in the linebacker position, and it just felt natural.
Speaker 1: Did the school do any good as a team?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were really good.  In high school, we actually were conference champs, not my year.  But then my year, like my senior year, I think we, we lost three games by one point which kind of was, not what we wanted.  But we were good.  And, you know, we, you know, we had winning records.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in high school from 1989 to '93' [1993]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Story_ID: 23679
Speaker 1: What was going on on the national scene during high school years?
Speaker 2: That was, let me see, that was actually the Gulf War [1990-1991] happened then.  And, you know, we really didn't know anybody involved in it, but it was just, that was the time when, you know, we really started looking at the news and actually seeing a war.  It's very different.  And, you know, also in school for me, you know, after middle school, I was still, you know, I was focusing on my--I liked the science and the math, and I remember one year, I think it was my sophomore year of high school.  You know, I was mostly playing in the band.  I didn't play football till my junior year where most people who play, they would start in freshman year.  And I was in a math class, and we had the teacher, I can't remember her name, but she essentially had--I think she was pregnant or had some kind of illness.  And she was pretty much out for the semester.  And we had a string of some of the worst substitute teachers worthy of a "Saturday Night Live" skit for pretty much the entire semester.  And the other students started looking to me to kind of teach 'em the material.  And so we finally got a decent substitute, I think his name was Mr. Styles, and he came in, and he was teaching the class.  And he would say something, and then the students would kind of look to me.  And I'd say, yeah, that's right (laughter).  And he just kind of took notice on us.  He was like, wow.  And so, then he, and I was already kind of on the advanced track in high school.  And he just kind of pulled me aside, and he said, you know, you know, you should, you know, normally what you do is, you take pre-Algebra and then, or Geometry and then pre-Algebra and the Trigonometry and then Calculus.  And he basically said, you know, you should just take Calculus junior year, which was unheard of, you know, at that school.  And so he just basically encouraged 'em to just let me learn at my own pace and just do things a lot more advanced.  And so that made a lot of difference to me, and then so my junior year, I was taking Trigonometry and Calculus and I think I was taking the chemistry and physics, all at the same time.  And I was acing all of 'em.  And there were seniors in the class who were looking at me for, how do you do this stuff and asking me for help.  And I was, you know, I was finishing my homework before I even went home for the day, so, I was, it was still fairly easy for me.  And, you know, just finally, it just took that long before they just said, you know, just let him do his thing and, and learn on his own.  And I had a few teachers who kind of would let us learn on our own pace.  And I, I would go ahead and finish the book, and the other students would just be behind, but this was the first time I actually really, officially got to do it.
Speaker 1: So you would read ahead in the books and--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  I would just read ahead, and I'd work out problems on my own, and it just seemed like, a lot of stuff just made sense.  And I would just work on it.
Speaker 1: Were you reading literature or watching film and that sort of thing that encouraged, that fed you with scientific information?
Speaker 2: I would read some "Tom Clancy", like I read "Red Storm Rising", and, you know, actually, at that time, a lot of students--I wasn't the only one doing this.  But you'd see a lot of students who'd walk around high school with a book and, that was not assigned in class, like "Red Storm Rising" literally, it's a thousand-page book.  And we'd walk around and just bring it with us.  And, you know, we got a few minutes and just read a little bit.  I mean we weren't like ignoring the teacher, but this was just what people did for fun.  And this was, like I said, this was like in an advanced, particularly advance high school.  But I think it was just, you know, just being able to get challenged just so it was interesting.  It was a lot of that, and then we also, in Jazz band, I was in for four years.  And we, we would perform, you know, concerts at the school.  And a few times, we'd have concerts off campus where we'd actually go and, and we felt like a real band.  I mean we were actually, one year I think we were one of the best in the state, where we got, you know, went to all the competitions and we would win and things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, what style of Jazz was this (unclear)?
Speaker 2: All kind.  Well, our regular band director, he was there my first three years.  And my junior year was the year that we were, really got all the really high-rankings, and we were, I think we were ranked in like the top, in the top five in the state.  And then we had a bunch of seniors on there, and they all graduated.  And our regular band director decided that that was a good time for him to go on sabbatical.  So my senior year, actually--no, no, that was my sophomore that that happened.  My, my junior year, my brother, who was a senior, he came in, and he joined the Jazz band.  And he played saxophone.  So we got to play together.  And a lot of our, our top players had left, and we had a kid there who was like a freshman who was like a piano prodigy.  And we had, but our substitute for the year, he came in, and he started a Jazz combo.  And so we used to perform where it was like, I think it was like four of us, where we would just have like a Jazz quartet or a Jazz quintet.  And we'd perform, and it was, it was fun.  We'd, you know, get to do all the improv and stuff.  And we got to explore all kinds of Jazz, like that was, I think the year Miles Davis died.  And we played a lot of Miles Davis.  My brother liked John Coltrane, we played a lot of John Coltrane.  And then we even did some experimental stuff like Ornette Coleman.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, you all were out there.
Speaker 2: Yes, so we, and, I mean we got to the, you know, we learned how to, you know, we could improv, we could play the smooth Jazz, we could play like the Jazz fusion.  We were, you know, and, you know, we learned all kind of music.  We, actually, they actually taught us back then how to write a little music.  So we were, you know, that was one thing.  Our school, we were good in football, we were good in band.  And, you know, academics, you know, we were not the best around, but--
Speaker 1: But you would at least get a chance to--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --at least jump ahead with the coursework.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  I mean, in my senior year, we had a, we had one guy who taught both the Calculus and the physics class and I had him junior year for both Calculus and physics.  So he actually put together a calculus-based physics course for me my senior year.  It was like an independent study so that was something nobody else was taking.  And I think that a lot of that gave me that, this sort of advantage in getting into, into MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology].
Story_ID: 23680
Speaker 1: Alright, now, you had a story about the [Space Shuttle] Challenger disaster.  Now, that took place in 1986?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And where were you then?  Were you at--
Speaker 2: I was in Missouri, I was in elementary school.  And I remember, what happened was, I'd never seen a space shuttle take off before.  And the shuttle launch was during the day, and it was during school.  And so, they thought it'd be a good idea to wheel the TV, and, you know, that's back when you had the, you know, the TV's you had to wheel in--
Speaker 1: The cart--
Speaker 2: Yeah, with a cart.  And they were gonna let the kids watch the shuttle launch.  And so, that was the first time I'd actually really seen a shuttle launch.  And it took off, and it blew up, and my thought was, why are they showing this to us kids?  It just seemed almost like, kind of mean, but they didn't know, of course, that that was what was gonna happen.  And it was, you know, I was really interested in space.  When I was in Missouri, I, I spent a lot of time going to the library.  And I would go there, and I would read, and I would, you know, just go through all the books on space and airplanes and stuff.  So that was, it was one of those things where you just don't forget where you were and what happened.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that, I, I've never heard it from a kid's point of view.  But, you know, but I guess that was a shocking thing to see.  But we used to watch all the satellites, maybe space capsule launches back in the '60's [1960s] with John Glenn and Alan Shepard and all of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that was, that was around the time the movie "Space Camp" came out and all the other stuff.  And I'll tell you, even watching the shuttle blow up, it didn't really deter a lot of us from wanting to with space.
Speaker 1: Now, you said, now did your family know some of the people that were--
Speaker 2: Oh, the astronauts?
Speaker 1: Well, in the shuttle program (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no.  At the time, you know, in Missouri, we were really far removed from NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].  Actually, since I've been here, you know, we're really tightly in a community with NASA.  And the guy in the office next to me, he, he remembers seeing Ron McNair every day picking his son up from school.  And, you know, they know a lot of these people here.
Speaker 1: And here, we're talking about--
Speaker 2: Here in Houston [Texas], and this community.
Speaker 1: University of Houston, Clear Lake, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we've, actually, this university has graduated ten astronaut alumni who've come here and gotten their degrees.  And six of 'em came out of our program.  And, you know, even the ones that aren't getting degrees from us, we see 'em and we talk to 'em, and get a chance to work with them.  And so I've gotten to know things about what it's like to be in space from a real, first-hand perspective that, just other people, just don't get a chance to, to see.
Story_ID: 23681
Speaker 1: Okay, so now, in high school, now, we were talking about you possibly going to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology].  Now, you went to MIT--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --we know that.  Now, how did that develop in high school, since they--now, are you officially in advanced placement classes now or--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was, I was officially in advanced placement classes.  I was taking, we didn't have AP classes, but I took the most advanced classes we had.  The normal college prep track--I had a really good counselor in high school too, helped me prepare, Mr. Fisher.  And I had, I basically--so, I guess the people who have influenced me most in high school was, it was Mr. Fisher, Mr. Lin, who was my Calculus teacher and physics teacher, Mr. Thorpe, who was our, my chemistry teacher--he seemed a little crazy.  But he was an excellent teacher. Mr. Styles, who was a substitute, who helped me get on a, lot of advanced track. And then my coaches and, you know, a few other teachers.  Well, when I was, you know, I went and visited MIT and did the, kind of the pre-frosh visit there.  And also I went to visit USC [University of Southern California] and visited some local schools like in Missouri.  And I remember, I would start getting all this mail from different schools that wanted me to apply.  And I just put 'em all on my dresser.  And the next thing you know, I had a huge pile of these things on my dresser.  The pile was like two-feet high, and I would throw it away, throw away--go through it and throw a bunch of it away that I wasn't interested in, and then keep getting stuff, and the piles would just keep going back up.  So I was, I felt like, you know, I was pretty much recruited anywhere.  And I had gotten the Bright Flight scholarship which would have given me free admission to any of the schools in Missouri.  And, but I wasn't interested in staying in Missouri at all.  I really did wanna go somewhere else.  And, you know, so I, I felt like I had a lot of good options.  And it didn't, you know, I felt like this is what I've been working towards, and this is what's gonna happen.  I actually graduated sixth in my high school class because I got a "C" in typing (laughter).  Everything else was an "A".  And also I took more advanced courses and got more A's in advanced courses than anybody else I graduated with.  And I, at the time, a lot of people I went to high school with, I think there was about 230 at my graduating class.  And most of 'em were just gonna go to school in state or were not gonna go to college.  So, my, when I, when I saw the letters coming in from MIT, I knew that that was a good one.  And my sister, when she was in, when she was applying for colleges, she told me, "You should go to MIT".  And she was the first one to say it.  And, and then when they started showing an interest in me, and they would actually send me two of every recruitment letter.  So I was getting two of everything from them instead of one, like you'd normally espect.  And, you know, and it was really interesting.  The only, the only thing that was kind of messed up was that somehow and some form, somehow, they put in the middle name for me, and it stuck for most of the time.
Speaker 1: They added, they--
Speaker 2: Yeah "N",--
Speaker 1: --"N".
Speaker 2: --yeah, for not applicable or no middle name or something like that.  And it actually stuck for most of the time I was in college until, and my mom was concerned.  She said, well, they'd better not put that on your diploma after all this (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did they?
Speaker 2: No, (laughter).  I would have had to give 'em my name and (unclear) change this (laughter).  So, yeah, they, it was really interesting to have a chance, and when I would actually go out there, to go there and visit it, it felt really comfortable, even though I didn't like the cold weather, just I liked Boston [Massachusetts], and I liked, you know, the campus.  And I, I thought it was just the kind of really interesting, challenging place I could go to.
Story_ID: 23682
Speaker 1: Okay, so you graduated from Fort Zumwalt North High School in 1993, and started at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] in the fall?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you do anything special over the summer?
Speaker 2: No, well, they had a program at MIT to help minority students prepare.  And I didn't go to that, and actually, that summer, we had one of the biggest floods in Missouri history.  So I actually did less that summer than normal.  So it was actually one of the most boring summers ever.  And what, the, really, the only thing to do there was to sandbag all summer.  It's where you fill up bags full of sand and you put 'em out.
Speaker 1: Not laying around and not doing anything, right, you just--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and I, you know, and I worked, I worked at a fast-food place at Rally's.  I had a few different jobs during high school which was, you know, working fast food.  I worked at Denney's for a while.  You know, that summer, I remember I looked for jobs, but it really, there really wasn't a lot.  And I, I did some temp work where I got to work in a factory and stuff that was incredibly boring.  But, you know, it wasn't, it wasn't really an exciting time.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, so, so MIT in '93' [1993].  So it was cold, and you didn't like that, but you liked Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, and you get used to the weather, but it's--the thing that was the biggest shock at MIT was that, you know, from being used to being the smartest kid in the room, to going there, it's a big shocker because, you know, they, they give you, when you first got there--I actually got to MIT early 'cause I was gonna play football.  And I got to meet the other football players and we actually we, from day one, my dad came there with me, and he left me in the dorm.  And he was gonna go catch a plane back.  And I think within ten minutes of him leaving, I met some other guys, and we started going out exploring Boston.  And, you know, we're just walking around Boston, finding places to go and stuff, and it was fun.  But we were, you know, we're all new.  We had no idea what to do.  And then we, about a week or two later, the rest of the freshmen started showing up.  And we had, started taking our assessment tests.  And that was interesting because I was used to being like, you know, one of the top students in math and everything.  And I actually failed the math assessment test the first time through, you know, which was, you know, I, I passed it the second time, but, you know, it's just, it was like, wow, this is, this is gonna be tough.
Speaker 1: So do you think, well, your preparation I guess was--they were stretching over there at Fort Zumwalt to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were stretching, but I mean there were people I ran into at MIT who were, they'd gone to elite, private schools, high schools, and they were seeing stuff there that I would not get exposed to for like over a year later.  And so it was really, you know, and the thing is, when you're in a small town, and you're in just a regular school, you don't really think about how high the ceiling really is.  And, you know, 'cause you don't see it.  You don't, you don't really get a chance to be competing against people who are really at the top.  So, that's where MIT was really interesting was that, you know, really smart people who--they were really together.  And, and then learning things like, it almost felt like when you're, after you were there for a while, and you could survive the environment and everything, you could deal with any kind of situation that would come up and not just academic, but, you know, socially or, or a particular, like if there's a crisis that needed to be managed or something like that, it just, it felt very natural and it felt like this is what we're here to do.
Story_ID: 23683
Speaker 1: Now, who, was there any particular student or--why I'm asking this question is, there's so many geniuses that have come through MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] or (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was any particular students that you felt were like super geniuses or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my lab partner for junior lab, my junior year was--I think he's still one of the smartest people I'd ever met.  And the guy, he, he was double majoring in physics and electrical engineering, which were the two hardest majors at MIT.  And he was getting straight A's in all of it.  And so I think afterwards, he, he decided not to go and follow physics any further and got interested in economics.  And, you know, I'm not sure exactly what he did with his career, but it was, you know, you know, he, he tried really hard, and MIT was--if it could challenge him, it would, you know, it really told me a lot.  But, yeah, he was, he was one of the smartest people I'd ever worked with.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, who were some of your professors there that stand out?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, let's see, Walter Lewin who is, you know, he's now famous on You-Tube for his physics lectures.  And, you know, going to his physics lectures, it was almost like a show.  And it was, it was fun and it really brought a lot of that alive for me.  There was, let's see, my advisor my freshman year was Phillip Sharp, who won a Nobel Prize in Biology just right after he got me as an advisee.  My advisor, after I declared physics as a major, was Wolfgang Ketterle, who won a Nobel Prize in Physics, I think in like 2002 or something or 2001 or 2002 [2001].  I got to work with Jackie Hewett who was my undergraduate thesis advisor.  I worked with David Pritchard who was my, another person--I did research under him, under the YUROUT [?] program.  I worked with a guy named John King, who was another professor.  You know, we, basically, I, I got to get involved undergraduate research, I think my second semester of my freshman year.  And so I got--which was really interesting.  It's something I wouldn't have done at other places.  And also, learning how to study when I got to MIT was difficult because I was used to things just being so easy in high school that, you know, when you're in an environment like that, and you're really challenged, it's a totally different ballpark.  And so, when I was interviewing for MIT, I was being interviewed by an alumnus, and he asked me if I studied in high school.  And I told him, well, actually, I really didn't, and I thought that I blew the interview right there.  And it turned out that was the exact right answer because he, he said later on, well, if you had to study in high school, with all the other stuff you're doing, then you're not gonna make it.  And so it just, the fact that I was learning a lot of stuff easier just helped me out.  And when I did get to MIT, I did study quite a bit.  I mean we used to have take-home labs in our physics class.  And I remember spending a Saturday working on one of these take-home labs.  And I, it was the first time I ever lost myself in it or I just completely lost track of time.  And then it was, I look outside, and it's night, and somebody's asking me if I'm going to dinner.  So it's, it was a good experience in that I learned more things and I also learned how to be independent, and I also learned how to handle different situations.  I played football for a couple of years at MIT.  I was at a fraternity, Kappa Sigma and I was social chair one year.  And we always had activities and things going on.
Speaker 1: So, is there a highlight of your undergraduate career at MIT?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see, for four years straight, I never felt bored 'cause I was constantly working.  I, I think, I remember the attitude there was when summer rolled around and people realized they were only gonna work forty hours a week, it felt like a vacation.  I remember, you know, when I was social chair, we ran into a few situations where, you know, it was kind of like you get to handle the crisis management stuff, and, you know, and so we could, we were constantly being able to just say, well, you know, we don't have an adult that's gonna sweep in here and take care of these things.  We're gonna take care of 'em ourselves.  And so we learned that kind of self-reliance.
Speaker 1: Alright, so when you graduated in 1997, did you graduate with any sort of honors or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, they didn't actually do any honors there.  I do remember, when I went to graduate, Kofi Annan was giving the commencement speech, and they did the graduation right out there in Killian Court where they've done it for like over a hundred years.  And I'm sitting on the edge, and the night before, I'd gone out with a bunch of my fraternity brothers.  And so we're there at graduation, and we all got cigars we were gonna light up, smoke a cigar afterwards.  And as I'm getting ready to light up this cigar, the photographer comes by, and so he's taking pictures of me.  And so, it was interesting afterwards, is that like they, when they put out the school paper, you know, I was on the cover of it instead of Kofi Annan.  And I thought that was interesting.  So--
Speaker 1: A nice souvenir--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you have some of those?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I still have some of those.  Actually, I have, one of 'em is the pictures I was gonna show you guys.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was a really good experience overall, and just being able to travel around Boston, like becoming an adult.  And that's kind of like where I felt like I really grew up at, was MIT, because you really, you know, you're out there.  We, you know, we didn't have cell phones at the time, so, you know, you're just out in the city, and if anything happens, nobody really knows where you are or nobody, you know, your parents don't really know exactly where you are.  And so you take care of yourself, and you make it in.  And at the same time, you know, we got to work in research labs with Nobel Prize winners.  And we got to hear about cutting-edge research that nobody else knew about.
Story_ID: 23684
Speaker 1: And it was, it was fascinating, and then also, this is also when the dot.com revolution was going on or at least getting started 'cause when I started at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], I'd never really, I learned a little bit of computer programming from my cousin.  You know, he taught me how to program on a Commodore Vic 20.  And it was basically one of those things where we had the cassette tapes that would store the programs to get, it could take hours for it to load and everything.  And I hadn't really, I'd never heard of the Internet.  I hadn't been on a modern computer.  And then I got to MIT, and we were using, you know, high-level Unix machines.  I hadn't even used a PC, and we were already at, using Unix and learning about the Internet, the world-wide web and being able to do stuff on it.  And then also, when I was working on my senior thesis, I ended up kind of getting involved in this computational project to simulate the gravitational lens on un-lensed images.  And the idea was could I, could--is it possible to train a computer to just look at the sky and figure out where the gravitational lenses are without having a human astronomer have to go through and do it by hand.  And so I was given this piece of code that really wasn't working very well.  And over time, I improved on it, I optimized it and everything else.  And then I made the kind of discovery that, I didn't even have to go into the lab to do this.  I could actually be at home on my computer and 24 hours a day, as long as I had access to the Internet, I could go and I could change the code.  I could rerun it.  I could do whatever I needed to do without going into the lab.  So that was part of my motivation from there on out, was the laziness that I could just have this total freedom to do science, but that I would, didn't have to be in a certain place at a certain time to do it.
Speaker 2: Now, do you remember when you got your first computer?
Speaker 1: I bought a computer when I first got to MIT, and they had a, an Apple store downstairs in the student center.  And I bought an Apple, and the main reason why was because when I was in high school, I took a computer class, and we learned how to use, you know, basic computer stuff on, on Apples, and they were Macintosh SE's.  I actually have one in my office now.  And it was, you know, they were incredibly primitive compared to what we have today.  But that's what kind of started.  And then I never really liked the PC's much.  But I, I learned how to use the Apples and I just stick with them since then.
Story_ID: 23685
Speaker 1: So what were your plans after graduation in '97' [1997]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted to go to grad school.  Actually, I explored a few different options.  I didn't find any jobs that I really, really wanted to do after I graduated.  And that's when I decided I was gonna go to grad school.  My parents really couldn't figure it out 'cause they had not, they hadn't gone to college, and they didn't really understand what's the point of going to more college after you just finished college.  So, I looked into graduate schools in physics.  And--
Speaker 1: Well, was it impossible to stay at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology]?
Speaker 2: Well, typically, in physics, they don't want you to continue on at the same grad school as an undergraduate.  It's sort of part of the tradition is that they want you to go somewhere else and learn from different people.  And so, you know, I could have probably just hung out and just taken a few more classes there.  But overall, you know, it was incredibly, I mean the people who they want to stay there and get their undergraduate and graduate degrees are people who they're so concerned that they just would--they want their name all over 'em for their entire career.  And, you know, there's very few people I know who've actually gone to undergraduate and graduate degrees in physics at MIT.  I think Jim Gates is the only one that comes to mind.  And also another thing is, I felt at the time, part of me was just, felt like, well, Boston was fun, but it's time to move on type of feeling.  And, you know, it, it was, part of it was tough because with the dot.com thing going on or just getting started, a lot of people I went to school with were starting to make a lot of money.  And I just wasn't interested in exactly what they were doing, but, you know, and at the same time, I didn't get, I wasn't, I didn't get the highest grades at MIT.  I, you know, I did pretty decent, but I wasn't at the very, very, very top.  And so I wanted to go somewhere else, and I looked at a few other schools.  I got accepted into two other schools, Penn State [University] and Syracuse [University].  And, I was not really looking at many schools that weren't really good schools.  I mean looking back on it again, I could have applied to a lot less competitive schools and maybe said, well, I'm gonna get my PhD here and, and, you know, but I, I was just, I had a very narrow list for some reason.  And so I ended up going to Penn State and part of the reason why was because they had a center for gravitational physics and geometry, and I was really interested in general relativity.  I had always been interested in it throughout college.  And there really weren't a lot of people at MIT at the time who were doing that kind of work.  And so I ended up going there, and also, I thought it would be nice to be out, you know, in a, more of a state-school environment, not a private school, and then I'd be near the mountains, and there'd be a lot of pretty stuff to look at.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Penn State's in State college, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 2: Yeah, State College, Pennsylvania, which has been in the press a lot lately.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause we're all-- reasons, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But it's in the mountains, as you said, central--
Speaker 2: It's in the mountains of Pennsylvania, right in the middle of the state, and also the major highway at Penn State--Pennsylvania, I think is Highway 80.  And it does not connect Philadelphia or Pittsburgh.  It's pretty far from both of them, but it passes not far from Penn State.  So, if you're driving through Pennsylvania, you see this sort of where the population is just, stays very low for huge stretches.  It doesn't quite drop to zero, but it doesn't really, you know, you don't run into major cities.  And so getting in and out of there wasn't easy.  It was, we had one airport in town where a few times, I really did think I was gonna die, flying in and out of there.  And, you know, I would often drive all the way to Pittsburgh or Baltimore or even Washington, D.C., just to catch a flight home.  So, yeah, about a, anywhere from a three to five hour drive just to get out of town, to get a plane to get out of town.
Speaker 1: Because of the way the, the kinds of planes that were flying out of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they were, well, they had limited flights, and all of the flights went to either Pittsburgh, Philadelphia or D.C.  They didn't fly to any other cities.
Speaker 1: So you'd have to make a connection.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 23686
Speaker 1: I think, now, you met your wife around this time, didn't you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, actually, I met her the very first day of grad school, when we were--we'd both gotten the Bear Fellowship.  And we were both starting Penn State at the same time.  And so we were at this, they had this little conference for new graduate students.  And we were both there, and that's when we first met each other.  And actually, this guy, Hank McCollum, (ph.) introduced us.  And it's funny, as I actually have the coffee mug from that, so I know exactly what day it was and everything.
Story_ID: 23687
Speaker 1: I was asking about your wife's name.  She has an interesting name.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Rispba.
Speaker 2: Rispba.  Yeah.  Yeah, the way she was named, during Vietnam, her dad was, he was in the Air Force.  He's an optometrist.  And so they, he was stationed out in Japan, and so the whole family was out there.  And so she was born there in Japan, and I guess they had a nanny named Rispba, and it was actually a Norwegian, and so they named her after her.  And she said she was, she was the biggest baby born in Japan that year.
Speaker 1: Okay, you all met, she was in, she was involved in physics as well or--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, she was in the molecular biology and biotechnology or something like that.
Speaker 1: Where did she go to undergrad school?
Speaker 2: Oh, she went to Bennett College, which is an HBCU in North Carolina.
Speaker 1: That's in Columbia, I think, right?
Speaker 2: Greenville, or--
Speaker 1: Greensboro?
Speaker 2: Greensboro, yeah, right, same town as North Carolina A and T.  And she's got, her family, it's kind of interesting.  They have, her dad was an optometrist.  And out of her four siblings, two of 'em have PhDs, and another one has an MD.
Speaker 1: So he did well.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah, actually, her brother is also a physicist.  So.
Story_ID: 23688
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I don't wanna go too fast here.  But in 1999, you and your wife founded the "Fast Financial Analysis"--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And it seems like an unusual thing for a physicist to do.  So, but what happened?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was an interesting one.  Well, what happened was, you know, we're in graduate school.  And one thing about graduate students is that they're all poor, which you may have heard.  So what happened was, everybody had their own little way of trying to make money.  And we were working, we decided we're, work with this company called Primerica which was, essentially, they would, they ended up doing like a multilevel marketing thing.  But they were essentially financial services for Citibank.  And the way they would work, is they would go out and they would do analysis of people's finances and then help 'em, sell 'em products to help them to do whatever it is that they wanna do.  And so one day, she came with this idea, well, why do we work with them to do this?  Why can't we just develop a program to do it?  And this was during the dot.com boom.  So we kind of came up with this challenge about can you create a computer program that can do what a financial planner could do but online.  And so I don't think we were even dating at that time when we kind of started working together on this.  But we started working on it, and I started writing code and just kind of applying what I'd learned at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] and in graduate school.  And I learned how to write a website.  I learned how to program in different languages.  And I developed this website which was, essentially had a background program where somebody could go online, and they could fill in information about their personal finances, and it would be completely anonymous.  So there's no person going in there reading about what decisions you've made and what your financial situation is.  And then you press a button and it'll crunch all the numbers.  And it could tell you things about your financial situation and how to improve it.  And the nice thing about this was, is that, it integrated every different area of your finances.  So instead of, but at the time, we'd see, somebody would have a mortgage calculator where they would, it would just calculate what the need to pay on their mortgage.  And they have a separate one for insurance and have a separate one for dealing with their debt.  And so what this did was, it could actually look at, pretty much every area of your finances, help you develop a budget and help you run different scenarios so you could, you know, whether or not you buy a new car and what the impact that's gonna be on some other area, it, it can tell you that, you know, you really do need more insurance, or, you know, you've got plenty here.  You should be saving more for your kids' education.  And it could look at, you know, given your life expectancy, are you really saving enough for retirement, and, you know, and then again, you know, or should you be saving more for your kids' college and things like that.  And so it kind of, you know, for people that use it, it just kind of gives 'em a health check on their finances.  And also, I found out, about the same time, that's when a lot of physicists were going to Wall Street, and they were doing, you know, not the same kind of thinking, but they were trying to apply what we learned in physics to other fields.  So right now the program's running.  It's online on a website.  It's free to use, and we're just, you know, just people go there and will use advertising dollars.  And our plan was that, people could go online, and they could use it and then if they do need some kind of financial services, there's financial services advertising on the site, and they could just click on those, and we'd make money that way.
Speaker 1: Okay, how has it done?
Speaker 2: It's doing okay.  I haven't gotten rich off of it, but it's, it's very inexpensive and part of our thinking was that, you know, we're helping a lot more people and it doesn't cost a lot of money to do that.  So even if it's not making money, it's still, you know, not really a big drain.
Story_ID: 23689
Speaker 1: Did you pause for the Master's degree or just go on through the PhD?
Speaker 2: Oh, I just went all the way through the PhD.  I had some issues my first year, passing candidacy exam.  And part of it was, I think I had a problem with the particular professor, but then the next year, I went back.  I retook the exam and had no problem with it.  So, you know, it was, it was a transition because, again, I was, I was in this new town.  And, you know, when I was in Chicago [Illinois], it was a, very much, pretty much all African American community.  And I made the transition to Missouri which was mostly white, and, you know, mostly working-class people.  And then I went to Boston [Massachusetts] which was the most, and MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] was the most diverse culture I'd ever seen in my life.  I had a friend come up from Missouri once, and then she, I took her out to a Happy Hour.  And she looked around, and she goes, "Hey, where are all the white people?"  And then she goes, wait a minute.  Where's all the black people?  (Laughter)  And I remember going to a table there and, in the student lounge, and you would see eleven people sitting around a table studying together and no two of 'em are from the same race.  It is really, really different, and everybody getting along great.  And then I went from that to Penn State where it was, I felt it was a really racist environment.  And, you know, there was a lot of, you know, really subtle racism and then there was, every once in a while, you'd see some blatant racism.  But it was never a comfortable environment, and so it was, I think most of the black graduate students on campus all knew each other.  And it was partly because, you know, we were the only ones that we felt we could be comfortable around.  And so I think that the environment alone made it a lot harder to study and concentrate.  And every once in a while at Penn State, you'd see some kind of fluke where, like, well, I think one year, I think we had about six black graduate students in our program at once, which was an incredibly high number or high percentage for physics PhD programs.  Right now, I wanna say that there's like thirteen physics, black physics PhDs that graduate every year.  And the average program is probably less than one or two percent African American.  And we had less than a hundred graduate students and like six of us.  So it was, we were like, you know, seven, eight percent, which was incredibly high.  And I don't even know how Penn State did it.  And I don't know if there was any plan of how they did it or what.  But they just, but it's like their graduate programs would be, could be fairly diverse, but then the undergraduate was just not at all.  And also at the same time, our program was over 50 percent foreign students.
Story_ID: 23690
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, who was your advisor at Kent State?
Speaker 2: I had two advisors (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Penn State.
Speaker 2: Jorge Pullin was my primary advisor, and my secondary advisor was Pablo Laguna.  And Jorge was interested in, I think his primary interest was in quantum gravity more so.  But he also did some stuff with numerical relativity.  I was pretty much in numerical relativity.  And like I said, at some point in my scientific career, I think the older scientists just decided that they wanted to stick the younger people in front of a computer.  And I felt more comfortable with that.  And Pablo was more focused on the numerical relativity aspect.  So we'd, I learned how to, you know, run code on supercomputers and the interesting thing was that at the time, most computers were single core, single processor.  And we were running on dozens, sometimes even hundreds of processors at once so we had a, a skill for running multiprocessor or writing multiprocessor programs before anybody even knew that that was gonna be a major need.
Speaker 1: So you'd have them networked and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah, they were networked, and, you know, they were--we'd use supercomputer architectures.  And then we started experimenting with Beowulf type architectures where they were, they weren't shared memory.  And then so each processor had its own memory, and they'd have to communicate with each other.  And so we got to do some really interesting research.  And also Penn State, even though it was isolated, at the time, it was the United States' premier center for gravitational physics research.  So anybody who had done anything with general relativity or cosmology passed through Penn State.  And the only other center in the world that was anywhere close to as big as what we were doing was in Potsdam, Germany.  And so we talked to them.  But we had, pretty much any, anybody who was a big name in the field or a potential big name in the field, passed through there, like Sean Carroll or Scott Hughes, or, let's see, one of my mentors there was Lee Smolin who's now one of the big people at the Perimeter Institute.  And we also had, we didn't meet Stephen Hawking, but we did meet Roger Penrose.  He actually would spend several weeks every year there at Penn State and was one of, and had a joint faculty appointment.  And so we were getting seminars from world class people, and we knew the absolute cutting edge of the research.  And so we were in this just, within our department, we were in this kind of a bubble of, you know, absolutely, top of the line, best research going on.  And we knew anything going on in the field, just by walking up the hall and talking to people.
Story_ID: 23691
Speaker 1: Okay, now, your dissertation was "Testing Binary Black Hole Codes and Strong Field Regimes"?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Basically, what that was, is that in the late '90's [1990s], early 2000s, we were having this problem where, the big problem in numerical relativity was to be able to simulate the collision of two black holes.  And the codes would always crash.  You know, they couldn't handle, with the equations, they were, where they were evolving.  And so the problem we came up, where, and Baumgartner and Shapiro, I think were the first ones to start talking about it, was that, was that the way of evolving the equations was, was fundamentally unstable.  And we didn't know why.  And so there were some people in our group who started looking into, well, maybe what we can do is we can look at the mathematical underlying's of what the code is doing and try to--'cause the, what was happening is the code's too complex to do a traditional stability analysis.  And so what I was doing was, I was trying to develop a set of tests that you could just run through any of these codes to see whether or not it's stable.  And then if it could pass these tests, then we know it's stable.  If it's not, then we know it's not.  And also, we could run on the system of equations and see why it's unstable.  And so what I did was, I, if you take Einstein's equations, and you wanna make it run on a computer, Einstein's equations are four-dimensional.  And you have to break it up into three dimensions of space and one dimension of time.  And you have a solution at a particular time, and you just evolve it forward in time.  And the way that we broke it up, was we had these things called the ADM equations.  And that's what we were using, and that's what wasn't working.  And so I developed these tests, and I ran them on the ADM equations to see why they were unstable.  And I found that, you know, traditionally, whenever you're doing a computer and numerical project, what happens is, if you have a grid with a bunch of points on it, and you're just evolving these points, and if the, your solution goes unstable and it crashes, what you do is you increase the resolution of the grid.  And then you run it.  And at higher resolutions evolve slower, but it'll be more stable, and you can evolve it longer.  What happened in numerical relativity was that the finer you make the grid, the faster it crashes.  It would actually go unstable faster rather than slower, which meant our normal solution of fixing this wasn't working, and all these non-linearity's and equations, we couldn't tell what's going on in the code.  And nobody could actually analyze it.  So that was my goal.  And what I found was, that there are these high frequency modes that were developing within the code and that were causing it to crash.  And so I did my thesis on that, and I later on published a book on it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we actually did find stable systems of evolving it, and you can apply the same tests, and they, they work.
Speaker 1: And so now was your dissertation cited very much or--
Speaker 2: I don't, I haven't really checked on that.  Actually, what I did was, I created a very shorter version of it, and I presented that at the, at a meeting in Brazil, along with some other work I'd done.  And that had gotten a few citations.  I don't remember exactly how many.  But that was something that was much shorter and easier to read.
Story_ID: 23692
Speaker 1: Okay, so you earned your PhD in 2002.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And, now, you had--now, did you, were you immediately hired by the University of Houston in Clear Lake [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that was an interesting story on how that happened.  At the time, when I was getting ready to graduate from Penn State [University], and I was in that last semester, before I graduated, my adviser, he'd actually left and went to LSU, my primary advisor, still working with Pueblo Laguna.  And I was kind of working by distance with Jorge.  And I traveled down to Louisiana to work with him for a while, and I traveled a bunch of other places interviewing for jobs.  My wife, at the time, we were seeing each other by distance, and she had left Penn State, and she had started medical school in Galveston, Texas.  So I was looking for a job, and I was looking for a job somewhere around here.  And really, I was looking for kind of a temporary appointment.  And, before my final year of graduate school, I was primarily interested in research.  I wasn't interested in teaching.  And I thought, you know, once I finish my PhD, maybe I would go and do something like, you know computational work or maybe even go into the hedge fund thing or something.  And so I was flying all over the place, interviewing for jobs, and I would, I, I got to the point where I would literally fly into state college one, and then wake up the next day and take another plane out somewhere else.  And at some point, I was, started talking to some people in Texas, and at a few different schools.  And things didn't work out and then I kept interviewing, and I got two or three job offers all at the same time, all in the Houston area.  And I decided to take the job here.  And part of my thinking behind it was, is that about a year before I graduated from Penn State [University], I bought a new car.  And I went up to a conference in Boston at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], mostly because I had a new car, and I wanted to go on a road trip.  So I went to this conference and there was a talk at this conference--it was a computational physics conference, but there was one talk in particular, and it was about developing a computational physics program.  I think it was Oregon State or University of Oregon.  And for the first time, it was kind of like, a light went off in my head and like, you know, he gets to develop this curriculum.  That sounds really, really interesting.  And so I became interested in the idea of actually developing curriculum in physics and actually, not just doing what we have been doing, but to do something different in programming, you know, so just the computer, actually, how students are gonna learn and what the process is gonna be for 'em.  And so I wanted to build a program like the one I'd heard about up there, and so I was applying for these mostly temporary positions because I was thinking well, I wanna do, go there and maybe see how I like it and not be tied in and, you know.  But I came here, and I found a unique situation in that NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] is literally across the street.  They didn't have a physics program.  They had a physical sciences program which wasn't really meeting the need.  There was a big high-tech community here.  They did not have, you know, there were people who wanted something, what they were describing, it really sounded like a physics degree, a degree where it could train people to be engineers or better engineers.  And I was also noticing that NASA was sort of expecting people to think like physicists even though they were called engineers.  And so it was just this incredible fit of what I'd become interested in and in what was actually available.  And also, I, I liked the idea of not coming in at the bottom and having to listen to other people and work for other people and be able to just sort of say, well, this is what I wanna do and to make it happen.
Story_ID: 23693
Speaker 1: So I took the job here, and it was originally a visiting position.  And then after a year, they made it into a tenure-track position.  And I managed to get 'em to do that without actually having to do another search and having to reapply and everything.  So I, that first year, I'd already started the process of trying to get a physics program started on campus.  And we started off with a Master's degree, and I remember when I first came here to campus, the very first student I ran into who was, came here to see me, was an astronaut named Greg Shaumatov.  And he was finishing, he was working on the space science degree that we had before the physics degree.  And he was trying to finish up.  And, you know, so I kind of advised his Capstone project.  And it was fun, it was interesting.  And then I met some of my other students, and it's like there was a group that were really, really interested and really wanted to do more.  And then there was a group that was sort of taking the path of least resistance, and they were not trying to take these other courses.  And then I met some of the adjunct faculty, and they were complaining about they, they wanted--they'd get a lot of demand from these students to teach a course like plasma physics or, or particle physics or something like that.  But the students didn't have the fundamental background to do it.  And so we started putting together core courses, and, you know, fundamental, core courses, just like every other physics program has.  And at the same time, we started with the, you know, starting this process of getting it approved.  And I'd hear from people, well, you know, the University of Houston's main campus is not gonna let us do this.  They don't want us to have these degrees.  And so I went and I talked to Larry Penske who's a chair at U-H [University of Houston] and invited him on campus.  And he said, sure, I think it'll be great if you have the degree.  And I said, well, can you give us a letter of support?  He says, sure.  And then also, I used some of the skills I learned, developing a fast financial analysis program, I developed an online survey that I sent to people at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]--and this is before Survey Monkey existed.  So, there wasn't an online tool for it.  And I wrote--
Speaker 2: Survey Monkey--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I wrote an ASP webpage which was a form, and I put--and a Microsoft Access database on the back end.  And I even wrote a page that did sort of an analysis.  And I sent this survey out to people, and I sent it to everybody at NASA JSC [Johnson Space Center] and came back with literally hundreds of responses of people who were interested in a physics program.  And I put all this together in a proposal, and the proposal was like another thesis for me.  It was hundreds of pages long about why it is we need a physics program, what it's gonna look like, projections on how many students we're gonna get.  So it was a lot like the business plan I wrote for Fast Financial Analysis, plus a little bit like my dissertation and then, using all these other things all put together.  And I found myself meeting with a lot of people at NASA who, you know, I didn't think that, you know, I didn't think, you know, a guy right out of grad school, would even be talking to.  And it was, it was just a very interesting ride.  And so for the, it took, I think I submitted the, started the process of trying to get this program approved around January of 2003.  And it was fully approved by the state in 2004.  So it took a little over a year, and at the time, it would take two or three years to get a new program approved.  And I worked with some good people in our provost office, Andrea Bermudas, for example, and we would talk to people at the Central campus about different parts of the approval process and she let me know any time there was any kind of movement on it, any time they had question that needed to be answered or anything that needed to be cleared up or defended, and we were right on the edge.  And it worked out.  So we got the Masters approved, and within, I think the second semester, we graduated our first student.  And then after that we just continued rolling 'em out.  I think we were averaging around five or six per year, Master's students, which is way above the national average.  We had a total enrollment, I think at our peak, of around forty five graduate students in the Master's program, which normal Masters physics programs have about a dozen.  And one year, a couple of years ago, I think we graduated thirteen students all in one shot.  So, it, and I, actually, I've graduated now a total of forty five Master's degree students.  And they're various places.  You know, not just at NASA, but also working in other industries or in PhD programs.
Story_ID: 23694
Speaker 1: So, you came in 2002?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And 2003, you proposed the (unclear) study, and approved in--
Speaker 2: In 2004.
Speaker 1: Two thousand four [2004], okay.
Speaker 2: And then in 2005, well, actually, I was at a meeting, and I--there was this guy, Charles Cunningham who was the chair of the physics department at Grinnell College.  And whenever I'd go to this meeting, I'd run into him, and he'd give me advice on, you know, things to do and how to run a program.  He gave me some advice on developing a professional science Masters, which was sort of this newer thing.  It was a Master's degree that wasn't aimed at going on for a PhD.  And so we developed a program like it.  And that became our technical management program, and it was designed partially, you know, got a focus group of some people from NASA, and locally, did another survey, got some buy-in from our business school.  And we developed a Master's degree which was not just the traditional science Masters, but something that could actually prepare people who were intending on working at NASA or in the oil industry or something like that, to be able--and the whole idea was, this, the idea for this technical science Masters came up after the Columbia accident and the, the Genesis mission that came in.  And I, at the time, we had such great relations with NASA, we had a, we used to do this little lunch seminar.  And it was just a very unofficial thing, and I had two or three people from NASA and some students.  And we would come there, and we would talk physics and, you know, talk about different topics.  And one of the guys who would come was Steve Hawley who was an astronaut, who was also the head of Aries here.  And he was involved in the Genesis project and the recovery of the material from that.  And so I got to hear a little bit about what they were facing and also he was involved with the Columbia accident investigation 'cause part of it was done here, where they would fire pieces of foam at the, at the leading edge of the shuttle to see what that really, the effect of it is.  And it basically came down to a fundamental problem in that, the traditional way that it works in a lot of engineering-type organizations, is if you have say a Master's, a Bachelor's degree in mechanical engineering and you work as a mechanical engineer for a few years, and then you're promoted to Project Management, and now you're head of this whole project, at NASA, not everybody's a mechanical engineer.  There's aerospace, there's chemical, there's electrical.  So there's a lot of different things that have to come together.  And you've got managers who really know their area, which is very narrow, and they don't really know--they know how to manage, but they don't really know what all the people below 'em are doing or understand the basics of it.  Physics is a very broad subject in that we can, we learn a little bit about everything.  And there are people who graduate with a degree in physics and they're just as likely to be called an aerospace engineer as a mechanical engineer, an electrical engineer.  And they've had fundamental courses covering the different areas in all these, and they understand the fundamental science.  And so a physicist can, has a better ability to talk to a mechanical engineer and understand exactly what their problem is, even if they can't fix it.  An electrical engineer, a chemical engineer, and an aerospace engineer understand the basics of what they're all doing.  And to be able to, you know, if there's a problem, to be able to respond to it.  And so the idea of this program was to have people with a Master's degree, as opposed to--in physics, as opposed to some of the engineering discipline where it's well rounded technically.  And then at the same time, they have the systems management background and, you know, and the basic leadership stuff that they would need.
Story_ID: 23695
Speaker 1: Tell us about the distinguished lecture series at [UHCL], there's a story here about--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they're, yeah, and there was quite a bit to that, and I don't wanna talk bad about anybody.  But when I first came in here, I didn't really see eye-to-eye with our dean that we had.  And he was, you know, he, he wanted to form an engineering department.  And he really didn't support the natural sciences as much as you'd think he would.  And he didn't really see the connection between what I was trying to do in physics and what he wanted to do in engineering.  So it was very difficult to get resources and to get support.  So I had already started the physics Master's degree which was very successful by physics department standards.  But compared to an engineering program, it didn't really have a very high enrollment.  And we were already doing this technical management thing.  And I needed more faculty.  I, you know, I was working really hard, and I was, I was depending very heavily on people from NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] to be able to run our program.  So what happened was, we, we finally got sort of approval to hire another faculty member, but he wasn't gonna give us any money to do the search which is, not good.  So what we did was, I got contacted by Jim Gates, and no, I think I had talked to him at some other event.  And I knew he was gonna be around Houston [Texas].  And so I wanted to get him on campus, and I kind of worked it out where I went to, I organized a public talk in the auditorium, and I went to some people in local industry.  And I got them to donate money.  And I, you know, to support the talk.  And there was a lot of interest in it.  I worked with our university advancement office, and helped advertise it.  And it just turned into a very big public event.  And before that we actually had, you know, if people would sponsor us, we, you know, they got a chance to have a dinner with him in advance and meet the speaker.  And, you know, and this was at a time, he was on television a lot, and he gave a very, very good talk.  And so then we used the money that we raised from this and put it into a special account and actually used that money to pay for a search to hire a faculty member.  So it was kind of our way of kind of self-financing.
Speaker 1: It seems that you did an end run around it.
Speaker 2: It's an entrepreneurial way of doing it.  I, I try to think of the physics program here, not as a program within a public university, so much as like, I think of it as like a start-up business.  And, you know, we raised money through teaching, and we're, basically, that's the taxes we're paying.  But, you know, there's a lot of other things we can do.  And, and we're just kind of limited by our own creativity.  So we did that.  We also at the same--
Speaker 1: This was 2006.  I'm just trying to date--
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: This is 2006.
Speaker 2: I believe it was 2006.  Before that, we actually had a, a weekly Spring lecture series.  And we still do, and it's every spring, and I bring in mostly local speakers from NASA or Rice [University] or U-H [University of Houston] or even here.  And they talk about their research, and it's the kind of (unclear) and it goes on everywhere.  But that is something where it's free, and it's the kind of, of service to the community.  But I've also expanded that where we actually use it for continuing education credit for engineers and teachers.  And we actually make money by having them pay for the continuing education credits.  So we've kind of developed all these other ways to generate revenue.
Story_ID: 23696
Speaker 1: So, now, in 2007, you published "Numerical analysis of simplified Relic-Birefringent gravitational waves"
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was actually the first paper I'd ever written with a student.  And it was a really interesting, good piece of work where one of my colleagues, Stephan Alexander, had come up with this theory on Chern-Simons, "Interactions in the Early Universe in Cosmology".  And, you know, when I came, when I left Penn State [University], you know, we did a lot of black hole stuff at Penn State, but I'd always been more interested in cosmology.  And so I was trying to train myself and think more about cosmology.  And so part of that, when I came here, was I started learning about plasma physics and things.  And so when this paper came up, it was, it was a chance for me to do something to try to get my foot in the door in cosmology.  And so I had this student.  He was a great student.  He, he was one of, he worked at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] or still works at NASA.  And he, he comes into my class, and the first class that grad students take is my math methods course.  And, you know, like a typical student, he came in, and he didn't know what it was gonna be like.  And after about two weeks, he was gone.  And I thought, well, that's the last I'm gonna see of him; comes back the next year.  He studied in the off season and he aced the class, went on to take several more of my classes.  And then I was like, well, you know, you need to do your Capstone project with me.  And so that's when we worked on the project, and it was, it's very good theoretical physics work that would normally be above a Masters student.  And he worked on it, and we got it published with, without any real problems from the referees or anything.  So, it was really, really good.
Story_ID: 23697
Speaker 1: Okay, so in 2008, you were promoted to associate professor of physics.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and actually, between then was when I founded the Collaborative PhD program.  And that was another one where, well, essentially, we had, we were producing very well out of our Master's program.  And we had a lot of people from NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] who normally would not have gotten a Master's degree in physics, but they were taking it because the program was local, it was convenient, and it met their needs.  And also, I found that they wanted a rigorous program.  The space science program under physical sciences was not a very rigorous program.  And a lot of 'em felt like it was, they weren't, they weren't really challenged by it.  And so what happens was, we had a lot of people who they got their Masters, and they said, well, I really wanna go on and get a PhD.  So every, roughly every two years, I was conducting a survey of these students and the people in the local community and at NASA.  And they said they wanted to, a path to a PhD.  And this is something that had always been sort of in our six-year plan.  And the president had just made some announcement about we have this new educational leadership doctorate, and, you know, we're gonna have more PhDs in the future.  And I thought.  Why are we waiting?  And so I talked to Dr. Masood, the professor I'd hired.  And I said, well, we need to do this.  And so I called up U-H [University of Houston] and I said, it's time.  Let's do some collaborative PhD.  He said, all right, let's do this.  And we worked out an agreement between the campuses which was kind of the first of its kind that we'd ever had, where our students, when they're working on a Masters, their Masters coursework here for their courses counts towards the PhD and towards candidacy.  And most universities, the difference between a Masters level course and a PhD-level course isn't really that different, although in Masters-level courses, we can teach 'em at a lower level and get away with it.  What this agreement did was it made us raise the standards on our Masters to where all of the Masters courses we're teaching are identical to beginning PhD courses at pretty much any university in the country.  And then we've modified the program over time.  We've added recitation sections to each of the core courses.  We've tried to mentor the students better about what they need to do for working on their PhD.  You know, and we've got, we haven't graduated any PhD students yet, but we're hoping to get our first one out within the next year.  And so it's, it was very interesting 'cause it was a path to a PhD that didn't exist before.  And within UHCL [University of Houston, Clear Lake], I ran into some resistance because I think a lot of people could not believe that U-H would wanna partner on us on this.  And traditionally, it was like, they looked at us like a little brother who really didn't know what they were doing.  And here it was they were--
Speaker 1: Is that the initial relationship, this is like a satellite or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, not really a satellite, we have our own president, but we're kind of like another campus, like not quite a satellite, but something like that.  And, yeah, and our president, he, he was just in complete, dumbfounded.  He's like, wow, I can't believe you got this agreement to work.  And so we held, you know, one year, one of--we did one of these distinguished lecture talks, part of the announcement at that was, you know, we're doing this to let everybody know we're doing a collaborative PhD.  You can come here, and you could start working on your PhD.  And you can basically do everything but some of the core courses here.  You could actually even do the thesis here.  And so it was a big step forward for us to be able to, to start staying we're gonna work up to that level.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this year, you became an advisory board member for the Space Center, and Space Center, Houston, and the research chair and president of the University of Houston, Clear Lake, faculty senate.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, actually, I'm starting, well, the advisory board for the Space Center Houston, hasn't met yet.  They're gonna start this fall, I believe.  We started our own advisory board for the physics department and also I was chair of research for faculty senate, and, you know, that kind of expanded all my administrative responsibilities.  So I, I chair, you know, I was--it was kind of an ill-defined position before I got it because we're not a major research university.  And so I looked at some things that I thought could improve research on campus, and we worked on developing a research website.  We also worked on some new technology, like we have, you know, we've done a lot more with distance learning and WIMBA.  And we did some of that under my watch.  And, you know, part of it, part of my job there was to try to, you know, faculty not just from within our school, but, or program, but all over our university, just more involved in research.  And since then, we've, we had a big increase in research funding on campus.  And I think we've went from maybe around 2 million [dollars] a year in external funding to like at least triple that.
Story_ID: 23698
Speaker 1: Now, in 20--this same year, you published a book called "What Every Successful Physics Graduate Student Should Know".
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well, actually, what happened was I, I went on sabbatical for about six months.  And my wife, she's in the Air Force, and so she was stationed in Tampa, Florida, which is not a bad place to go.  So I wanted to take off for some time and go down there.  And while I was gone, I was concerned about the advising situation of students, 'cause they were always coming in with questions about what to do with their PhD or if they'd want to go for a PhD or, you know, what it's like.  And I'm finding students have very, very fundamental questions, and they ask the same questions over and over.  And so I wrote a book on that, and I, I've recently published as an eBook on the Apple Bookstore.  And I'm thinking I'm probably also gonna put it on a more general type of bookstore, where--as an eBook.  And the basic idea is that it goes through all the different parts of what's involved in a graduate physics program, Masters versus PhD.  It talks about each of the core courses and what kind of material is in each one and what's covered in each one.  It talks about the admissions process.  It talks about assistantships and, you know, the financial part.  It talks about how to pick an advisor, what to do with their career.  So I tried to go through everything that I thought students would know, need to know.  I think the last version of it was around forty pages or so.
Speaker 1: Now, you've submitted two articles for publication this year as well to the "Astro Physical Journal"--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think one's "Astro Physical Journal" and the other one we're getting ready to submit to the "Journal of Cosmology and Astro Particle Physics".
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, and actually, the other one I ended up submitting to "Physical Review D" instead because there was a, there was a page charge in the original journal I was gonna submit it to, and I didn't have the money for it.  But one of those is actually on a, a project which I've been working on for years.  I, I developed a computer code, you know, parallel computer code, where it can simulate Einstein's equations and the electro-dynamic equations, all at the same time.  And the idea is that I wanna be able to do a computer simulation of a relativistic plasma in order to determine the dynamics of the plasma and also what kind of gravitational waves it would produce, and as a potential signal of gravitational waves from the early universe.  And the way I got into that was, when I first came here, I was interested in cosmology, I kind of had to become educated in plasma physics, which is a big part of cosmology.  And I, I started working with John Shebalin who is a plasma physicist here at NASA JSC [National Aeronautics and Space Administration Johnson Space Center], and also worked with Chekland Frank Diazs' group which is a, he has a project where they're developing a plasma rocket engine, which they predict can cut the time to go from earth to Mars from six to nine months down to as little as six weeks, really interesting cutting-edge stuff.  I worked with them, you know, just worked completely with them one summer.  And, you know, from there I just continued on with the plasma, and then over time, I've been developing this code, and it's just the first paper where I'm actually releasing tests of the code and explaining how it works and what it's gonna be used for.  The other paper, I, actually working on with Stephan Alexander who was the one who was sort of our inspiration for that biuro-fringe gravitation wave paper.  And what that includes is, that's actually, we're actually writing it with a student at, well, she's just graduated from Haverford College, really smart undergraduate.  And what he did was he wrote another paper where he was looking at this Chern-Simons interaction as a possible explanation for inflation in the early universe, which is an alternative way of describing inflation.  And as I'm understanding it, one of the issues with inflation was, is that in order to do inflation, you need to have a Scalar field.  And, you know, you put inflation into cosmology or scattered model of cosmology, and it works, and it explains all the data.  But the problem is that nobody knows exactly what the Scalar field is, where it came, where it came from, where it went or why it acted when it did.  And so what this theory does is, it explains kind of the Scalar field as an interaction, this Chern-Simons interaction.  And we were able to successfully show from just the interaction in this field, how you would get inflation to start.  And so actually on a computer, I actually could show the beginning of inflation and it happens about when everybody agrees it should happen, and it happens under a very specific set of conditions when the universe gets to a certain size.  And it was really interesting because the first time I heard about this work that Stephan was doing, he would happen to be in Houston, I think with, something with "National Geographic" or something.  And he calls me up, and we go to meet for a drink.  And he's trying to show me a draft of his paper on his iPhone.  And he is, you know, going through, and he's explaining this whole thing with this Chern-Simons interaction and all this, engaged fields and everything.  And I looked at him, and I said, "Oh, so it's kind of like a plasma physics situation where you'd probably end up getting an inverse energy cascade and then once it cascades down to a certain energy level, the whole thing will blow up."  And he says, well, I didn't think of it like that, but I guess.  So six months later, you know, he, he wanted me to do the numerical side.  So I, I wrote a computer program.  I did the simulation by modifying my GRMHD code, and we ran a computer simulation.  And sure enough it happened exactly like I predicted it did.  And it looked exactly like a plasma-physics dynamic model, and you could actually--when I, I did a spectro-analysis of the gauge field, and you could actually see all the energy, inverse cascading down to the lowest energy modes.  And it was beautiful.  And it's just one of those great things in physics where you just have this intuition and you kind of see the system related to a completely different system and then see that it works the way you hoped it would.  So, but anyway, we're getting ready to publish that paper, and I think--we've already got it on the preprint archive and expect to have the, you know, submit it to the publisher soon.
Story_ID: 23699
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell us a little bit about your colleagues here at University of Houston, Clear Lake?
Speaker 2: It's a good group.  We used to hang out a lot more, you know, have after work, go for like a little Happy Hour and things like that.  And it's very, it's a relaxed environment somewhat because we teach evening courses and so everybody's got sort of a different schedule.  And so there's not a lot of pressure about when people are here.  And so, you know, and also I think people tend to agree a lot on certain fundamental important things around here.  So there's, you know, I found that it's a good environment to work in and also it reflects on what the students' experience is.  I had a student yesterday come in who, he was in our collaborative PhD program.  He had a few problems, well, he graduated here with his Masters degree.  And he told me the time he spent here was like some of the best time of his life.  And he just had a wonderful overall experience.  He learned a lot.  We can actually, you know, while we do research, the research doesn't overwhelm the teaching.  So we actually get a chance to take the time, make sure students really know what they know.  We're not worried about trying to get 'em through, hurry up so they can get into the lab.  We haven't had, at least in the physics department, we haven't really had any cheating incidents, which to me tells me that students are serious.  And so we have a lot of mature, serious students.  They really wanna learn, they really want--I've had students how, they could have done better.  They were allowed to work in groups.  They could have essentially just said, I'm gonna let the guy who I think is smarter than me do the work, and I'm just gonna turn that in.  And they've not done it, and they've taken the lower grade because they were more concerned about them learning it than to get a higher grade.  And part of that is that when a lot of these students, they work full time at NASA.  And so even getting the, you know, the grades aren't really as important as the knowledge.  And so I like that, and I like the idea that, you know, you can raise the standards and they respond better.  I had a, when we first started the collaborative PhD program, and I was teaching my electro-dynamics class, and I mentioned to them that, you know, U-H, to have recitation sections, but we aren't, we weren't doing that.  And a student actually asked me, well, can we just meet an extra hour a week?  And it was a good feeling.  Also, another thing is because of that collaborative PhD program, that's why we started the Bachelor's degree program.  So we kind of did things backwards compared to most other universities.  We had a Master's degree program, then a PhD, and then a Bachelors, as opposed to starting with the Bachelors, like most universities do.
Story_ID: 23700
Speaker 1: Now, you became, you were hired when you were like twenty seven, twenty eight?
Speaker 2: Twenty eight, twenty six.
Speaker 1: Twenty six.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  Yeah, I turned twenty seven in October, so that was about two months after I started here.
Speaker 1: Well, the point is now, you're a young man, you know, a black man coming into a school and establishing a program--
Speaker 2: Yeah, without tenure and actually that first year, I didn't even have a permanent position.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, now, you've been here now for, almost ten years, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, actually, it's ten years right now.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you see as your future?  Do you see yourself staying here much longer or moving on, a program or--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I'm, I like the challenges, and I mean I actually, I, you know, I like the administrative stuff.  I like the research, but I'm, I know that, you know, just the way that I feel like I'm moving in my career, I know that I'm not always gonna be, you know, a faculty member doing research in a lab and working with students.  And I think that what happens is, eventually, you know, I'll get to explore all my ideas about what I wanna do with my research, and then I'll wanna do something else.  And also, I like teaching, but at the same time, I know that if I ever--I don't think I would be happy if I ever went back to having to teach like four courses a semester or something like that.  So I see myself one day, you know, going for a dean position or eventually becoming a university president.  And, you know, and part of it is, is that I like, you know, as much as you have to fight with the administration, you know, I can of enjoy the fights (laughter).
Speaker 1: You're, a lot of people can't stand that part of it.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: But, so you've got a, that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I find myself, I spend more time putting out fires than anything else.  And just to be able to juggle everything.  And also another thing is, I think my perspective on it is different than a lot of other administrators because for me, I've always seen this whole quality issue as the big thing.  And a lot of administrators, they kind of turn into bean counters over time, where they're just looking at how much money we're gonna get, how much, how much we're gonna bring in, not their personal salaries.  And they're, they want more, and they're thinking, how can we jam more students into a classroom and make it work.  And they're not really thinking about it from the student's perspective of, you know, what are the students getting out of this.  And one thing that we've done a lot of, especially after we started our Bachelors' program was, we started really looking at the issue of career training, like what is it that students are really getting to prepare themselves for a career?  And we actually, having an advisory board has been great at this because at one point, we started this, you know, Bachelors in physics.  And we were gonna do a sub plan, we did a sub plan in engineering physics, and it was because our advisory board said, "Look, you guys are the closest thing to an engineering program here.  You need to take advantage of that", and based on their suggestions and their ideas, we came up with this engineering physics thing, which trains students in the basic physics, but also gives them the engineering.  And we're actually trying to take advantage of what we're already doing here in engineering and, you know, adding a little bit extra to make it work.  With the, with these other guys, you know, it's, they, they look at that, and they say, well, that's a good idea because they're thinking, you're training people that we'd wanna hire.  And that's good.  With, one day we came in, and we had, well, we got a great idea.  We're thinking we wanna do a space physics, sub plan, just like the engineering physics.  And that way we can lead it into like an astronomy program and this will be great and we can tie into with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] and what they're doing.  And we showed it to the advisory board.  And they said, "Yeah, it looks fun, but what are they gonna do with a Bachelor's degree in this?"  Who's gonna hire 'em?  And then that killed the idea.  And it was kind of a good thing they killed it because it stopped us from making a mistake that, you know, academics, we tend to think about, you know, the fun or the intellectual stuff.  And we don't think enough about the careers, and what I found was, with this, we get a chance to look at the careers.  What are they gonna do with a degree in physics?  And we looked at it, you know, just among our faculty.  And we said, you know, you stop and think about it.  This is one of the best degrees somebody can get, with a Bachelor's degree, even if they don't go any further.  You graduate, with their degree in physics, they could become a teacher.  And they can, you know, right now, you, if you know physics, and you wanna teach, schools, they will have no problem hiring you.  You can do the alternative certification.  You can graduate in May, finish the alternative certification over the summer and be teaching by fall.  And you will not have a problem getting hired 'cause they can't find enough physics teachers.  There is also, they can go to work as an engineer.  And there's all these high-tech companies around here at NASA where they can walk in and they can do the same work that these electrical mechanical engineers are doing, and, you know, and get good salaries 'cause they, they have the same skills.  And we're actually working on integrating things like Mat-Lab into their undergraduate education so that when they, they could put that on their resume, and they can get these engineering jobs.  They can do programming, like, for instance, every one of them has programming experience.  And if they do the right research, you know, the right Capstone project, when they're finishing, they'll have good program experience.  They'll be able to do that.  They could also go to graduate school in a lot of other fields besides physics.  Actually, the physics majors, I believe, they were the second highest of all possible majors on the MCAT exam to go to medical school.  They were the highest on the LSAT to go to law school.  The only people that beat 'em out on the MCAT's were the biomedical engineers who specifically majored in that, and they were so far above the pre-meds, it was like not even comparable.  And then, you know, and then like our engineering (unclear) we had here, his Bachelors and his Masters degrees were both in physics, and then he switched over to industrial engineering for his PhD without ever taking an engineering class.  And that we had other people who were engineers who've, all their degrees were in physics until they went and switched over to engineering.  So they like have all these different options for this, their degree, but nobody sits there and tells students that.  And nobody tells them that, you know, you can do all these things with a physics degree.  Instead people just sort of avoid it and in the past, it was never really an issue because, you know, physics faculty felt that, well, we don't need a lot of students.  It's less work for us not having all these students.  And, and people didn't really look at well, this is what we can actually do with the degree and how much money we can make, and they, they just did it because they liked it.  And people were happy for a long time with just people who went into the field only because they liked it and hopefully, one day to lead to a, an academic position.  So we're doing a lot more with that now, and we're trying to get students involved, and we're trying to use our advisory board in getting students some internships, and we're trying to really link 'em into the local community, into different jobs.  And we've looked at, not just the aerospace industry, but also the energy industry here in Texas and how to tie 'em in, but they've--really smart students with a lot of options and we just basically have to tell 'em, your problem is not being marketable.  Your problem is figuring out what you wanna do with this degree and then, you know, and we'll help you from there customize everything for it.
Story_ID: 23701
Speaker 1: I can't help but think when I listen to you that you may become a better-informed Freeman Hrabowski at some point--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --bringing into the STEM fields, you know, in the college.
Speaker 2: Well, I think that's what our job is.  I mean like I said, I think of us, we're like a start-up company here.  We're, you know, started off at zero and, you know, trying to take advantage of what we have locally.  And also we have to kind of look at our job as providing careers for students, not just giving 'em a degree and kicking 'em out the door.  And so a lot of that means that maybe the stuff that they end up being interested in and doing is not the stuff that we're interested in.  But at the same time, you want them to have the skills to where, you know, if they go out and form a company, that's great.  If they go out and work for somebody else, that's great.  You know, whatever, they wanna do is gonna be their life.
Speaker 1: What's the quote on the wall in your office, about physics being the only science and the rest is stamp collecting?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (laughter).  I think, I can't remember, well, yeah, the quote was that, "In science, there's only physics; everything else is stamp collecting."  I just it was just a good quote (laughter).  But, I don't know, we, we do have such a different view than other scientists I think because physics, we're always looking at things from a very fundamental point of view.  When I was in high school, I actually thought about what I was gonna major in in college, and it basically came down to physics or aerospace engineering.  And aerospace engineering was obvious because, I mean I was crazy into planes, and I, remote controlled airplanes, and real airplanes.  And for a while, I could probably, you could have shown me a picture of any airplane from World War I up to the present day which was in the '80's [1980s], and I could tell you exactly what the plane is and I could probably tell you a few things about it, you know, top speed, maybe how many--how big the engines were, whatever.  And I was reading books on, you know, aircraft design and, you know, and what happens when a plane goes supersonic and things like that, and about the shockwaves and how they would actually design the structure of the plane to withstand it.  And I actually, my dad had a bunch of old drafting equipment.  And I actually would design my own radio-controlled airplanes.  I'd actually have a big sheet of paper, and I would draft it out, and it would be in the detail that you could actually construct a plane from it and build it.  And I actually did that.  And so I was really into it, and I was into space and I was always talking about wanting to go work for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] one day and everything, but what happened was, I guess I felt like, well, anything I do with this engineering side is just limited by the science and the physics.  So I looked at the physics, and I thought, well, you can even go even more fundamental with the physics and the science.  And, you know, we're not limited by what the technology is right now.  We can, we develop new technologies, and we'll, you know, discover new science.  And we'll be applying stuff before the engineers have even, knew it existed.  So that was what kind of drove me in physics.  And I wasn't thinking so much from my own side about careers, like, which is, I guess it's true for a lot of physics students.  When I was in grad school, pretty much all the grad students felt that their career path was after they graduate, they're gonna go do a post-doc and then they're gonna, you know, become a faculty member.  But if you'd asked any of 'em how much a faculty member makes, I don't think any of 'em knew.  And it was just, we were, it was, it's funny in physics because we're, you know, you get really, really brilliant people who were incredibly ignorant about basic things that everybody else seems to know when they're heading into their careers.
Story_ID: 23702
Speaker 1: This is, of course, stereotypical, what you're saying--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --because this is what people have stereotyped scientists as being like.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and we're having to move beyond that because well, what's happening here in Texas is that there is pressure from our coordinating board, where they recently shut down six physics programs for low enrollment.  And the physics people came back, and they said, that they--well, the coordinating board said, well, we shut down a total of 500 programs throughout the whole state.  But we're only getting heat from these six physics programs.  And they said, well, 'cause physics is such a great useful field, and you can do all this stuff with it and everything.  And, you know, without these physics programs, you can't train the physics teachers and the coordinating board said, well, if it's so great, why are there, why aren't they graduating more students?  And, you know, we had a meeting actually here in Texas, and we talked about it, and it was, you know, and it was really interesting and refreshing in that, instead of them saying well, we should go and lobby the legislature to change this rule, and, you know, exempt physics from it or make it so that, you know, we can graduate less students and be okay.  They said, no, we're gonna figure out how to graduate more students.  And we're gonna, you know, and we're gonna meet the numbers.  And that was the plan.  And we're gonna look at, what are not doing that we could be doing better? And the idea was, and, you know, and I like that.  We're looking at it not so much as, you know, Oh, my gosh, this is a horrible environment and a horrible economy and we're just victims of it.  We're thinking, physicists look at it, and we say, we're the smartest people in the world.  If there's a problem, we're gonna solve.  And they, even if it's not a physics problem, they find a way to solve it.  And a good example of that is what's been happening in physics education over the last twenty years.  There's been a, kind of a revolution going on there where the way that we teach introductory physics now is completely different than the way it was taught twenty years ago or when I was in school, or even ten years ago.
Speaker 1: You mean, in what sense?
Speaker 2: Well, back, if you look at the history, you know, back during the Golden Age, you know, the Manhattan Project, and the space race, everybody wanted to major in physics.  And physics professors, they didn't have to compete for students.  They basically said, we're just gonna take the best people and they're gonna wanna be here.  And they didn't mind failing a lot of students 'cause they're saying if you're not up to the cut, you're not gonna make it.  And what's happened over time is that there's--back then, there weren't as many technical jobs.  So there really wasn't a big need for a lot of 'em.  So there was no need to graduate a lot of 'em.  So what's happened is they've started actually keeping track of what's going on.  And they started saying, well, we're getting a, we're failing a lot of students.  And it's become a disturbing thing because now, you're not supposed to fail a lot of students.  If they're really trying, and they're not passing, then it's not necessarily because they're not smart enough or not capable enough.  There's probably something you might be doing wrong as a teacher.  And so they started looking at these things.  Like one measure is the DFW ratio.  And I heard about it this summer at a conference.  And what they were doing is, they looked at how many students enroll in a class in the beginning.  And then at the end of the semester, they look at how many students got a "D", an "F" or withdrew.  For a typical physics class which is taught in the traditional manner, at a good university, where you have a good faculty member who is a good lecturer and capable of doing their job and they're professional at it, the DFW ratio is around 52 percent.  For introductory biology, it's close to 60 percent, for chemistry, it's around 40-something percent, 43 or so.  So we're getting, we're losing like half the students.  If you don't have a really good professor who knows what they're doing, and you're at a less selective university, that ratio could be up higher, closer to 90 percent.  I mean even at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] where we had really, really smart students, and everybody's required to take physics, everybody is taking calculus and everything else, I'm sure that ratio was probably on the order of 20, 30 percent.  So, what they've done is, physicists, there's people who, you know, did nuclear physics or particle physics or, you know, real frontline physics research, they were teaching these introductory courses.  They were seeing all these students fail, and they were thinking, there's gotta be a better way.  And they started what they call physics education research, which sounds like it's something that should be done in an education department.  But it's something that the physics people own it.  And they started looking at cognition, how do people learn, how does their memory work?  How do people absorb different ideas, and they did, applied analytical tools to it, and they found, you know, more interaction works better, hands-on experience works better, peer instruction where the student--you actually train the students to kind of learn from each other, presenting what problems and letting them discover the answers.  And so they've had, written all these different texts and different approaches to it.  And at the same university, which is very similar to ours, it had a DFW ratio in the 50's before, got it down to around 20 by just applying different techniques.  And so, you know, other schools, you know, they're down to like 10 percent failure rates and things like that.  So, you know, we're seeing a big difference in how these things work.  And, and that translates into not just more people pass the class, but they actually learn so they can actually apply these skills they're learning in physics.  And so even if they're not physics majors, they go into other sciences and they actually understand the science.  And, you know, it's not enough, you know, if you're going into medicine, to just pass a physics class, just to say that you got an "A" in it.  At some point, when they start talking about blood pressure, you have to know what that really means and what that really does to the body and what the reaction of certain drugs and how they actually are physically gonna affect the system are gonna work.  And if they don't understand that, and they're your doctor, then you're in trouble (chuckle), 'cause if anything, if anything doesn't go completely textbook that they may have memorized, then, you know, the poor patient is gonna be in trouble.
Story_ID: 23703
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: The biggest concern is about just education.  I know that, let's say I had stayed in Chicago [Illinois], but I didn't go to Whitney Young [High School], I don't think I would be here right now because there's a lot of problems in just the general education, where they're just not getting the quality.  And it's kind of like they're, you know, they're disadvantaging the schools and even when you do get good teachers who are capable, there's so many other issues that aren't being addressed and crime and drugs and things like that.  So it's really, you know, to get, to become a scientist, there's a lot of hurdles you have to jump over.  I remember I once had a, kind of a debate with a guy who was a big believer that this global climate change is not real, and there's no global warming.  And so he said, you know, he'd be explaining to me why it is, and he's saying how it's a conspiracy among scientists that we're all, you know, all the global climate scientists are just out there to get more grant money.  And I said to him, well, assuming that you're right, assuming that you could actually build your scientific career by agreeing with everybody, which is not what I've seen, and assuming that, you know, you really getting all this grant money, and that's what they're doing this for, let's sit here and think about the scam that they're pulling.  They had to go through all their elementary school and high school, taking the toughest science and class--science and math courses offered, which meant they had to work harder.  They had to study harder in order to pass all these classes.  Then they go off to college, and they to pretty much, you know, to be competitive, you know, you have to go to a good school.  And there, again, have to take all these tough science and math classes.  So they're gonna be studying a lot longer hours so while other people in other majors are out partying, they're gonna be studying.  And they're gonna spend a lot of time in the library.  Their classes are gonna be early in the morning.  They have to spend a lot of time in the lab.  So they're gonna do this for four years.  And then when they graduate, when all their friends are off making money and partying, they're gonna be in grad school, living poverty for the next six or seven years, barely scraping by make--you know, when I was in grad school, making about a thousand dollars a month.  And I had friends who were working in industry who spent that much on a single night out.  And so, you're gonna do this for several years, where you're just scraping by.  And then after that, typical climate scientists, after six, seven years, they're gonna go onto a post-doc, where they're gonna be finally be making as much as the secretaries, only it's gonna be several years later, and it's gonna be a temporary position where they're only gonna be in one place for maybe two or three years.  And so they can't really start a family or have a home or anything, you know, assuming they could find anybody who's willing to travel the country with 'em and not have a career.  Then, they're gonna do that for a while.  And then they're gonna land their faculty position most likely, 'cause there's only so much work in government labs.  And, you know, starting salary for them is probably gonna be on the order of like 60,000 a year.  If they go to a good research university, maybe 70,000 a year.  And they're gonna spend most of their time teaching, you know, explaining to, you know, at a big university, teaching freshman classes.  And, you know, they'll be teaching rocks or jocks or something like that, nothing really intellectually stimulating for 'em.  And then if they're really good, and they manage to get some of this grant money that they're all scamming their way into, which they only have about a 10 to 20 percent chance of actually getting a grant when you apply, it only allows them, if it's from NSF [National Science Foundation], they're only allowed to pay themselves up to two months of summer salary, which is probably on the order of 20,000.  And to earn that 20,000, they're gonna have to spend their summers down in Antarctica drilling ice cores.  So, you got these people who are so dedicated to this scam that they're gonna spend twenty or thirty years of their life, putting this scam together in order to pull down less than a six-figure salary, when they could have had the exact same skills, you know, and these guys are experts in computer simulations, in statistics and data mining in order to do this research, wonderful analytic skills.  You can go to Wall Street, work for a hedge fund and start off at half a million dollars a year, using those same skills.  And that's just starting before they start getting their bonuses and things like that.  So, you know, I'm wondering, like if that's a scam, that is the worst scam ever (laughter).
Story_ID: 23704
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, I mean you're relatively young by our standards, I'm telling you, by half the age of everyone else, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: It would have to be starting the physics program here [University of Houston, Clear Lake], and the idea that I started something that could be around long after I'm gone.  And for any other positions I move on to, and I think about, you know, making the program as sustainable as possible, having somebody, other people who can come in and run, and they already have the sort of bluebook about what it is they need to do in order to keep things going and to keep improving on things.  I also think about the students that have graduated and like I said, I, you know, I've graduated forty five Masters students.  I know the exact number, started tracking them on LinkedIn so I know what a lot of them are doing now, and starting to graduate a handful of undergraduate students.  And I look at what they're doing in their careers, and it's, it's a good feeling because even if they're doing stuff that I can't do in my career, the fact that they're doing it just means a lot to me.  You know, like when I--you know, I've had Asthma my entire life, and I know that, you know, you can't really become an astronaut if you've got to take Asth--a medication every day for Asthma.  But the idea that I could train somebody and they can become an astronaut based on what I've taught 'em is good.  I've got one student who, she graduated here, and now she's a faculty member, a full-time faculty member in Colorado.  I've got other students, and I got another student, he's just left to be the head of a physics program at a, at a school, not a college, but like a K through 12 school in the Middle East.  And, you know, I got people off doing really interesting, exciting things.  And, you know, and a lot of 'em, they'll, they'll come to me, and they'll tell me like, look, I would have never done this if it wasn't for you.  I had one student, he was the first African American student I ever graduated.  And he came in and he took my math methods class in the Spring of 2003.  And he didn't do very well in it.  He didn't think he did very well, and then fall comes around, and I go to teach my class.  I'm teaching basically, the next class, I think it was like classical mechanics or electro or something.  And he was in the class.  And I called him up on the phone, and I made him come to class.  He wasn't even registered.  And he ended up graduating with his Master's degree in physics, and he actually, later on, he just told me, look, I was gonna drop out.  And you wouldn't let me, and I'm glad (laughter) you didn't let me.  And he, you know, he's, yeah, working and he's working in the aerospace industry still.  And, you know, people are moving into jobs that they would not have had.  I had another student who, he was her, and he came up with an idea of in sito resource utilization which is a fancy word for, living off the land when you go to the moon or something like that.  And he came up with an idea to develop a battery that you could use on the moon, and, that you could build there instead of having to fly everything up.  And he did this as his Capstone project, for his Master's degree.  And after he graduated, NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] funded him full time to work on this battery and it became his project.  And he was able to run his own project, that he wouldn't have gotten to do before.  So, it's really interesting that, you know, I get to say I'm part of all these, what these people are doing.  And they're doing some really interesting stuff and in more areas than I could ever cover myself.
Story_ID: 23705
Speaker 1: If you look back again at everything you've done--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Not with the program really.  I mean there is, I mean there's probably a few things I would have tweaked or figured out differently or, you know, and there's a lot of things you don't know when you start out.  And actually, I think that not knowing certain things, actually made it easier to follow the problem than knowing.  Like some of my early projections on how many students we're gonna have in the program, were way off.  But because I didn't know that they were off, you know, I was able to really push for it and it really made us look a lot more attractive.  So, you know, sometimes the ignorance helps (laughter).  But, yeah, I mean I, I think that a lot of the stuff we've done has worked out well.  You know, our distinguished lecture series, we did that for several years, and we literally brought hundreds of people to campus who would have never come here, and it also helped to build the intellectual environment on campus, like I feel that we have this duty to the community where we need to, you know, we need to provide an educational outlet for--and if people here are interested in something, and they wanna learn more about it, then we should provide a forum for them.  We did a talk on climate change here, and I had Joseph Fromm here.  And we didn't get a big turnout from the community.  I think a lot of that was just a lot of people just felt, you know, it had become a political issue, and they just weren't gonna support anybody talking against it, you know, or talking about it.  But it was still kind of our responsibility to the community to do it.  And, you know, and, and so I think that we're building an environment, and if we don't have these things, we don't push for these things, the university becomes, becomes kind of this hollow place where people go.  They take some classes and then they leave, and then they get a bunch of letters in the mail asking them to donate money, but they really don't want to.  And, you know, and then they look back and said, well, why isn't my career any different because of this place?  And I don't, I want my students to know that their career and their life is different from being here, and if it's not after getting their degree, then we've done something wrong, and we really need to go back and look at it.  I can't say I can give 'em their money back, but that's about as close as I can come to it.  And I, I've had students where they graduate, and years later, I mean they know they could still call me up or email me and I can help 'em out.  Just like when I graduated from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], I felt like years later, if I've, if I'm looking for a job, I can go back to their career office, and they'll help me.  And, and to make things work right, it really comes down to faculty.  We need, we do--everything the university does, we do it in the, in the program or department level at some degree.  I mean we have office-sponsored programs that helps us with grant writing, but we have to write the grants.  We have to do the research.  You know, we have to really put a lot of work into it.  When it comes to recruiting students, we have an office of enrollment services.  But we're the ones who actually will go out to community colleges and talk to students and tell 'em why they should major in physics and explain to 'em what they're getting out of the degree.  You know, we have a career services office, but, you know, I'm talking to the advisory board, and I'm talking about what they can do, how to improve their resumes, what jobs to go after.  And, you know, and then, and so, you know, we have our university advancement, but then we're involved in bringing in these speakers and things like that.  We, you know, we have our president and dean's offices, but, you know, we're the ones to go over and make contact with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] and build the collaborations and say, well, these are the things we're gonna do.  So, we got all these other people on the perimeter and they get to focus on what they do, and we do everything.
Story_ID: 23706
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us a little bit about your family.  Now, do you have children?
Speaker 2: No, not yet.  My wife and I, we had problems conceiving so we're still, we're getting ready for our third round of IVF [in vitro fertilization] and looking into adoption and stuff, so--and it's, also, it's been, you know, it--with the military, it's been a little bit difficult.  Right, now, she's stationed in San Antonio [Texas], but she, yeah, she was in Florida for a couple of years.  And before that, she was here, and she was, you know, for most of the time I was here, she was in med school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And also my parents, they've moved down here so they actually live in town too.
Speaker 1: Okay, right, you were alluding to that.  Your mother's got a garden.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she, like I said, she's, I think she could probably grow anything anywhere.  You could be out in the middle of the desert and somehow you'll see like, I don't know, she'll be growing whatever.  She'd be, have like a crop of corn or something like that growing there (laughter).
Story_ID: 23707
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Yeah, let's see, we talked a little bit about my research.  We talked about my teaching, you know, we talked, I guess we talked a little bit about the labs.  Like I said before, this lab wasn't here.  The other lab we went into, that computational lab, it really wasn't used as a lab before, started three new labs here on campus so far, we'll probably get, start a few more.  And also, we're getting ready for what's coming up next which is, this university is unique in that it doesn't have freshmen and sophomores right now.  And we're preparing for a downward expansion where we're gonna actually add freshmen and sophomore-level classes.  And I've become involved in that, well, first, from the physics planning point of view of having to teach these introductory courses.  But, and what resources we need, but also I am, was elected as chair of our university's faculty senate.  So I'm gonna be vice president this year, and then next year, I'll be president and then when we start the downward expansion, I'll be past president.  So I get to be involved in that, and we'll see how it goes.  But I, I like the challenge of being able to kind of work with all these different groups.
Speaker 1: I know I mentioned Freeman Hrabowski a little while ago and how he starts a, basically on the high school-level, trying to get the students prepared through--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --through Upward Bound type programs, and now at the University of Maryland.  Are you thinking about or would you consider doing that kind of thing, working with high school students?
Speaker 2: Well, we work with high school students a little bit, but I, I know our higher education a lot more.  And that's, that's the thing, I--you know, I feel like my knowledge of K through 12 is at the point where I'd probably end up stepping on a lot of toes about how it works and how to do things.  And at the same time, I, I really enjoy working with these advanced students, and, you know, we cover, get to cover like the PhD level stuff and the advanced stuff.  And I get, I'm teaching classes that most of the people I went to grad school with, would not be allowed to teach if they're at a big university.  They'd be stuck teaching the lower level.  So I like working with the advanced students, and I think there's a problem in K through 12.  And I think that the thing I can do to help fix it is really what we're doing at our level in teacher education.  We've, we've butted heads a lot with our educational department, and that's what they do is teacher education.  And we're getting to the point now where for them to get funding or for them to get the grants and things like, they have to work with us 'cause all the money that's in education has kind of dried up except for the STEM education stuff.  And we actually worked with them, tried to develop a plan under a physics BS to do teacher education.  And it didn't go well.  I intentionally designed this degree so that it was kind of minimal on the physics-math requirements, and we could teach 'em everything we thought they needed to know, but still give 'em the flexibility to explore other areas, like engineering or if a student wanted to do pre-med, they could do within our degree or if they wanted to, you know, study computer science, they could do that within our degree, and, you know, and still graduate on time.  So I thought we're doing good, and it's a very flexible degree and it's a lot of room for electives.  But these education people, we met with them, and they started throwing on their education electives, and they filled it up.  And then they started wanting to cut physics classes to make room for more education courses.  And then the math people got involved 'cause the certification would have been for physics and math.  And they said, well, there's not enough math classes in here, so they wanted to take away more physics for the math.  And that's when I said, forget it.  We're not doing this because it compromised on it so much, this would not have been a physics education degree.  It would not have been a Bachelors, a BA in physics.  It would have been a BS in physics.  And I felt it would be very, very dishonest for a student to graduate and it says on the diploma, BS in physics, and then they get this degree where they've taken 50 hours of education courses, and they apply for an engineering job, and they can't get it.  And it looked to me like, the education people didn't seem, at least from my impression, didn't seem like they really cared that that was a problem.  They were just thinking, well, this is more we can crank out the door.  And I said, look, you're not gonna get any grant, funding for this program, and even if you do it, you're not gonna get any students in the program.  The coordinating board will shut it down if it's not graduating five students a year, which it won't graduate.  And I'm not comfortable with it.  And so we started looking at other programs like, University of Texas, has a program called "You Teach", where they've had basically the same problem, and they've made it work.  And I guess what they've done is they've cut down on the education requirements to the point where they were more compact, and it got all the material they needed.  But they were also expected to really learn in the major, and so there was, there's actually funding out there when you do a program like that, where the students can get funding, and if they--I think they're required to teach for a couple of years after they graduate.  And then if they decide they don't wanna teach, they wanna go into something else, they've got the qualifications to do it.  And I'm not comfortable with any program where they're getting this Bachelor's degree in physics, but they don't have the ability to do all the things a physics major can do.
Story_ID: 23708
Speaker 1: All right, my last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  And I think I'm still a ways off from answering that one because, you know, I'm still, you know, I haven't had kids yet, and I'm thinking that once I have kids, you know, and see how they remember me.  I, I know how my students remember me, but, I, I also think that I'm still at the point where I haven't found my long-term position or career.  So I don't see myself just staying here as a professor, just being--just doing exactly what I'm doing now, even though I've got one of the most interesting jobs in the world because, depending on what day you walk in here, and you see me working, you will not know what job I do.  I've had days where people would have swore I was the janitor because I was setting up the lab and cleaning stuff.  I've had other days, where, you know, you see me working on the computers.  You think I'm one of the technicians.  I've had days where I'm working with students one-on-one on research, and you'd think that's what I do all the time.  I've had days that are just pure teaching days.  I've had days where I'm over at NASA in meetings or I'm meeting with our administration here or giving talks or travel or, you know, interviewing people for different positions.  And so, it's, I, I feel like I've gotten a chance to use all my skills that I've learned, which I really, you know--really, the only thing that I've really learned here or learned in my life that I haven't had to use on this job involved either playing a trombone or designing football plays.  So, I'm waiting for that to come up, but it, so far, it hasn't really happened yet.  But, you know, I think that there's a lot of other interesting jobs out there, and I, you know, I see myself becoming more focused over time.  And I see that, you know, I'm gonna get a chance to kind of explore my ideas on research.  And, you know, I, I do enjoy mentoring students, but like I said, I am all over the place as far as what to do.  And at the same time, I, you know, I--it may sound strange, but I actually consider myself a little bit of a lazy person in that I like to see, you know, I like to be not bored, but I like to be able to delegate and have other people do stuff that I know that they can do and that they can do as good or better than me, while, you know, and focus on things that I think I'm the only one that can do it at the time.  So a lot of the stuff that I've gotten to do here is because I, I was, I looked around, and I was the only person to do the job.  So, you know, I've spent a lot of time doing that, and then I've also, over the time, over time I've gotten more free time, and I'm getting to learn things like how to go, you know, sailing and things like that.  And so I'm developing other hobbies outside of work, but I think that, you know, it's--what happens is the future is gonna depend a lot on what the opportunities are gonna be, and how they feel.  And I'm not one of these people who's just motivated to make money because I realize I could a made a lot more money doing a few other things that would have probably been easier.
Story_ID: 23709
Speaker 1: Go ahead and tell us what we're looking at.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is actually a picture of the plaque at my old high school.  In 2009, I got an award from my high.  It was their Hall of Fame, and what they did, it was a, it was a new project where they wanted to honor some of the alumni of the school.  And they called me up, and I was in the first group.  And actually, I was the youngest person in that group.  And so they--so there was a big ceremony at the school and so forth.  Okay.
Speaker 1: All right, this is me, scuba diving off the coast of Hawaii.  And, you know, it's the first time I'd ever been scuba diving.  And an interesting experience.  I just, you know, this was, I guess this was one of the advantages to having Asthma, learning how to breathe through my mouth (laughter).
Speaker 2: Great, at least for your first experience.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is a picture of my family when I was growing up.  I think, I wanted to say that we got this done as like a anniversary gift for my parents.  But that, you can see, that's my older brother, and my sister there.
Speaker 2: Okay, could you name everybody?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's my, my dad on the top left, my mom--my dad, Millard, my mom, Christine, you know, and then there's, at the bottom there's my sister Cassandra, we call her Sandra.  There's myself, after Sandra, and my older brother, Michael.
Speaker 2: And this is a picture of us when we were really little.
Speaker 1: We've named everybody.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is a picture of me and my brother, Michael, and this is basically what we did for 90 percent of the time when I was growing up in Chicago.  We pretty much lived on our bikes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this is a picture from Christmas in Missouri.  This was actually my parents' house in Missouri, and you can see my wife, Rispba, and myself, and I'm holding my nephew, Myles, and in the chair is, I believe that's my cousin, and so we were, I guess we were just opening gifts.
Speaker 1: And this was our, our first trip to Hawaii.  This was right after my sister graduated from high school.  And it's interesting is that, about, I'd say about 20 years later, a little over 20 years later, we ended up going to the exact same Luau.
Speaker 2: And this is me sailing.  And this is actually out here in Clear Lake, in, you know, the Houston area.  And it's one of my, my latest hobbies.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And this is me giving a talk here at the university and what happened is that the provost started this, this distinguished lecture series.  And so I wanted to describe my research to the other faculty that's in our faculty club.  And so I, I gave a talk, and it's actually called "Numerical Cosmology for Poets", and part of the reason I gave it that title was, we had a faculty member who, you know, he had specialties in poetry.  And, unfortunately, he didn't make it to the talk (laughter).
Speaker 1: Numerical cosmology for poets.
Speaker 2: This is me at a graduation, and that is my first Master's degree student.
Speaker 1: Name.
Speaker 2: His name is Collins, so, Jason Collins.
Speaker 1: This was when I accepted that award from my high school for the Hall of Fame--I'm sorry, Jacob Collins, I messed his name up.
Speaker 2: This is again me on the stage getting that award, and that's the award in my office.
Speaker 1: And same thing, you can see the rest of the distinguished honorees.
Speaker 2: And this was taken from the homecoming parade the next day where they actually had us, all the people that they honored, give a, you know, we're all driving around with the Corvette Club, and they're in the homecoming parade.  And then also that night, you know, and also later on, we went to the actual homecoming football game.  And it's really interesting, was that at the honoree event, they had a, the Jazz band was playing.  And so the bandleader actually said, you know, well, this is really interesting.  We've got Dr. Garrison here who used to play in the band, just like you guys.
Speaker 1: And you got to make a cameo appearance.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, this is what I did, did a little bit of flying, before I got into sailing.  And mostly I'd go just go flying with friends and one day, we're flying around, and this is out of Ellington Field, which is nearby.  And one of the guys in the hangar next to us, he invited us over to hang out for a little bit.  And we walk into his hangar, and he had Mig-21's sitting there and so this is--
Speaker 1: Blackhawks.
Speaker 2: --in the cockpit of a big fighter.
Speaker 1: So the Russians use that same color from the '60's [1960s] and we did.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and see this is me outside of one of the Migs.  That's the same Mig.
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and this was from my birthday a few years ago.  And what I wanted to do more than anything else, that I've always wanted to do my entire life was to fly in a B-17 bomber.  So that's what I did, and so this is me outside of the B-17.  And it was an unusually cold day in Houston, especially once you got up in the plane.  And so I was like a kid in a candy store.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this me inside of the B-17.
Speaker 1: So is that like a bombardier's  position.
Speaker 2: Actually, I think this is the tail gunner's position, and so this is, I think this is at the back of the plane.  And I, I did actually, you know, get behind the guns and shoot down some Luftwaffe (ph.) planes while I was up there (laughter).
Speaker 1: This is me and my wife from grad school, and this was actually, I think our first trip out of the country when we went down to the Bahamas.
Speaker 2: Okay, and what's her name again?
Speaker 1: Rispba, and this was actually taken, I think this was like right after we launched our website.
Speaker 2: And this is us on, I think this was New Year's day after we, we actually went with a friend flying.  And we just flew down from Ellington Field down to Galveston which is probably a distance you can probably drive in about half an hour, forty-five minutes.  But it was a lot more fun by air.
Speaker 1: I bet.
Speaker 2: This is from when I was on the cover of the EGRID Magazine is the school magazine.  And so what happened was they wanted to do a story about the physics Master's degree and this was when the, the technical management sub plan was brand new.
Speaker 1: This is me, I think this was when I was just getting my five-year award.  And what happened was, because I came in as a visiting assistant professor, and I wasn't tenure-tracked, they somehow left me off of the list for the award.  So the president has a special ceremony for me.
Speaker 2: So this is the president?
Speaker 1: Yeah, see, the other guy sitting there, that's the president of the university, Bill Staples.  Behind him is our provost, Carl Stockton.  Next to him is Saudi Divari (ph.) who was our interim dean at the time.  We've since hired another dean.  And then that's me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture taken from the photo shoot from the EGRID [school newspaper], when they did that story.  And actually, it was taken in this room.
Speaker 2: And this is a picture of me with Cindy Ballard who was one of my first students.  And I thought it was a really cool picture, and we just kind of--they wanted us to just fill the equation with, fill the chalkboard full of equations, so we did that.  And she was actually one of the first students to come here specifically for the physics program.  Her husband worked at NASA, and like, one of the best students I've had.
Speaker 1: This is our wedding day.  This is me and Rispba, walking down the aisle.  And this is us getting married.  And this is us again (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, everybody's gotta show off the ring (laughter).
Speaker 2: That looks like it.
Speaker 1: Okay, thanks.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
