Story_ID: 569388
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I am the interviewer and Neculai Burghelea is the videographer, and Jacques Lesure is observing. And, I'd like to start out by having you state your name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Reginald Hudlin. That's, R-E-G-I-N-A-L-D, last name, H-U-D-L-I-N.
Speaker 1: Is there a middle name or--?
Speaker 2: Yes. Alan, A-L-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, can I have your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Sure, 12/15/61 [December 15, 1961].
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Good question (laughter).
Speaker 1: April.
Speaker 2: It is--
Speaker 1: March. March.
Speaker 2: March. It's the end of March (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Thirty-first.
Speaker 2: March 31st.
Speaker 1: March 31st, 2008.
Speaker 2: And our location?
Speaker 1: We're in the BET [Black Entertainment Television] offices in Los Angeles, California on Santa Monica Boulevard.
Speaker 2: Okay. And, your occupation?
Speaker 1: Wow! Now, there's a mouthful, you see. I am a writer, producer and director of motion pictures and television. I'm also the president of entertainment at BET.
Speaker 2: You would say though your occupation is film?
Speaker 1: Yeah. I would say, filmmaker. That's a nice, I mean, to say storyteller sounds pretentious. (Laughter) You know, I'd rather just go, "I'm a filmmaker," you know. That's the cleanest, simplest, shortest answer.
Story_ID: 569389
Speaker 1: And, I'm gonna start out by asking five People magazine-ish questions. Just short answers, no, no, no specific answers (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Easy.
Speaker 1: Favorite food?
Speaker 2: Indian.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Orange.
Speaker 1: Favorite vaca- color? I asked favorite color, sorry. Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: My favorite place to vacation, Hawaii.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Makes noise) You mean the phrases I over use, (laughter) or the ones I like to use? 'Cause I'm sure there's a bunch of bad ticks. Like, "You know what I mean," or, "Whatever," like that, or whatever bad grammatical habits that haven't been beaten out of me yet. Don't know. Good question. Perhaps at the end of these hours of conversation, you can tag which phrase I, I overuse.
Story_ID: 569390
Speaker 1: Now, we're gonna start out and I wanna, you know, I had read that you come from a family of entrepreneurs.
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: But, I want to start out by asking about your mother. Can you tell us her name and what you know about her?
Speaker 2: Sure. Helen Hudlin, Helen Cason Hudlin, grew up in St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: How is Cason spelled?
Speaker 2: C-A-S-O-N. And, she's an amazing woman. Let's just cut to the essence of it. She raised three sons in East St. Louis, Illinois, which is a tough town. All three of us went on to be successful. While raising three sons, she got her master's [degree] and Ph.D. She is an educator. She ran a mental health center, and a gifted program in St. Louis. Then, after her retirement, she became a full-time community activist. She organized the, the block organization. She shut down a couple of crack houses. And, in fact, she (laughter), the--a great tele- I got a phone call from a childhood friend of mine, Pierre Paradise, which is his true name. And, Pierre goes, "Man, your mother sure is brave." Well, that's not the call you wanna get, you're mother's brave. "Well, what do you mean?" "Well, she was at the block meeting. There was some guys sent there to disrupt the meeting, and she cursed them out and she said they were working for the drug dealers. And she started naming the politicians who get the payoffs so the drug dealers can just keep doing their thing and it was something. And, you know, she said she was gonna quit and everyone said, 'Please Mrs. Hudlin, you can't quit.' And, she just got the whole room fired up." So, I said, "Oh," (laughter), so, I, I said, "Mom, I think you should move the Los Angeles [California]" (laughter). "Well, no, I got stuff to do here." I go, "Mom, you've succeeded. I think you should--if Bush [President George Walker Bush] can declare victory, you can declare victory. You shut down a couple of crack houses," you know, you've, you've--you know, she would shut down the crack--she would find out who owned the place. She would shut it down, tear it down, and then build a new home there, which would be leased out or sold to either a low income family, a policeman, or an artist. So, she was literally rebuilding the neighborhood. And, again, this is like in the, the fourth stage of her life, right. So, finally, we got her to move from East St. Louis to Beverly Hills [California], which was hard. It took me and my two brothers [Warrington Hudlin and Christopher Hudlin] to convince her to move out. But, once she moved out and, you know, she got to, you know, be with her grandkids, she was like, "Oh, this is great. You were right. I'm just adding years to my life." But, that's what it took.
Story_ID: 569391
Speaker 1: So, let's talk about her [Hudlin's mother, Helen Cason Hudlin], her background and her growing up. What do you know about that, Reggie [HistoryMaker Reginald Hudlin]?
Speaker 2: She, she was raised by her grandmother who was very tough. Her father, who was a professional, both her parents [Inez Kelso Cason and Richard Cason] worked. She got instilled a strong sense of just discipline and hard work. And, you know, the value of education. She wet to, you know, Soldan High School [sic. Charles H. Sumner High School], which is sort of the black high school in St. Louis [Missouri], and, you know. If you name almost any famous black person from St. Louis of her generation, they all went to that high school. And, met my father [Warrington Hudlin, Sr.]--
Speaker 1: Now, was she raised in St. Louis, or East St. Louis [Illinois] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In St. Louis.
Speaker 1: Okay, in Eas- okay, in St. Louis.
Speaker 2: And, then met and married my father and moved, moved them to East St. Louis, which was a big deal. Because, you know, even though St. Louis is--you know, can be a tough town, some tough neighborhoods. East St. Louis is a whole other thing (laughter). This is like, "Oh, my god, you're moving to East St. Louis? What are you doing?" So, she was a strong black woman, stood by her strong black man, moved to East St. Louis and raised her kids.
Speaker 1: Now, did she, did she tell any stories about her growing up that you remember? Any stories that, that strike, strike you?
Speaker 2: Yes, many stories. And, I'm trying to think of some particularly striking ones right now. Very tricky. (Pause) It's funny I--when you asked that I started thinking of my father who's told me a million stories that, that I really recall a zillion times more than my mom's. At least stories I wanna tell on tape (laughter). But, let's come back to that.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Did she--so, her family, so, she has sort of St. Louis the--were the roots on her side of the family, did they originate in St. Louis or was there any other southern roots?
Speaker 2: Well, it's very interesting, her father, Richard Cason, was quite the amateur historian. In fact, in my home, I have a display case of things he collected of his ancestors. We have an ancestor that was a Buffalo Soldier and his, his son who fought in the Spanish American War. So, kind of two generations of black military men. And, all kinds of incredible artifacts, you know, sort of a, a pipe. But, it feels more Native American than kind of old western, you know. The menu for Christmas dinner at a U.S. Army post in 1919 somewhere out in Arizona, you know, kind of an elaborate Indian, Native American name. So, there was certainly a strong sense of pride and heritage that we got from our grandfather.
Speaker 1: And, so, what--was your mother from a large family? Or, was it a small family?
Speaker 2: It was a midsize family. She had an older brother and an older sister. And, she outlived both.
Speaker 1: Okay. But, you're saying her roots really, the roots were strongly St. Louis (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: In that respect? Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 569392
Speaker 1: Now, your father can you give his name?
Speaker 2: Sure. Warrington Hudlin, Sr.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, can you tell about his background?
Speaker 2: Sure. He grew up in Hot Springs, Arkansas. And, his, his father [Edward Hudlin] was a stonemason. He fought in World War I [WWI], and while he was there, he saw a, a style of stonemasonry called rubble stone. Where you don't take, you take uncut stone, meaning it's not carved into a neat brick. It's almost like you have a puzzle of rock. You have a pile of rocks and you figure out how to make a flat straight wall out of that. He was intrigued by that style and came back and became a stonemason. So, he built home--all kinds of buildings based on that. And, he--they moved to St. Louis [Missouri] because there was a big tornado that hit St. Louis and there was a lot of homes that needed rebuilding. So, they moved to St. Louis because there was a lot of great work there. The, the Hudlin family actually had two branches in St. Louis. There was St. Louis side and an East St. Louis [Illinois] side. And, the St. Louis side was actually very kind of middle class, upper middle class. In fact, there's all this kind--again, I was fortunate, I--he had, he's the eldest son of six. And, one of my other uncles, Uncle Richard [Richard Hudlin], is truly the family historian. And, he has an incredible grasp of the family history, which I'm trying to learn as best I can because when you're young you just take it for granted. Oh, Uncle Richard's got all that stuff. And, then you realize as you start losing uncles that you're, you're losing this stuff. So you, you're like, "Okay, if I'm gonna pass this on to my kids, I've gotta learn this stuff." So, okay, let me start from back--from what we know. We know there were three Hudlin brothers on a slave plantation in Virginia who either bought or escaped, right. But, I think, at least a couple of them bought their freedom. They traveled west. One stopped in St. Louis and settled down. One stopped in Chicago [Illinois] and settled down. And, one went to Canada. The one's in St. Louis became friends with a black man who was sort of one of the--I think, Morgan [ph.] was his name. One of the, sort of the founders of St. Louis. The one that went to Chicago became friends with the du Sable [Jean Baptiste Point du Sable].
Speaker 1: Du Sable.
Speaker 2: Du Sable. One of the founders of Chicago. And, the folks in Canada went on and did a whole other kind of series of really interesting things. So, that's kind of as far back as we can directly track the family. Now, there were also, there's a Jeremiah Hudlin [ph.] we see in New England in the 1700s. We haven't quite connected it. But, so, and Hudlin is a pretty unusual name. We really haven't met any Hudlins that weren't related to us. So, we figure, okay, we've got this thing. And, there's a lot of, lot of unsubstantiated que- you know, things about, oh, we about, you know, perhaps even where in African we might from. I once met an Islamic scholar, or at least a guy who had a large kind of Islamic cult in Brooklyn [New York], who said, "Oh, your family name is Hud, and the -lin means family of." Now, I have no idea if that's true or not. And, I have no idea why we would still have our name if that were true (laughter). But, but I just thought, wow, that's pretty interesting.
Story_ID: 569393
Speaker 1: So, anyway, so, these three brothers--now, my great-great-great-grandfather I think, Richard Hudlin [sic.], was a pretty amazing guy. I mean, I know we have an ancestor that worked on the Underground Railroad. That--and, it was a weigh station. I believe his son did a lot of amazing things. He--no, that was Peter Hudlin, Peter Hudlin was, you know, was a, what's the word?
Speaker 2: A conduc--
Speaker 1: A conductor--
Speaker 2: Conductor on the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) on the Underground Railroad. His son, Richard Hudlin [Richard Hudlin, Sr.], did a lot of amazing things. He wrote for several papers in St. Louis [Missouri] including a German language paper. 'Cause he grew up in Germantown [Baden, St. Louis, Missouri], so he spoke German as well. He also wrote for the St. Louis Post-Dispatch, which was a very conservative all-white paper. But, he would mail his articles in. So, they didn't know he was black. And, I guess, one time they just loved his writing so much they were like, "We want you to come in and pick up your check." "No, no, no, just mail it." "No, we insist. You need to come. I just need to meet you." So, they met him and that changed things (laughter). And, and not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, that was Peter you said?
Speaker 1: No, that was Richard.
Speaker 2: That's Richard, okay.
Speaker 1: Right. That's Peter's son. And, the most amazing thing he did, which, well, amazing to us 'cause we didn't find out 'til about fifteen years ago, that he was a filmmaker. And, he was part of that generation of filmmakers who--black people who became filmmakers as a response to 'Birth of a Nation' ['The Birth of a Nation']. So, I mean, I guess, he did some Shakespearean acting in St. Louis. And, there's this film historian, black film historian who faxed us an article from the St. Louis Argus, which was the black paper in St. Louis at the time. And, he gave this interview about he's gonna, you know, make these films about Negro life, and da-da-da-da, and tell the true story. And, it was chilling because as my brother [Warrington Hudlin] and I were reading those article, if you replace the word Negro with the word black, it could've been an interview from either one of us. And, it was just like, whoa. And, somehow that piece of information, we knew about all the other stuff he did, but that particular informa- piece of information got lost. So, now I'm trying to figure out, did any of those films survive? We don't know yet, you know. And, they'd be on nitrate stock, which means they could've been destroyed or exploded or whatever. But, pretty heady stuff (laughter), that right. So, and, then he had my grandfather who, as I told--
Speaker 2: Now, what time period would, would've Richard Hudlin been around?
Speaker 1: Oh, he was also the postmaster of Clayton, Missouri. And, Clayton, Missouri even today is a very tony upscale neighborhood. So, in addition to all that other stuff I said he did. He also did that. This--
Speaker 2: What time pe- you know, time period?
Speaker 1: This is the turn of the century. This is like 1919. So, pretty amazing stuff. So, his son, my grandfather, Edward [Edward Hudlin], like I say, he was a jockey. You know, in that period where he--as I say, he fought in World War I [WWI]. He was also a jockey. So, that's even once a races--he lost in Santa Anita out here in California [Santa Anita Park, Arcadia, California], and became a stonemason. He had his, his eldest was a daughter, Lucille [Lucille Hudlin McClelland], and then five boys who he made--and he made all this sons work in the construction business. Which they, you know, pretty much, most of them hated (laughter). But, you know, and again, that kind of stonework is you're literally, there was someone on the ground with a pile of rocks, and my Uncle Russell [Russell Hudlin] had this gift. He could look at a pile of rocks and figure out how they fit together into a perfect wall. Like he could just do that math, right. So, then there'd be someone on the ground floor and then someone up on a piece of scaffolding. So, all day he would throw a stone up a story, and they would catch it, lay the cement and lay it. And, you'd do that all day. And, then you'd lay the roof, which was hot tar, right. So, you'd take a mop with hot tar. So, like, the definition, the epitome of hard work beyond your imagination. So, they're doing that and they lived in East St. Louis [Illinois]. And, again, there was this St. Louis side. My grandfather's brother was also Richard [Richard Hudlin], there's a lot of Richards so it gets a little confusing. Richard was a teacher at Soldan High School [sic. Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri]. He also was a tennis coach. And, he had a couple of star pupils as a tennis coach. He coached Arthur Ashe and Althea Gibson. And, in fact, I know--I think for a brief period like the Davis Cup stayed overnight at his house for some reason or whatever. So, again, this whole thing of just doing things that were very different, very ahead of their time. That's a real kind of family trait.
Story_ID: 569394
Speaker 1: What else? I can go on. My family (laughter) is pretty wild (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, so, I wanna ask this question. So, that, so, he--the five brothers and the one sister, those were your grand--?
Speaker 1: No, no. Those were, those were my [paternal] aunts and uncles.
Speaker 2: Those were your aunts and uncles?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, most of--like I say, my Aunt Lucille [Lucille Hudlin McClelland] went on to become dean of nursing at Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois]. My Uncle Russell [Russell Hudlin], he was a businessman like my father [Warrington Hudlin, Sr.]. He had a pharmacy but, you know, kind of a store. My Uncle Irving [Irving Hudlin] became a lieutenant colonel. He fought in three wor- three wars; World War II [WWII], Korea [Korean War] and Vietnam [Vietnam War]. He did later went and got a graduate degree. My Uncle Richard [Richard Hudlin] has a Ph.D. And, my Uncle Edward [Edward Hudlin], my au- my Uncle Edward and my Aunt Lucille have degrees from Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York]. He got a Ph.D. as well, taught at Southern Illinois University. Also, taught at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] for a brief time, so.
Speaker 2: So, you said that there was the educated in the East St. Louis [Illinois] side, but I'm not quite understanding the difference.
Speaker 1: Well, see that was--that's funny part.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: See that's the interesting part, right. Because the St. Louis [Missouri] side, right, they were a little more well to do. Like they had this big house on Cook Avenue. And, even as a child I remember, oh, the house on Cook Avenue, which apparently was a big deal back then; the house on Cook Avenue. And, so, they were kind of this, in a middle class, you know, successful bourgeois family, and my aunts and uncles were the ghetto side from East St. Louis. I mean, ghetto. We're the part that was like they would drive in my grandfather's [Edward Hudlin] truck over to these ice cream socials they would have on Sunday. Now, my grandfather did many amazing things. But, what he was horrific at was preventative maintenance. So, the truck wouldn't have brakes. So, they learned how to drive from East St. Louis to St. Louis in a truck with no brakes. And, they would like, you know, how to like drive and scrap again the railings or whatever to slow it down or whatever. So, when they got in front of the house, he would have all his sons jump out in front of the truck and stop it like Superman or something, like (makes noise) (laughter). I mean, it was crazy. It was crazy, 'cause they were too broke, like to get the, you know, get, you know, the brake work done. So, anyway they figured out how to get over. So, they were like, the ghetto side (laughter), coming over for like ice cream and peaches or whatever. So, yes. But, you know, that side, it all worked out (laughter). You know, meaning that, you know, this ghetto side went on, you know, to be actually more driven than the St. Louis side, and ultimately more prosperous than the St. Louis side.
Story_ID: 569395
Speaker 1: How did your parents [Helen Cason Hudlin and Warrington Hudlin, Sr.] meet? You were, you said that they met but you didn't say how they met.
Speaker 2: Post office. You know, I mean, they were real black people, they taught (laughter), and they worked at the post office for extra money. And, so, that's some real black people stuff. So, yeah, they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, both of them taught?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: I mean, briefly. Like, my father taught and got really frustrated very quickly because it was clear that a lot of people were in education 'cause they couldn't get other jobs. And, you know, like, my father just takes everything seriously. He's just like, "This isn't gonna work. I gotta make some real money." So, he just kind of fell into insurance as, looked like a good business for him. So, he did that. I mean, he--'cause he was supporting his family, you know, because it's not like my grandfather [Edward Hudlin] ever made any real money. So, he had--and he's the eldest male so he's supporting all those brothers, you know, all his brothers and sister [Lucille Hudlin McClelland] and whatever, as well as having three boys of his own. So, he, you know, everybody was working, everyone, you know, had their grind on.
Speaker 1: So, did he talk about why he moved to East St. Louis [Illinois]? You said, your parents met and then he--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, convinced--
Speaker 2: I don't know. I mean, I don't know why they settled in East St. Louis as opposed to St. Louis [Missouri]. Maybe it's 'cause it was just cheaper.
Speaker 1: Now, give me your siblings name, and--in birth order.
Speaker 2: Warrington [Warrington Hudlin] is the eldest, and Christopher [Christopher Hudlin] is the middle, and me.
Speaker 1: And, how many years are there between you and Christopher, between--?
Speaker 2: Seven.
Speaker 1: Seven. Okay. Wait, so, so, it's Warrington then Christopher was two years younger than Warrington?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 569396
Speaker 1: Now, what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: I don't know, probably when I was a baby we would play kick thang. And, I would lay on the couch in the living room on my belly. And, they go, "Kick thang," and I would like kick like I was swimming (gesture). They go, "Stop thang." They go, "Kick thang," then I kick some more.
Speaker 1: You remember that?
Speaker 2: Yeah. That was great. Even now I remember that. That was good times. And, I also remember my first favorite record, which was, 'Louie Louie.' And, I had a little dance I would do in my diaper, and that would just crack them up. 'Cause my little diaper be sagging, I'd be getting my bounce on. So (laughter), those things I remember very clearly.
Story_ID: 569397
Speaker 1: Describe what your family life was like.
Speaker 2: It was great, you know meaning, my family, you know, I would say was a very loving family. Meaning like, I never, there was never any doubt that everyone in that family loved me, and we all cared about each other. There were fights of course, you know, you got, you know, my brother [Christopher Hudlin], who's the middle kid, and so he's trying to define himself differently than all the rest of the family. My eldest brother, Warrington [Warrington Hudlin], who was very much excited by the politics of the era. I mean, there was one famous, I mean, incident where he and his friends had decided they were gonna drive to Chicago [Illinois] to join the Panther Party [Black Panther Party]. My father [Warrington Hudlin, Sr.] absolutely forbid it. And, he just spent the whole weekend just furious. Like, "You are just in high school. You're not going anywhere," and da-da. And, that was the weekend that Fred Hampton was assassinated. It was one of those like, oh, (laughter). So, it was that kind of household. My, my father was always very active in different community service organizations, you know, always, always, always. So, that was kind of a presumption growing up. You know, worked really hard, but always had new interests. I remember, I don't know how old he was, maybe his fifties he decided, he always wanted to learn how to fly. So, he was gonna learn how to fly. So, he took flying lessons, and you know, go this, you know, he, remember he came home with his pilot's license and goes, "Black Ace." And, you know, he would take me up flying, and give me the controls, you know, 'cause it was just like, "Here. You can fly." (Laughter) And, you know, so, and, you know, and here now he has two sons who wants to be filmmakers. We're like--but, he was always supportive, you know. His whole thing was always, "Do you have plan? Okay. Let me hear your A plan. Let me hear your B plan. Let me hear your C plan. Now, are you working at 'em?" And, as long as we had a plan and we were working hard to support 'em, he was there.
Story_ID: 569398
Speaker 1: So, I wanna take you back to your, to your childhood and what was the address that you lived at at the time? Who was--and what--can you describe the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: 3136 Virginia Place. Again, the irony is, the three Hudlin brothers who escaped from a plantation on Virginia, and now there's three brothers being raised on Virginia Place. I don't know what it all means, but it's pretty cosmic. (Laughter) And so, we're all there and Virginia Place was formerly a private street. It was not private by the time we were there. But, it was, it was McCasland [Avenue] and then there were two blocks that were, sort of one continuous block that was Virginia Place. And, they had stone walls at either end and it was kind of a, it was an oval. And, it had a green, you know, center, you know, with, you know, that we, we could place baseball, or football, or whatever, in the middle. It was a beautiful block, but there's so many old wonderful trees of different types. I remember as a kid my dad [Warrington Hudlin, Sr.] driving me to school or work or whatever and he would say, "Look up at the trees." And, you would just see this explosion of color in the fall. And, he would just make sure to point out stuff like that. That, you know, there's this, there's beauty everywhere. There's beauty in East St. Louis [Illinois]. I remember the smell right before it rained, or the cicadas in the summertime. It's just all the sounds and texture of the--or, it was a train, 'cause East St. Louis is, you know, in St. Louis [Missouri] it's kind of crisscrossed by trains. So, late at night, lying in bed, and you would hear the trains coupling and uncoupling, (makes sounds). And, it was just a great, you know, kind of lonely east southern sound that you would just hear that was, was part of the texture of my childhood. So, when you mention that, I think of that stuff really, really strongly. And, I just love that. I just loved all--and I miss that.
Story_ID: 569399
Speaker 1: Sights, smells and sounds that really remind you of your childhood. Are there others besides (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. I--again, you know, the thing about the--you know, rubble stone construction, which is the thing I was describing, is that you had all these different textures of rocks. So, you'd have a piece of limestone, then you have like a, sort of a shiny stone that almost looked like sort of a gem. And, then, you know, and it was all threaded together by this thin little line of cement that they would also, it would put a co- little crease in it that they would paint green. And, I just remember all those different textures that would be put together to make a wall. And, it was something symbolic about that to me 'cause it was, it was hard and it was beautiful and they made something out of leftover pieces, you know. It wasn't, it wasn't cut but you could still make something strong out of it. What else? I remember that my dad [Warrington Hudlin, Sr.] would have us work at his office [Hudlin and Co. Insurance, East St. Louis, Illinois] on the weekends to help file or whatever. I remember the great names of his customers. People like, Crazy Chadwick [ph.]. Just like these names that would, they felt larger than life. Like, I don't know who Crazy Chadwick was but that's a heck of a name. People named Mister as their first name. You know, just big colorful characters.
Speaker 1: And, smells? What about more smells? Any?
Speaker 2: Sure. Well, burning leaves in the fall of course. Everybody, you know, great big pile of these, and these plumes of black smoke you'd see all over the city. Dogs. Because everyone--at the time the vicious dog of the moment was the German Shepherd. And, as I got older it was shifted into the Doberman [Doberman Pinscher]. But, they hadn't gotten to the pit bull yet (laughter). That was later. So, when you would walk through the alley, you know, as a kid you always take a shortcut through the alley of course, all right. And, every fence there'd be a dog that run up to the fence (makes noise), you know, there's always a big scary dog. And, there was always a fear that a dog would get loose, which was not an idle threat. I remember I went, I was leaving my friends, Sanfus Reaves [ph.], S-A-N-F-U-S, again another colorful name. So, I was leaving my friend's, Sanfus' house. I was coming back and I was driving pass this one house that was a particularly raggedy house. In fact, that family, we called the montroglodyte family [ph.], after the song in The Jimmy Castor Bunch, the troglodytes ['Troglodyte']. And (laughter), so, they had a dog that lived under their porch. And, the dog ran out, got a big nasty chain on it. So, I start riding, and I had a gold bike with a purple banana seat on it. And (laughter), you know, and you know, and my hands--I said, "Uh-oh." And, all of sudden I looked down and I saw the end of the chain just flipping. I was like, "Ooh, he not chained to the porch, he loose." So, it was like double (laughter), and it was like a big nasty dog is after you. He got me (makes noise) (gesture). So, then you had to, then they had to watch the dog to make sure he didn't have rabies. 'Cause if he had rabies, then you would have to get all these shots in your stomach and everyone knew the shots in the stomach for rabies was the worst thing ever. So, I remember that. I remember seeing mad dogs. Literally dogs that were, you know, foaming at the mouth, and, you know, all kind of knots and nastiness growing on their heads; East St. Louis [Illinois].
Story_ID: 569400
Speaker 1: What was the block that you lived on? Who were the neighbors? Can you describe that block (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. Well, I'll start with the famous people. As famous as it gets for East St. Louis [Illinois]. Two doors down on one side was Brother Joe May. He was a famous gospel singer. And, you know, he would tour with C.L. Franklin and, you know. And, in fact, Brother Joe May's daughter [Annette May Thomas] was childhood friends with Aretha [Aretha Franklin]. They would hang out together and play together. And, she now lives in Los Angeles [California]. So, when Aretha was getting her big award from the United Negro College Fund [UNCF], she brought my mom. And, they went backstage, 'cause Aretha was like, "That's my girl." And, it was one of those like, "Wow!" So, Brother Joe May lived two doors down on one side. Two doors down on the other side was Ike and Tina Turner's mother. And, you know, that's the house where, you know, it all happened. And, I was too young, but my older brothers [Warrington Hudlin and Christopher Hudlin] remember hearing Ike [Ike Turner] and Tina practice in the basement. Because somebody would come out and shoot--'cause the kids would gather, of course, in the alley to listen. And, they'd come out, "Hey, get away from here you kids." And, then a few minutes later the kids would re-gather. And, my mother remembers that Ike was very nice and Tina was stuck up. That, she'd see Ike walking through the alley going to the corner store, he would always say, "Hey, Mrs. Hudlin [Helen Cason Hudlin]," 'cause she was sitting out in the backyard pregnant with me. But, Ike would (gesture)--but, Tina would, you know, never speak (laughter). So, there you go.
Speaker 1: So, was it, was it a neighborhood in the true sense of a neighborhood (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, 'cause there was--
Speaker 1: Did you--playing, everyone playing--?
Speaker 2: There was a lot of kids on the block, a lot of, lot of kids. And, you know, I had my best friends on the block and my best friends, you know, in nearby blocks, and then your best friends from school. But, like, there was the Riddle family [ph.], 'cause there's always a family that's got like ten or fifteen kids. So, there was the Ridd- the Riddle family that was in the middle of the block. And, like, you know, you always end up grav- because they had, they had someone who was your age no matter what age you were (laughter), 'cause there was so many of 'em (laughter). And, then, you had my man, Brian [ph.], who lived directly across the street. He didn't actually live there, but his grandmother lived there. And, he spent a lot of time over there. He would go over there and clean up this grandma's house. And, I remember she'd chew tobacco. So, me, Sanfus [Sanfus Reaves (ph.)], and Brian would be on the grandmother's porch playing laugh-in. And, basically, laugh-in is that, you know, a porch has sort of an L, right. So, you'd sit here, and the person who was up would come around the corner and try to do something to make the other two people laugh. And, you had to stay up there until you made someone laugh. So, it was brutal 'cause they're, you know, they were like (gesture). And, Sanfus, and Brian were unbelievably funny and I was not funny at all. And, in fact, sometimes they would just go, "Oh, Reggie [HistoryMaker Reginald Hudlin], just sit down 'cause we just can't take you being unfunny anymore. I would take your spot." So, that was my first comedy school. And, I was bad at it. They were brutal. And, then so, as we were playing laugh-in, Brian's grandmother would come out and spit tobacco, and the porch was just covered with these brown stains. And, the aroma of chewing tobacco (laughter). And, so, and then we went in the house and it always smelled like Pine-Sol, 'cause he would just (gesture), he'd be in there mopping with the Pine-Sol as fast as he could so he could come out and play with us.
Story_ID: 569401
Speaker 1: And, we'd go ride bikes or whatever, and we went to red hill. You know, a lot of the kind of, you know, when you go on kind of a, an adventure trip, kind of a Huck Finn [Huckleberry Finn] type thing with your boys. It was always somewhere profoundly unhealthy (laughter). Because East St. Louis [Illinois] is full of all these bad post-industrial wastelands, right. So, you'd go to red hill, which was some kind of mining thing. So, literally, it was this big hill, or you know, kind of thing you would climb and it was all red. Kind of a red smudge, sand combination. I don't know why it was red. Maybe it was red clay that had been churned or whatever. So, it felt like you were on Mars. And, you'd be walking, then you see these bones. And, you're like, "Where are those bones from?" And, someone would say, "From the pack of wild dogs." Which was, you know, it probably--I mean, or were there wild dogs there? Absolutely (laughter). Were there feral dogs roaming through red hill? Yes. Which of course, for the excitement of going to red hill (laughter). What--was that a leftover bone from one? I don't know. But, it was part of the excitement. Or, it was a big grain factory. Not factory, but, you know, they would store the grains and the trains would come and load up. And, one day that caught fire. And, it was amazing 'cause it was a giant fire. So, of course, everyone comes to watch the fire. And, all of a sudden you heard all the popcorn pop (makes noise). But, like, it sounded like Iraq. And, then the popcorn smell. Then the smell of burnt popcorn which is not so fun. So, what was left of that plant, we'd go rummaging around in, just like an old factory, weed covered, and you'd see a mattress and then somebody would say, "Man, you should bring a girl out there. It's a mattress." And, you'd be like, "How's that supposed to work?" Some mattress in a weedy lot. That's not romantic (laughter). And, then there was a, there was, there was this elaborate sprinkler system, right. And, there's this, and there was water and kids were literally playing in this. And, we were like, "That is chemical water." That's some kind of fertilizer or something. So, like, I don't know what kind of chromosomal damage those kids got from playing in that water, but I knew not to get in it. And, on occasions you'd look down there and a snake would just pop out. We were like, "Ho! It's chemical water and it's a snake" (laughter). We were--they were like, "Whatever, it's all good," (laughter). Or, we would walk down to Lincoln Park [East St. Louis, Illinois], which was the park. And, none of us knew how to swim. But, each of us knew a little bit of how to swim. So, we were determined to teach each other how to swim. And, we each learned as much as three kids who don't know how to swim (laughter) could learn. Eventually, I took real swimming lessons but (laughter). So, yeah, it was, we had--and there were apple trees. So, there'd be apple wars where you know, you go--a big thing full of apples and they're hard apples, they're not ripe yet. So, you throw 'em (gesture), right and they would sting. So, you'd be running through the neighborhood (gesture), you know, hitting people, attacking people, which is, you know--and, that's not nearly as bad a chat war. And, chat are those little smooth stones that you put in a driveway or whatever. And, now that could put your eye out (laughter). So, there would be that kind of action too.
Speaker 2: So, you're describing a typically boy, young, adventuresome boys--?
Speaker 1: (Nods head).
Speaker 2: Playing, playing in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: I mean, there were some like heavier stuff like, the park I remember, you know, occasionally they'd be like a gang fight and they'd be some people pulling out guns and stuff. So, yeah, it sometimes it would go to another level. But, again, that's before drugs became big. I mean, in the '60s [1960s] it was not the same kind of thing as later when drugs drove the stakes up really high.
Story_ID: 569402
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember anything with the riots or anything like that when you were, and who was the--?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, obviously the big race riot was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were young, you were young.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was 1917.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you were, you were young.
Speaker 2: So, that was before my time. That's something I read about later.
Speaker 1: No, not some--no, I'm not talking about that. I talking about, do you remember anything like being aware of, as a young kid, anything happening with MLK [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] or the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Sure. I remember the death of MLK.
Speaker 1: You do.
Speaker 2: I remember--
Speaker 1: But, you were young.
Speaker 2: Yep. I remember 'cause I was at the Katherine Dunham center [Katherine Dunham Centers for Arts and Humanities, East St. Louis, Illinois]. And, the--[HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham, the world chorographer, anthropologist, had been brought in and, 'cause the state wisely figured out that, East St. Louis [Illinois] could be the next Watts [Los Angeles, California]. It could be the next Detroit [Michigan]. So, they brought her in like, "Well, do some arts things to try to calm the natives down." And, she was like, "No, if I'm gonna do this, we gotta do this in a much more progressive way." So, she basically created a college prep program. Where she brought in dancers from her program to teach dance. Master drummers like Mor Thiam from Senegal whose son Akon is a huge music star now. She brought in martial artists from Asia and Brazil. So, my, you know, that's how we learned Asian martial arts, and then later I learned capoeira, the Afro-Brazil martial art. They brought all kinds of teachers like [HistoryMaker] Shelby Steele taught there, who's now a conservative. But, he was truly my brother, Warrington's [Warrington Hudlin] mentor. And, really helped guide him. Got him--helped him get into Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], and helped him through all these times. A great writer, I think Henry Dumas was his name, he taught there. Eugene Redmond [Eugene B. Redmond], the poet. So, it was an amazing collection of, of artist and intellectuals, and there were all there in one place. And, my mother [Helen Cason Hudlin] took dance classes there, and Warrington learned drumming, and it was an incredible program (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What years was this? Do--what year is--?
Speaker 2: These are the early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: And, you were, so you were, probably about nine, nine, ten--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Eleven?
Speaker 2: No, 'cause I remember I had a size zero G (laughter), when I took martial arts class. And, there was big trip where they flew all of us to Washington, D.C. to perform for the president. And--for Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon]. So, that was a big deal 'cause we're all getting on a plane (laughter). And, so, so, yeah, that is--so, yeah.
Story_ID: 569403
Speaker 1: So, now where did, where- what was your elementary school?
Speaker 2: It was Alta Sita High School--I mean, Alta Sita Elementary School [East St. Louis, Illinois], which was a few blocks from--
Speaker 1: Alta?
Speaker 2: Sita, German name, hierogram. It was one of those classic old schools where I met my friends Marcus Canada, Pierre Paradise, (laughter), all these--and then there is a big explosion in East St. Louis [Illinois]. Again, as I mentioned before, crisscrossed by train tracks. So, two containers with liquid fuel ran into each other. And, it was a gigantic explosion. It was literally as if a nuclear bomb went off. Every glass window in the hou- in the city blew out, people's walls collapsed. It's an amazing gigantic disaster. And, the roof of my elementary school collapsed in. So, for my mother [Helen Cason Hudlin], she was like, "Great. This is the excuse we need to take 'em out of East St. Louis public schools and send 'em to a private school." And, my father [Warrington Hudlin, Sr.] was like, "Private school, I'm not paying for that." So she said, "Fine. I'll pay for it." And, sent me to an experimental private school out in Webster Groves [Missouri], which was as different as can be. But, there were a couple of other black kids from East St. Louis, who, I guess, all the moms got together and made a decision. So, we kind of carpooled out there, which was fantastic, a life changing experience.
Speaker 1: So, you were at Alta--
Speaker 2: Sita.
Speaker 1: Alta Sita from--?
Speaker 2: From, from kindergarten through second grade.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, like 1963, '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: Right. And, then in--from third grade on, I left.
Speaker 1: Oh, went longer than--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry. I'm (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, see, in third grade I would've had Mrs. Davis [Cleota Henry Davis], which is Miles' [Miles Davis] mother. But, I never had her, which is probably good 'cause she was strict (laughter). Everyone said she was quick with the ruler (laughter). Not that I was the get the ruler hit kind of kid, I was get the work done early kid, but (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, really, I was incorrect. It's probably 1968 maybe--
Speaker 2: Yeah. Sixty-eight [1968] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That you moved over.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I remember I had in my first grade photo, I had on this paisley jacket and a red shirt, and I borrowed my brother's medallion, and I had my little 'fro so I was looking, was looking fly (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, where were you (laughter)--?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 569404
Speaker 1: There's several questions I have for you. One, how, how was the hierarchy in the family? You're the youngest baby boy. But, what was the interaction between, you know, Warrington [Warrington Hudlin], you and--
Speaker 2: Christopher [Christopher Hudlin] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know, Christopher?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, Warrington and Christopher fought a lot because East St. Louis [Illinois] is the kind of town either you decide to not fit or you decide to fit in. And, the rest of our family had pretty much decided not to fit in. And, Chris wanted to fit in, which drove everyone else crazy. 'Cause it was just like, "Why you trying to fit in? This place is a disaster. This is the place to get out of." So, there was a lot of tension between the two of them. Everybody treated me great. I was the baby. So, you know, everyone had fought all the fights already. I got what I wanted. I did what I wanted. We had the most--by then our family was, you know, middle class, living in a working class town. So, I had the easiest, best of all of 'em.
Speaker 1: So, what were you as like as a young boy? I mean, were you internal, external? Were you--I mean, what, what was going on in your--?
Speaker 2: I was well behaved. I was very studious, big imagination. A very--talked a lot at school, quiet at home, you know. Well, I mean, I only know that because when my parents [Helen Cason Hudlin and Warrington Hudlin, Sr.] went to visit the school, kind of out in the county, my parents talked to everybody, then they talked to the black janitorial staff. Like, "What's really going on with my," (laughter), "with my son?" And, they were like--so, the janitors broke it down. They were like, "Ah," (laughter). I remember that. They were like, "What's the real deal?" (Laughter) And, so, yes, so, I remember them saying that like--I remember them saying that I, them say, "Wow, he's a big personality, talks a lot." And, they were like, "Wow, he's not like that at home." I was like, "Oh, I'm not like that at home. Okay."
Speaker 1: But, why was the difference? Why were you not like that at home?
Speaker 2: That's inter- well, you know, part of it, I was just trying to catch up and figure things out. I got infamous, I remember my, my brother say, "Reggie's [HistoryMaker Reginald Hudlin] just a black hole. He just takes everything in and doesn't give anything out." 'Cause I was just listening. I was just really trying to figure it all out. I just didn't feel the need to talk. And, everybody in the household was older than me and smarter than me. And, I just always felt the need to catch up. I remember a kid reading Time magazine. I remember, I learned to read fast 'cause I felt like when I read Time, there was all this stuff I didn't know in it. So, I needed to read faster so I can just figure out more stuff.
Speaker 1: Do you think Warrington introduced you to Time? I mean, who, what's a kid reading Time magazine for?
Speaker 2: It was in the house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, my family read--I mean, that was the thing. I mean, my fa- you know, my father read the paper so, you read. I mean, we were a reading household.
Story_ID: 569405
Speaker 1: Were you a household that had a dinner, you sat down at dinner and talk or were you--?
Speaker 2: We were a TV tray household, you know. We definitely ate in front of the TV. But, we were, in any--whenever the whole family got together, you know, all the cousins and aunts and uncles and stuff, a lot of debate. In fact, my father [Warrington Hudlin, Sr.] would tell me about when they were dead broke, living in New York [New York] in the Depression [Great Depression], one of the things they would do to amuse themselves is they would debate a topic. And, if one side was losing, my grandfather [Edward Hudlin] would switch sides, and bolster the other side. And, the point was, it's not a matter of who's right and wrong, it's being able to articulate the point. So, my family really comes from that mixing up kind of tradition. And, great storytellers, great debaters, very, again, politically minded. So, that was the environment I grew up in.
Story_ID: 569406
Speaker 1: So, you said you were introspective. You had an imagination. What were the things that you would think about and imagine?
Speaker 2: I remember, I mean, you know, my brother had a gigantic comic book collection. And, I would read that, and, so, I would take--and I had a lot of inherited toys. Like, you know, both of my older brothers' toys came down to me and whatever new toys I had. So, there was a, you know, the breezeway, which is between the kitchen, I mean, between the garage and the living room, was kind of like play area. And, I would take the different army men and Captain Action or whatever, and I would assign them different superpowers and different identifies and I would just make up stories with them. And, you know, my friends would come over and say, "Let's all play together." I was like, "How are we playing together? I don't, you don't know the story in my head. I'm telling the story here. You're interrupting my story." (Laughter) So, I didn't quite get that.
Speaker 1: So, and you, you also developed a love of co- well, your fa- you developed a love of comics from your brother, or you--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, from Warrington [Warrington Hudlin], yeah.
Speaker 1: From Warrington?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, what was in this collection?
Speaker 2: Everything. He had pretty complete runs like 'Avengers' ['The Avengers'], one through seventy-eight, 'Fantastic Four,' 'Spider-Man,' he had everything. It was an excellent collection which now, I'm in charge of taking care of. But, it was an impeccable collection at the, you know, the true golden age of comics.
Speaker 1: And, what about the comics resonated, were the same thing that resonated with him? I mean, he's, he's nine years, right--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He's nine years--?
Speaker 2: Yeah. But, I mean, I think the, the thing, I mean, that like saying, what is it about The Beatles that you like? You know, it's like, you know, what Stan Lee and Jack Kirby were doing in the '60s [1960s] were so imaginative, you know, he--they gave these characters psychology and neuroses. And, made them--they took ordinary people's problems and played them out on a cosmic scale. And, that was great. And, you know, beautiful art, really clever concepts that were very relatable. And, now, our generation is old enough and successful enough to, you know, make a movie like Spider-Man and X-Men, where you play those things out so that everyone can get it.
Story_ID: 569407
Speaker 1: So, now you, so you said that when you went to school out in Gro- Coo--
Speaker 2: Webster Groves [Missouri].
Speaker 1: Webster Groves that was a big change for you. Can you describe what that was like?
Speaker 2: Well, it was essentially all white. There were maybe one or two black kids, but basically all white. And, you know, middle class. I mean, upper middle-class. I remember one kid got dropped off in a Ferrari, which, you know, we never even saw a car like that before. But, it, I didn't feel the money difference so much. They were certainly very, you know, well to do people. But, it was, it was not kind of a rote school stuff, it was very--and it really encouraged, you know, kind of creativity and imaginative thinking and just a school with these great resources. So, it was really, it was a great, it was a great school.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, you at this point in terms of your family, Warrington [Warrington Hudlin], he had done well in school, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah. It was very interesting. He, in East St. Louis [Illinois] public schools, he was actually not doing so well. I remember very clearly, he had a teacher named Mr. Blank [ph.]. (Laughter) Again, you can't make these names up. Mr. Blank was a white teacher who would give him Cs on his papers 'cause they said, "Well, you clearly didn't write this. So, you must've plagiarized it." Because, he just couldn't believe that this kid could write that well. So, he had those kinds of experiences. So, then when [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham opened her program [Katherine Dunham Centers for Arts and Humanities, East St. Louis, Illinois], all of a sudden he went from Cs to A's, 'cause it was like, you know, and they were reading Frantz Fanon, 'Wretched of the Earth' ['The Wretched of the Earth'] (laughter). I mean, just like (makes noise), so suddenly he's doing fantastic. And, then Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] had the summer school program and that's when they actually wanted kids from the ghetto to come, as supposed to recruiting the black kid at Exeter [Phillips Exeter Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire], right. So, they come to East St. Louis and they said, "You should apply." And, Warrington said, "I'm gonna apply." And, he got in. He went there for the summer, did great, and goes, "I'm gonna apply there to go to college." And, my father [Warrington Hudlin, Sr.] was like, "Well, how? We can't afford it. Are you gonna get a scholarship?" So, he got in and got a scholarship. So, it all happened. So, yeah, there was a model of like, yeah, here's what to do.
Speaker 1: That was there for you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you look up to Warrington a lot from, from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Always?
Speaker 2: Always.
Speaker 1: So, how would you describe him as different from you?
Speaker 2: I'm more flexible, you know. Warrington is just like, here's what I wanna do, here's how I do it, and that's it, you know. I'm more like, "I don't know, let's see it, and try this way, let's take the middle path." He's like, "No." I would say that's the fundamental difference.
Story_ID: 569408
Speaker 1: So, there at the, at the, oh, I can't remember, gro- I keep remembering Grove, and not the first--
Speaker 2: Webster Groves [Missouri].
Speaker 1: Webster Groves (laughter), okay. At Webster Groves, you started you said in the third grade, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, are you the only black kid in the class? In your class (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. There's another, there's a couple of kids from East St. Louis [Illinois], Eric Foggy [ph.], whose parents had a sausage company. They lived like a block over (laughter). And, let me tell you something, Foggy sausage [Foggy's Sausage Co.], some really good sausage. Oh, my god! Had the spices. It was bumping. Anyway, they had a (laughter)--they would make it in the backyard. It was amazing. And, there was the mayor's son, he went there too, Williams [James Williams, Jr.]. So, and then there was, I think, a black kid or two at the school otherwise. But, I mean, a lot of those kids weren't, ultimat- weren't even in the same classes as me. So, I really felt kind of there on my own.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, did you remember any adjustment period on your part with the teachers or anything, or did you fall, sort of fall right in?
Speaker 2: I remember being terrified my first day. But, I felt terrified at every school I've ever been to on my first day (laughter), you know. Or, the beginning of a new year is always terrifying. It wasn't a prolonged adjustment period, you know, after a while you kind of make your friends and you kind of get in the groove of it.
Speaker 1: Now, that school, you were in 'til what, six--?
Speaker 2: 'Til sixth grade.
Speaker 1: And, then what happened next?
Speaker 2: Then, that's the school ended there. And, then I went to St. Francis Xavier [St. Francis Xavier School], which was a Catholic school in St. Louis [Missouri] proper, which is a uniform school. But, that was a good school. And, that was more of a truly mixed school. And, that was, you know, and that was, like I say, it was, you know, good solid middle school. Then I went to Assumption [Assumption Catholic High School] which was also a Catholic high school in East St. Louis [Illinois], which was also mi- it was kind of 60/40 when I got there, and 60/40 in the other direction by the time I left. So, it got blacker and blacker over the course of the four years.
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember discussions in the family about where you were to go to school?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: You know, what the decisions--can you, can you discuss what, I mean, what was being debated?
Speaker 2: Sure. I remember, particularly it became a real issue, again, you know, the issue of taking me out of East St. Louis public schools and going to private schools, that was the first big foohaha, between--
Speaker 1: So, your mother [Helen Cason Hudlin] was for it, your father [Warrington Hudlin, Sr.] against it? For, for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my, my father was just like, "Why are we paying extra money?" I like--he didn't get that.
Story_ID: 569409
Speaker 1: But he was there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was a kid.
Speaker 1: But wait, he was at the Dunham--he was at the Dunham cent- [Katherine Dunham Centers for the Arts and Humanities, East St. Louis, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: That's amazing. That's amazing.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I mean, and they had, you know, Dunham [HistoryMaker Katherine Dunham] had this incredible display case, where she had, you slave shackles and the posters of the--I mean so just, you know, you just saw that as a kid growing up, and you know Mor Thiam the drum- I mean that's the thing, it's like my later love for funk and hip hop it's like, it's grounded in hearing pure true African drumming. So when you hear absolute truth like what he was playing, I mean you just, it just, it's like true north. So okay, does it feel like that or not feel like that? 'Cause that is the truth.
Story_ID: 569410
Speaker 1: So, you were saying that at, you know, I was asking about the discussions about, you know, where to go to school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, yeah, the school.
Speaker 1: And you were saying--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in high school--
Speaker 2: Well, in high school, yeah, 'cause there was the big prep school that I ended up not getting into.
Speaker 1: Oh, you didn't get into that.
Speaker 2: Didn't get into. So, then there was CBC, Christian Brothers College [Christian Brothers College High School, St. Louis, Missouri] which was the--
Speaker 1: But, the black, the prep school was Washington--St., St.--
Speaker 2: No, St. Louis--
Speaker 1: St. Louis Washington--
Speaker 2: St. Louis, was it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: St. Louis High something [St. Louis University High School, St. Louis, Missouri]. So, then there was a, the second best school in the city was a military school. And, I remember, you know, and I got in, I was interviewing, and they were explaining. I said, "Well, what about art classes?" "Oh, we don't have art classes, but we have, you know, military class." And, something in my head goes, a place that doesn't have an art class is a bad place. So, I was gonna go and then Warrington [Warrington Hudlin] came back from college break, he was just like, "There's no way you going to some military school," and he just like shut the whole thing down, like (laughter). Even though he was the eldest son, but he had that kind of veto power. 'Cause he would just a di- and, he would just like, he would, he was, he was the boss. He wasn't the boss. My dad [Warrington Hudlin, Sr.] was the boss. My dad and mom [Helen Cason Hudlin] were the bosses. But, he was old enough and forceful enough to assert and was like shut it down. Said, "No, we're not doing that." Why Assumption [Assumption Catholic High School, East St. Louis, Illinois], yeah, "He goes to Assumption." So, that's how I end up going there. That was a, that was a Warrington call.
Speaker 1: So, what is the, what are you at that point? What--I mean, what kind of person are you when you are starting to enter high school? I mean, are you, you know--?
Speaker 2: Skinny, you know, insecure, kind of naive, you know, like, you know, boisterous with my friends, but you know, shy.
Speaker 1: And, what are the subjects that you like?
Speaker 2: Reading, writing, you know, history, sociology stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, bad at math, unfortunately. But, you know, that's, that's what I gravitate toward.
Speaker 1: And, were there teachers that were influencing you?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I always had a couple of good teachers. Not--I can't name a teacher like that's the teacher that saved my life. But, there are always two or three teachers that seem to get it.
Speaker 1: And, what, what in terms of--were you involved in any other activities? Were you still involved in the Dunham Center [Katherine Dunham Centers for Arts and Humanities, East St. Louis, Illinois] at this point or you had sort of moved passed that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. I was still involved there. Again, there on and off, you know. But, got back in particular the last two years, the last two or three years in high school when they started--when they brought capoeira in. Yeah, usually doing a bunch of different activities. Whether--you know, played soccer for a couple of years, and you know, Model UN [United Nations], you know, student council, stuff like that.
Story_ID: 569411
Speaker 1: Well, what are thinking you're wanting to do and be at this point? Or, is that even settled?
Speaker 2: Well, I think by the time I entered high school [Assumption Catholic High School, East St. Louis, Illinois], if not before, I had already gotten a re- rejection letter from Marvel [Marvel Entertainment Group, Inc.; Marvel Entertainment, LLC], 'cause I had applied for a job as a writer.
Speaker 1: At Marvel?
Speaker 2: Yes. It didn't work out. But, I was lying, I was a sixth grader so (laughter), you know. And--
Speaker 1: Well, you, wait, no, I wa- you said in sixth grade you applied for a--
Speaker 2: I don't know, maybe I don't know what grade I was in (laughter), I just said sixth or--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, I was--no, no are you saying six--before, in high school you applied for a job (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, like, so it was a backup plan (laughter), I decided I wanted to make movies. But, certainly, by the time I graduated I knew I wanted to make movies, you know, 'cause I was doing a lot of theatre, you know. And, by the time I was a senior, I was writing sketches, skits and stuff like that. I remember 'cause Warrington [Hudlin's brother, Warrington Hudlin] was a, you know, studying film at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], and you know, and it just--movies made sense to me because I loved the arts in general. And, I thought, okay, movies combine all of the seven lively arts, right? It's, you know, it's painting, it's photography, it's architecture, it's, it's literature, it's acting, it's all of them in one thing. It lasts the longest, and pays the best. So, I didn't see any reason why you wouldn't make movies. Like, it seemed perfect. So, that was a kind of conclusion I came to on my own. So, I was pitching things to Warrington, you know, over the phone all the time 'cause, you know, and then finally one Christmas, he gave me a book that was blank. And, he said, "Stop telling me, start writing it down." So, that's when I just started writing down stuff.
Speaker 1: So, what were some of the ideas that you would pitch him when he would call on the phone?
Speaker 2: They were just, you know, parodies like the $6.49 man, you know, parodying 'The Six Million Dollar Man,' which was big back then; just stuff like that. Later in college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I would just write a lot of snatches of conversation, stuff like that. Like, oh, that's kind of cool, you know, something like that, something like that, and you just--I mean, ultimately by the time I was a senior in college, I would just, you know, start threading those little idea fragments into 'House Party.' And, that just came from finding like minded fragments and putting them together like rubble stone (laughter).
Story_ID: 569412
Speaker 1: I wanna go back to--just a little bit, to when you were talking about, you said you were a TV, TV dinner, TV dinner family.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Which, you know, so--
Speaker 2: TV tray.
Speaker 1: TV tray. Sorry, TV tray. That's right, not TV dinner. TV tray. So, that meant that a lot of time was spent, you know, watching TV. What were some of the shows that you were watching, you know, growing up that sort of influenced you?
Speaker 2: 'All in the Family,' great breakthrough show. I remember watching 'Good Times,' until James [James Evans] died. Then, as a fam- we were just through with it then. We're like, "Can't kill the dad." (Laughter) I'm like, "We're out." 'Red Ball' [sic. 'Roll Out']. I remember that. It was about black soldiers in World War II [WWII] who drove the trucks. I remember loving that show. And, what else? T- you know, 'Movie of the Week' ['ABC Movie of the Week']. A lot, of course, Sunday morning stuff. I (unclear) on, 'Ultraman,' (gesture) with Hayata (laughter), you know. 'Tobor the 8th Man' ['8th Man'], about a little robot. That was early anime stuff.
Story_ID: 569413
Speaker 1: And, did you, do you think, okay, well, I'm gonna go on. So, you graduate from high school [Assumption Catholic High School, East St. Louis, Illinois]. What is it determined--where is, where--I'm not saying you graduate. Where do you decided and how do you decided where to apply to school?
Speaker 2: Well, I applied to six schools. Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island], BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], NYU [New York University, New York, New York]. Wait, Harvard, Yale, Columbia, Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], BU, NYU. Those were the backup schools (laughter), right. And, I remember going to my guidance counselor and say, "Look, can you give me one of those forms, because all these applications fees are really expensive. Can you give me one of these forms I can--?" They were like, "Well, does your family make under fifteen thousand dollars a year?" I'm like, "No. That ain't the point."  And, they were like, "Well, you know, Washington University [Washington University in St. Louis] is a very fine school right here in St. Louis [Missouri]." "I don't wanna go there. I'm trying to go out." So, after and of course, after we got into all those schools--she was like, "I knew you would." I was looking at her like, "And, you were no help at all. You were worthless and not encouraging." So, got into everything which was fantastic. And, Warrington [Hudlin's brother, Warrington Hudlin] said, "There's no real choice. You have to go to Harvard." And, he said, you know, not that he ever went to any Yale football games or anything 'cause he had a complete contempt for stuff like that. But, he said, "At halftime they unfold this big banner that said you may get in--'You may win the game, but we got into Harvard.'" And, he said, "That's the whole point." Like, "Go to--if you have a choice, go to that one, 'cause that's the one. I did Yale. You need to meet the Harvard people. You need to do that." So, it was like, it make sense to me. So, he made that decision too. (Laughter) So, that was that.
Story_ID: 569414
Speaker 1: So, that's 19--what you--?
Speaker 2: Graduate in '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: Seventy-nine [1979]. You graduated?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, from high school [Assumption Catholic High School, East St. Louis, Illinois] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) From high school? Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, now, he had already at this point, he had already co-founded BFF [Black Filmmaker Foundation], right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, are you aware of what's going on and what he's doing? I mean, are you--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, how are you--I'm just trying to understand the dynamics, was it everything he was doing, you were paying attention to and sort of part of? I'm just--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: You know, and were you visiting? Did you go visit him on campus [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. I, I mean, I, you know, would visit him on campus or when he was living in New York [New York]. I remember there was a Muslin restaurant around the block. We'd go there and eat great food for cheap. Go, to the Carnegie cinema [Carnegie Hall Cinema, New York, New York], seen movies by Costa-Gavras. And, he would say, "All right, this a foreign film." "Oh, it's okay." "It's got subtitles, you gotta read." "That's okay." "It's slow, things aren't gonna be blowing up." It was almost like a kind of a machismo. Can you like, can you take the grownup movie? So, I would see international films. There was a great series on PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] called 'The Japanese film with Edwin O. Reischauer' [ph.], which I loved. And, I would see all the classics from Kurosawa [Akira Kurosawa] and Ozu [Yasujiro Ozu]. And, then later, I remember my freshman year, at The Harvard Crimson, it was a headline that said, "Edwin O. Reischauer retires." I was like, "He was here at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I didn't even know. And, now he's retiring. I never even got a chance to meet him," and (laughter) you know. So, I, you know, became aware of foreign films at an early age. But, also I got to see independent films at an early age. So, early they weren't even called independent films back then. That's when they were called underground films. And, you know, that whole vibe of just, the fact that you could make movies outside of Hollywood, and, you know, that was not a notion. But, I, I was aware of it through my brother 'cause I would see these independent films. I would--saw, you know, 'Titicut Follies,' you know, classics of independent cinema as well as foreign film classics. So, by the time I'm studying film at Harvard, I'm not some super knowledgeable guy, but you know, I'm at least competitive. I had never touched a camera before, never seen a light meter, didn't know anything about that. Unlike all of my peers. But at least, I knew a little bit. In fact, I'd never actually went to Harvard before I came there to move in. Like, we didn't do college tours, they were just like, "You got in. You're going. What difference does it make what the campus looks like? You're going," you know. And, then my parents [Helen Cason Hudlin and Warrington Hudlin, Sr.] didn't go. I just came with a trunk of stuff, you know. But, I remember my father telling me how he enrolled himself in high school. And, how the principal always looked out for him. 'Cause it was just like, "I've been teaching a long time. I have never seen a kid enroll himself," so, you know. It was just, it wasn't like, it wasn't a big deal at the time. It's just that when you see other people, you go, "Oh, it's a big deal, huh?" (Laughter) So, so, yeah, I was aware of what Warrington [Warrington Hudlin] was doing. I ended up putting together little black film festivals every year at Harvard, and I would have him come down. I'd show a bunch of different black independent films. So, I was kind of getting in that mindset then.
Story_ID: 569415
Speaker 1: Let me ask, when you came in [to Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], who was in your class that we would know of?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, that--okay.
Speaker 2: Lot of folks. Mike Ferris [Michael Ferris] is the co-writer of a bunch of big movies like, 'Terminator 3' ['Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines'] and 'U-571' [sic.], and 'Breakdown' [sic.]. Jon Mostow [Jonathan Mostow] directed those two movies. Peter Rader wrote the original script for 'Waterworld.' Lisa Henson, of course, from the Henson family who was an executive at Sony [sic.]. Now, she is a producer. Of course, a lot of folks are on 'The Simpsons' writing staff. Conan O'Brien was '95 [1995], so, I didn't really know him. Although just recently, we were corresponding 'cause he was on 'TMZ' or something and they were asking if he was gonna host the Oscars [Academy Awards], and, he said, "Oh, I'm trying to host the BET Awards." So, I wrote him. I was like, "You can host any time." (Laughter) So, he wrote back, he was like, "It's good to know I have a home at BET [Black Entertainment Television]," (laughter) you know, so. So, yeah, there was a lot of people there that went on, a surprising number of people who went on to work at a pretty high level in Hollywood.
Story_ID: 569416
Speaker 1: And, so, you--describe your college years though. I mean, you definitely came in interested in film. Now, this is not a film school.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You know, so, how are you--okay.
Speaker 2: Warrington's [Hudlin's brother, Warrington Hudlin] whole thing was, it's easy to learn how to make a movie. You gotta learn what to make a movie about. So, the idea was to get a well rounded education, which seemed like a great i- a great approach to me. So, and, was also when I men- when you mention college, I think about my roommates. So, I feel very fortunate that I put together pretty much by the end of my first day there, I found my crew. And, they were my crew pretty much for the, for the whole four years. And, we each had a different interest. One guy was pre-med. One guy went on to business school. One guy became a professional musician. One guy became a, an academic. But, that's who we set out to be when we got there and that's who we all are now.
Speaker 1: So, who are their names?
Speaker 2: Clinton Carter who's a physician in, in Atlanta [Georgia]. His wife is also a physician. Martin Davidson is a professor at the Darden business school at UVA [University of Virginia Darden School of Business, Charlottesville, Virginia]. Jake Slichter [Jacob Slichter] is a musician. He won a Grammy [Grammy Award] for a song called 'Closing Time' with his group Semisonic. Kermit Billups is a, went to Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] and is now--works for a large firm in the Baltimore [Maryland] area, and me.
Speaker 1: So, it's not like they were, they were your hanging buds, but they weren't interested in film like you. That's--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They weren't, they were interested, I mean, that's the thing, we were all interested in what each other was doing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, that was a great thing. We all shared what we were learning with each other, which was fantastic. And, we still do that now. So, that was great. At the end of the first--'cause I had a set of roommates and I was like--I shook them right away and, started hanging out with these dudes (laughter). And, by the end of the day, and the end of the day--Clint's older brother was at the dental school [Harvard School of Dental Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts], or the medical school [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts] or dental school. And, so, he had a house on the campus. So, we went to--he said, "Let's go by my brother's house." So, we went over there. And, we met his brother and his wife. His wife was [HistoryMaker] Debra Lee. Who, (laughter) and who was at the law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And, so, I remember there, I remember there was this new records that they had by Lenny White called 'Peanut Butter.' So, he played 'Peanut Butter.' And, I was like, "That's a jam." (Laughter) So, at the end Clint said, "You want anything?" You know, meaning something to eat. I said, "Yeah, you can play that 'Peanut Butter' record again." He was like, "Then, speak up then." So, he played that jam, 'Peanut Butter,' some more. (Laughter) And, and, then I never saw Deb again until years later. And, you know, she had remarried, da-da-da, and you know, she was one of the top execs of BET [Black Entertainment Television]. I was like, I remember, I think I met you at my first day at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]." And, I told her the story and she was like, "Oh, my god, I can't believe it." So, we, yeah, so we met then, and then later of course, Lenny White and Marcus Miller did the score for 'House Party,' my first film. And, I was just like, I just can't believe how all these little, how small the world is. So, anyway, so that became my crew. And, we are still tight now. We don't see each other that much. But, when we do, it is as if five minutes have elapsed.
Story_ID: 569417
Speaker 1: Now, what was significant about the Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] experience for you? I wanna go to the 'House Party,' but, I wanna just have a sense of--
Speaker 2: Sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, because college is a time of maturation, and--
Speaker 2: Sure. Harvard was great for a lot things. One is, it really is, I mean, I really--if my kids can go, I really want them to go because, because of Harvard's reputation you go, "Okay. This is the best of the brightest," right. That's the rep [reputation]. So, if I can hang with these people, I can hang anywhere. And, when you get there, you realize, yeah, you know what, there's a lot of smart people. I'm smart. I'm right here with them. There's a few geniuses. The same way in life, there are some geniuses. I knew some geniuses in East St. Louis [Illinois], right. So, the same percentages hold no matter what context you're in. And, it just helps break the mythology of whether it's, you know, white supremacy or classism or whatever it is, you just go like, right, got it. A lot of this is hype. There are some people here who know how to take test well, who aren't very smart. There're some people here who are too smart for their own good, and they get in their way, and they're underachievers. You just really peep out all the levels of game at the highest level. And, it just demystifies a bunch of stuff. So, it makes you--that as much as anything else you learn and you learn so much. And, you make great contacts and all that. But, you know, demystifying that is really important. And, obviously, very important for someone like myself from East St. Louis where it's, you know, literally the blackest city in America. So, that was great. You just go, okay, no need for any inferiority feelings.
Story_ID: 569418
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, what was the black community that you came into at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], though? What was it at the, you know, at that particular time? Because you're coming, I don't wanna say a generation later, but sort of a different time than your brother, you know, and the time he was at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] because it's the formation of the black studies department at Yale and so, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. And, you can really, I really feel like I was there at a hinge period in social history. That, you know, the seniors were there--were kind of the last of the kind of, come black nationalist movement. And, we certainly were a political bunch. But, it was already--figured out a new way of expressing it. You know, and, we were there literally at the beginning of hip hop. Where I remember hanging out with some friends from New York [New York] and going to the rooftop and going to, you know, Broadway International [ph.] on 148th Street, you know, going, you know, hip hop at the very, very beginning. So, and, you know, hip hop changed a lot of things in terms of, you know, how people thought. And, that was before any of that happened, but you know, it was, it was interesting time to be there. You also had, again, the recruiting policies had changed a little bit. Again, they're still getting their black numbers, but, there black numbers from St. Paul's [St. Paul's School, Concord, New Hampshire] and Exeter [Phillips Exeter Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire] as opposed from East St. Louis [Illinois], and Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: So, did you, you didn't feel, just because you had Warrington [Warrington Hudlin] as a brother, you didn't feel it was, and you know, you had a certain level of schooling, you didn't feel like it was a jump? You didn't feel like you were a bunch of--among a bunch of preppy other black people?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Absolutely. It was definitely preppy others. I mean (laughter), again, that first week, probably day two, you meet the president of the college. So, it's a formal, you know, dress.
Speaker 1: So, who was the president at the time?
Speaker 2: Derek Bok.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, so, everyone in the room had on the same outfit. Blue blazer, either a white or blue shirt, a, you know, a either yellow or red tie, khaki pants. Literally, everyone in the room except for me. I had on a white jacket with the collar flipped up (laughter), a loose knit tie, sleeves pushed up. I literally, I looked, and I looked around and I said, "Nobody in this room knows how to dress but me." I mean, and it was just like, "Wow!" I mean, I did not think, "Oh, I'm inappropriately dressed." I was like, "All y'all are whack, and my game is tight." (Laughter) That's East St. Louis. See, that's when ignorance works for you (laughter). That's very, very important, 'cause that's how I felt. So, yes, by the time I graduated I was like, yeah, maybe, okay, I maybe--you know, it was like, "Maybe I'll wear an alligator shirt [Lacoste]." You know, like I finally, you know, opened up to it. But, so, yes, I felt definitely surrounded by other, and which is why I appreciated my roommates so much. Because they felt as other as I did. You know, Clint [Clinton Carter] was from Jackson, Tennessee; real country, you know. My man, Martin [Martin Davidson] from Cleveland [Ohio], you know, arguing like, "There's no reason to spend more than forty dollars on a pair of shoes." (Laughter) You know, so we were all country, backward, smart determined cats. And, that's, that was our crew. And, you know, we reinforced each other as we dealt with everybody else.
Story_ID: 569419
Speaker 1: So, tell me what classes are you taking [at Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]? Who are--you know, are there any teachers that are influencing you there? How are you honing? Is your, is your interest in film, is it being honed internally but, also at the same time with BFF [Black Filmmaker Foundation]? I mean, I'm just trying to--?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean, there were a couple of really good professors. Who really sticks out for me is Ross McElwee. He came a couple of years in to the program and he was making--it was a very documentary film oriented program. Not, into fiction films at all. Maybe a little bit of experimental but not even really that. It was really, you know, doc- cinema verite documentary; very strict, definition. Don't talk to the camera, no stand up interviews, nothing like that, very purest approach. And, Ross, Ross' movies like 'Sherman's Way' [sic. 'Sherman's March'], and they were like documentary equivalence of Woody Allen movies. They were funny, they were personable, they were relatable to us in a way that a lot of the other stuff was all very interesting but too cold. I was like, "Oh, this is another way of doing." For some reason, our year, our year we all went left. Like, John Mostow [Jonathan Mostow] made a horror movie. I made a, you know, a teen comedy about hip hop ['House Party']. Everybody, like, almost no one did the kind of movie the stud- the school was trying to teach us to make. We all wanted to do something else. And, I think after our year, they changed the rules to make sure that would never happen again (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, what year is this? Is this your soph- ?
Speaker 2: Class of '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: But, no, is this your senior project or is it--?
Speaker 2: Senior projects. What happens is, they have what's called visual and environmental studies. This--they're embarrassed to have any kind of arts programs. So, if you're gonna study arts, it's an honors only program where you study film, photograph, graphic arts, architecture. Actually, a very good program. Took photograph the first time. Loved it. Took a zillion pictures. A lot them are actually really good. I look back going, "Wow, I was good." At that moment in time, I was in the zone and I took some great pictures.
Speaker 1: Now, I'm just--about the program, the program was a declared major program or it was (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You had to apply.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you had to have a certain GPA [grade point average].
Speaker 1: And, you applied what year?
Speaker 2: Freshman year. At the end of freshmen year you apply. Then you start sophomore year--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --through senior. So, by your senior year, you're doing--the first two years, you do group films. And, then your senior year, you do your own film. So, like for example, the group film our second year, there was a group of people who just said, "Let's make a movie about people who work at night." I was like, "You mean, you're gonna stay up all night in the Boston [Massachusetts] cold?" And, then there was another group of guys, almost all of whom were on The Harvard Lampoon who said, "Let's go to Daytona Beach [Florida] and make a movie." I was like, "I'm with that group. I'm rolling with the cats going to Daytona." So, we dr- we got someone's mother's station wagon, then we drove from Boston to Daytona Beach. So, just on the way down, they were just doing this Lampoon style humor, and some was very juvenile, you know. "You can't hear it, let me turn it up." And, like, like a million ways of giving you the finger. Just, just that whole comedic sensibility. So, by the time I'm done with the movie, I'm drenched in that comedic sensibility, which later would be the comedic sensibility of the era, right. That would define 'Saturday Night Live.' That would define 'The Simpsons,' you know, that was the comic point of view of our era. And, I got a crash course making that movie. That movie was also interesting because, John Payson, one of the group, after graduating took a job with this new network called MTV [Music Television; MTV]. He was working as a PA [production assistant] and then kind of worked his way up. And, he showed them our, our group project. Like, "Hey, can you show this--you gotta show this on the network." And, they said, "No, we're not gonna show it but it's a really good idea." And, that's where 'MTV Spring Break' came from, you know, our, our movie. And, then John went on to direct a movie called 'Joe's Barbershop' [sic. 'Joe's Apartment'], which is a musical about roaches. It's really, really, quite clever. And, he actually had me act in the movie which was insane. I kept going, "Don't you want a real actor? I know people. This new guy Chris Rock, he's really funny." He was like, "No, no, I want you to do it, Reggie [HistoryMaker Reginald Hudlin]." So, I did the voice of Rodney Roach in the movie. And, I acted and I sang. "Funky Towel" is my number, which was a lot of fun. Almost no one has seen the movie because it's about roaches. I could not get my girlfriend or my mother [Helen Cason Hudlin] to see this movie, but I'm in it.
Story_ID: 569420
Speaker 1: You did this, you did the project for your junior, you know, year. Now, when did the idea of 'House' ['House Party']--how did that, when did that originate? Was it, did it originate because of an assignment? Was it percolating inside, I mean just--?
Speaker 2: Well, that junior, I mean, during the summers I would go work at the Black Filmmaker Foundation [BFF].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, that particularly--I was working all summer to save enough money 'cause I knew I wanted to make my senior year project. And, I spent all summer working on a script. And, then literally the last two days of the summer I had a--I was listening to a song, 'Bad Boy (Having a Party)' by Luther Vandross. And, as an exercise I would imagine a music video to a song. So, I was like, "Wow, that'd be a cool video." And, I was like, "That'll be a cool movie." And, I just banged out the script like in a week. After working all summer on this other script. And, then it was just like, "Wow, now I got two scripts." And, I showing them around to everybody and finally they were like, "You should do the 'House Party' one." So, that was it. So, I did--
Speaker 1: What was the other script?
Speaker 2: It was called the 'Cold Waves.' It was about this white kid that was a drummer in an all-black band. And, I ended up shooting that movie the summer after I graduated. So, I did two shorts. And, then it's funny 'cause then later I wrote feature--film scripts of each and sent them both to New Line [New Line Cinema, Los Angeles, California], then New Line eventually picked 'House Party.'
Speaker 1: So, now, tell me what was the short? What was, how long was the short?
Speaker 2: The short was twenty minutes long, twenty-one minutes long. It's the local kids from the Boston [Massachusetts] area and it's basically the same plot as the feature, you know. Father, starts with the father saying, "You can't go out. It's a big party. Forget about it." (Makes noise) He sneaks out anyway, you know has a great time, da-da-da, meets girl, you know, the party bust up 'cause it get out of control, sneaks back in, this father's waiting for him, he gets a whipping. So, same, same basic peaks.
Speaker 1: And, what, talk about, you said you did it, you cast it out of Boston, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, how long did it take you, was it the whole year that you took to, to do the short or?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I think so. I think it took forever. You know, we were shooting, you know, this shot here and there. It wasn't like some tight production schedule. You shoot when you can. When can you get a cast? When can you get available--we're shooting this, this, you know, wonderful gentlemen let us shoot in his building. Then one day we actually broke a window. I was like, "Oh god, we have to finish shooting the movie before he gets back." So, we shot as much as we could. (Laughter) Then he came back, and it was like, that was the end of that. So, we had to do a couple of pick up shots at Harvard's campus [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] but that's pretty much it.
Speaker 1: So, now, were you showing parts of it to your brother [Warrington Hudlin] as you were sort of going along or not? Or, you just submitted it as class project, and--?
Speaker 2: Well, it was my senior thesis, I think I probably showed him rough cuts. But, you know, he was in New York [New York] and I was in Boston. So, I'm just, you know, working with my professors, with my classmates and so on. In fact, I remember near graduation, I guess there was some black folk from Hollywood. I remember [HistoryMaker] Denise Nicholas came and looked at it. She was there with a couple of other people, but I remember Denise. So, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, now, what other, so at that time, you said that the--they changed the rules after that because--were you kidding about that or were you--?
Speaker 2: I don't know for sure that's true. But, (laughter) I think it is true 'cause they were like, all these people are doing these silly fiction films, and it was just not what the direction of the program was. I mean, they didn't have a class that taught screenwriting or anything like that. They weren't encouraging of that.
Story_ID: 569421
Speaker 1: So, you graduate [from Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I'm just trying to understand also what is informing you, you know, you said it was the beginning of, you know, we're at the beginning of the hip hop era, you know. What are the things that are sort of informing you because, you know, that was 'House Party,' it's popularity was that it just sort of took things, you know, it exposed, and it hit a chord, you know, and it blew up.
Speaker 2: Well, I remember when I was kid, I mean, like in middle school, and remember seeing two movies that really deeply affected me. One was 'Animal House.' I was just like (makes a face), I had never seen the like--it was just a perfect film. Just unbelievable funny. Every frame, every inch was genius to me. I was like, "I gotta make a movie like 'Animal House'." And, then later there was a screening at a, at a library I feel like, and I saw 'American Graffiti' and that blew me away. I was like, "I gotta make a movie like that. Why don't black people have movies like that?" You know, 'cause most of the bo- I mean, you had the blaxploitation films of the '70s [1970s]. And, then you have kind of black independent films which were all super political. And, I dig both of them. But, I thought, there's another path. Why can't they just be movies about regular black people? You know, why can't I make a movie like 'Risky Business'? So, 'House Party' I was like, well, I'm gonna do 'Risky Business' about where we're at. So, that was it. It was just like, the most shocking thing you can do is to depict regular black life. And, I still believe that is absolutely the most shocking thing you can do.
Story_ID: 569422
Speaker 1: So, now, when you, so you turn in your class project, you graduate [from Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and what are you thinking you're gonna do at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, definitely make movies.
Speaker 1: But, people just don't--
Speaker 2: I know. There was no real road--no real roadmap.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I mean, people just don't just go out a make movie--I mean, you can dream like that but I'm just--
Speaker 2: No. And, that's the thing.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: There's just no real plan. Other than, I do think I'm going to make movies in Hollywood. There's no roadmap, there's no ladder, there's nothing like that, right. But I--
Speaker 1: Who are your mentors besides, at that point, besides Reg- your--Warrington [Hudlin's brother, Warrington Hudlin]?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: No. None (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. But, there had to be a way to get there. And, but, I know I can make films independently. And, the goal, the goal was to make a feature film and play two weeks at the cinema studio. That'd be incredible. Like, can you imagine that? To have a movie that plays for two weeks in a theater? That was, man, dreaming big. Dreaming big. So, that, that was the plan. And, so, you know, I'm applying for grants. I'm taking all kinds of jobs, you know, I teach at University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] for a year. I work in advertising for a little while. Just whatever hustle that would give me access to a camera, right. 'Cause like, whatever else I'm doing, I'm working on the other plan. And, you know, so, I'm making a few more short films stuff like that, and applied for grants.
Story_ID: 569423
Speaker 1: And, then 'She's Gotta Have It' came out and everything changes.
Speaker 2: So, tel- that's what I was gonna ask 'cause 'She's Gotta Have It' came out in 1985 [sic. 1986].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Right? So, what does that, what do you mean by everything changes?
Speaker 1: Well, all of sudden Hollywood's like, "Hey, there's another kind of filmmaker that's resonating with the audience. We don't know how to make that. Let's figure out who these people are. Is there another one? Can we buy it?" I remember a big party at Nelson George's house and, you know, Nelson is the hub of all things. In fact, if you haven't done Nelson, you really--
Speaker 2: We haven't done--I don't remember--
Speaker 1: That's the number one person you need to profile in this thing (laughter). It's like what you need, a day (laughter). So, we're at Nelson's house, so [HistoryMaker] Russell Simmons is there. And, I know he's working on--he's planning this movie called 'Tougher Than Leather,' and I'm pleading with him to let him--let me direct 'Tougher Than Leather.' He's like no my partner is gonna direct it. And, later I find out he's just like, "Who's this Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] guy? He doesn't know anything about hip hop and wants to do this movie?" So, I was like--and, Spike [Spike Lee] gives me script. 'Cause Spike lives down the street.
Speaker 2: Now, do you--how did you meet Spike? Like, I mean, do you know him at this point? And, I'm just wondering if he was in the BFF [Black Filmmaker Foundation] circle or not?
Speaker 1: Yeah. What happened was, Warrington [Hudlin's brother, Warrington Hudlin] in 1979, 1980, does this big film conference in New York [New York], and everyone's there. There's filmmakers from Africa, all kinds of folks. [HistoryMaker] Julie Dash is there. Just all kinds of folks are there. And, there is this film student from NYU [New York University, New York, New York], comes in at the last minute. Warrington waives the fee, lets him in. And, he shows his first film, 'The Answer,' which is a student film. He's doing it at NYU. So, that's when I meet Spike. So, Spike's there and he goes, "Yeah, A and M Films want me to do the Otis Redding story. I don't wanna do it. I gave him your name Reggie [HistoryMaker Reginald Hudlin]. Here's the script." So, I'm like, 'Sittin' on the Dock of the Bay' [ph.]. Fine, I'm in." So, I'm so--I call them up--
Speaker 2: Wait, but year is this? I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry. This was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Sittin' on the Dock of Bay'? I mean--okay.
Speaker 1: No, no. This was, this was--
Speaker 2: Is this, this is not a--
Speaker 1: This is eighty--what year did 'She's Gotta Have It' come out?
Speaker 2: Eighty-five [1985].
Speaker 1: Yeah. Eighty-five [1985]. It's '85 [1985].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, I called them on Sunday. (Laughter) 'Cause I'm like, "Hey, I want a job." So, finally I get a call back. And, they go--I said, "Well, I love Otis Redding." They said, "Okay. But, we're not doing that movie. We're gonna do a movie, 'Janet Jackson and The Time'." I'm like, "Whoa. That beats Otis, Otis Redding any day," (laughter). So, I get my--they fly me out to Hollywood. I get my first Hollywood job writing the movie 'Janet Jackson and The Time,' which never happens. But, the money from writing that script--for, A, I learned how to write a script. I had never written hundred pages of anything--
Speaker 2: Wait a minute, okay. Okay, Spike Lee has success with 'She's Gotta Have It,' okay. Then they contact him, am I--
Speaker 1: About an Otis Redding movie.
Speaker 2: Otis Redding movie.
Speaker 1: So, I--
Speaker 2: But, he doesn't wanna do it?
Speaker 1: No. He says, "You should call Reggie, he's talented." So, I call them, they call me back. They say, "But, great we wanna meet with you but not about the Otis Redding movie. About this movie with Janet Jackson and The Time," which is a hundred times more interesting than Otis Redding. So, they fly me out, and A and M Films has the old Charlie Chaplin Studios [A and M Studios; Jim Henson Company Lot, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 2: Can I just ask, are you showing anything? I mean, do they wanna see some of your work?
Speaker 1: Yeah. I showed 'em--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --'House Party,' and you know.
Speaker 2: They like--okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, it was, you know, one of those people. It's interesting--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --like now, if you've written a black play on the Chitlin' Circuit like Tyler Perry, you can get a job in Hollywood, okay. So, that's what it was for black film in '85 [1985]. So, they were like, like you're a kid, you're paying your tui- like, nothing to lose, right. So, they fly me out, (makes noise) give me the job. I'm like, "How can I write a hundred pages?" If, if you took everything I wrote all together it's not a hundred pages (laughter), right. So, I write this script. It's a hundred and fifty pages of mess. So, the executive works with me and we beat it into shape. And, you know, and it's still not great but, it's a, kind of a movie. But, then you know, it goes nowhere, right. But, with that movie, I have enough money to buy a computer. And, with a computer I can write, I don't have to write longhand and ask some friend of my brother's to type it on a computer. So, I buy a computer, and that's then I write the spec for 'House Party.'
Speaker 2: So, how much did you get paid on that job? That first job, do you remember?
Speaker 1: Forty thousand dollars I think, forty-five thousand, something like that. They just gave me money. I mean, from what I've been living on. You know, 'cause I said, "I can buy a computer and still catch cabs." 'Cause, I always says, "My thing is like, I'm the guy going home with my date at three in the morning on the subway." So, I'm like, "I can catch a subway [sic. cab] late at night." I was living. I was balling out. I could eat in a restaurant. (Laughter) You know, I was balling out.
Story_ID: 569424
Speaker 1: Reggie [HistoryMaker Reginald Hudlin], can I ask another one? Was 'House Party' always named 'House Party'?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Even when it was a student film it was--
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Student film it had an exclamation point (laughter), but, yes. So, yes, so, so, I got that job. I got another job for New World cinema [New World Pictures] doing 'Cold Waves,' which is that other short I had done. And, then--so, I had those two scripts. And, then, Helena Echegoyen who's an exec at New Line [New Line Cinema, Los Angeles, California] heard about BFF [Black Filmmaker Foundation], heard about the short films, you know, and then New Line eventually bought 'House Party.'
Speaker 1: So, tell me about that deal. I mean, was it--had you learned enough about how to make a deal, you know, when they bought it or was that really your, that's your first deal?
Speaker 2: Well, the amazing thing was, like, a couple of weeks before, Nelson George said, "You should meet this attorney. He seems like a cool guy." So, I said, "Fine." So, Stephen Barnes, actually I think flew to New York [New York] to meet with me. And (laughter) he went up to our apartment on the 4th--no, 49th [Street] and Broadway, which was not remotely impressive in any way. And, he took me completely seriously. And, me and my brother [Warrington Hudlin] quizzed him like, to no end. And, we said, "I like him." Then the next week, got an offer for a Hollywood deal. It was like, "Wow, I need an attorney." So, he became our attorney and that was that.
Speaker 1: So, what, what kind, I mean, was it a question of what kind of deal to negotiate?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, you know, we were very suspicious of Hollywood. Looking back, it's all--a little bit, I mean, we end up striking an extremely good deal. Looking back, I remember asking a college friend of mine, David Heyman, who has produced all the Harry Potter movies. And, his dad [John Heyman] was a film producer. So, I was like, "Well, what's a good deal?" And, he was like, "Just take any deal they offer you." I remember being very resentful of that advice. Looking back, I understand that advice, 'cause it's true. At the end of the day, get in. Make a movie. Whatever you, you know, like if the movie works, you'll get paid off the second film. But, we knew enough and Stephen was a very aggressive negotiator so, we ended up getting a very good deal.
Story_ID: 569425
Speaker 1: So, now, talk, let's talk about the, the, you know, just the making of it. That--it's one thing, so, that is what month in 19--you're saying that's still in 1985 or is that 1986, '85 [1985]?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh.
Speaker 1: Wait a minute (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it was--no, no, we made that movie--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: In '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: Eighty-nine [1989]. I'm sorry, that's right.
Speaker 2: 'Cause it came out in '90 [1990].
Speaker 1: That's right, 'cause you had, you'd been working, you worked as a copywriter at Ogilvy and Mather--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --before--okay. And, then, then there's the whole thing of all the film festivals, you know, that were going on. You were involved with that with Warrington [Hudlin's brother, Warrington Hudlin]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. Also. Now, that can--before I go to the making of, of 'House Party,' can we just talk a little bit about the, the film festivals and what that sort of represented at that time?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know, you know, you said that Warrington had done the big one, right?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Back, let's see, you know, in the early '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That was before--
Speaker 2: Seventy-nine [1979], yeah.
Speaker 1: Seventy-nine [1979]. And, then, and then, there were film festivals sort of going around in different places around the country, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were, well--
Speaker 1: 'Cause there was a guy in, I know in Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yeah. Floyd Webb.
Speaker 1: Floyd Webb. Right.
Speaker 2: Right. There's a few black film festival here and there. And, there's al- and Warrington, every summer he would do a screening in a borough over the course of a week or whatever. Like, literally like, kind of, kind of inspired by the whole, kind of Cuban thing of like. You know, just take a film to where people are, show them different representation of themselves, that kind of attitude. So, we, we'd have screening in discos, in roller rinks, all kind of unlikely places. And, it was great, 'cause, you know, that's--it was pre-YouTube, pre-cable, where're you gonna see black independent film except though this approach? 'Cause, you know, he had done a bunch of independent film successful, showed them in the film festival in Europe and whatever. And, it's just like, there's no mechanism that really is aggregating all these black films and figuring out how to address the issue of distribution institutionally. So, he did through creating the Black Filmmaker Foundation [BFF]. So, I got was--got that and was working in the foundation and it was great 'cause you learn a lot of stuff. You learned about projection, and negotiating with people and, you know, getting into the advertising, and you know, per- and press 'cause you just have to, it was just all do it yourself. So--
Speaker 1: Soup to nuts, like soup to nuts (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 569426
Speaker 1: So, what, what do you think though was important about that period of time? You know, you were, you were starting to say that, you know, after, you know, 'She's Gotta Have It,' you know, it was a case sort of, of being at the right place at the right time. But, what, what is, if you look back now, what do you think about that period of time where these film festivals are being sho- you know, shown? It's, you know, we're talking really, you know, almost twenty years out of, you know, mid-'60s [1960s]. So, I'm just trying--
Speaker 2: Well, it's, it's, what you see, and I think looking back with the advantage of in the rearview of history, you have the growth of hip hop. You have a TV show like 'In Living Color.' You have in the comic book world, you have Milestone comics [Milestone Media] like these black publishers. You have the rise of groups like Public Enemy. You have people trying to figure out black nationalism in a kind of, in, you know, in a kind of--
Speaker 1: Post. Post?
Speaker 2: Yeah. It's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Post-'60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: And, what, (unclear), and then, yeah, in a post-'60s [1960s] world. Like you know what, the revolution didn't come, the revolution ain't coming. We're--this is the world we're living in. How do we find our way in? And, how do we get our piece of the pie, you know, by our own terms? So, that's really what it is. You have a bunch of folks who have those same political ideologies but it's not about, you know, it's just like, no, we gotta take a different approach. And, that's a really golden era in a lot of ways. You know, the rise of black clothing companies, right? With Karl Kani and all that stuff. I mean, all these, all those different ideas, you know, are happening in all these different mediums, all these different platforms. Everyone's trying to figure it out, figure it out. And, it gets perfected ten or twenty years later. But, everyone's figuring it out.
Speaker 1: So, you, what are you learning though? You said, you start looking and, I mean, besides the technical things, you know, you said you learned about projection and things like that. But, what else are you learning about filmmaking? You know, by, by just taking and seeing what's out there, you know, and what's what as much as what is out there as what is not there. I mean, what are you sort of observing and seeing?
Speaker 2: Well, I wanna make commercial films, and you know, and I don't mean that from a, I wanna make money, although nothing wrong with that. It's like literally, I don't wanna speak to the converted, I wanna be sitting there, showing my movie in a basement to twelve people. All right, that's a jerkoff. If you are politically minded and you're using film as a weapon than you need to be speaking to a broad audience. And, if that's what, you know, and if, yeah, you can do that if you want to, you know, get with your little crew. But, that just feels like a waste. So, I'm always trying to figure out like, how do you say it in way that connects with a large number of people.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, what does, so, there, you didn't have any issues about artist versus filmmaker? You know, being an artist versus a filmmaker. You didn't have--
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Those are all false.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: False arguments.
Story_ID: 569427
Speaker 1: So, let's talk about or at least we're gonna talk about the making of 'House Party.' Okay. So, your project gets green lighted. What does that mean?
Speaker 2: It means, they're gonna make the movie.
Speaker 1: Did you know what it meant at the time?
Speaker 2: Sure. You're green lighting, you're budgeting, you're casting, you're getting a crew, finding locations, you're making a movie.
Speaker 1: So, who do you assemble as your team?
Speaker 2: There's an executive at New Line [New Line Cinema, Los Angeles, California], who becomes our executive producer [Gerald T. Olson].
Speaker 1: And, who's that?
Speaker 2: Oh, god. I blanking out.
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: Good guy, though. He, big blues fan. I remember going to his house and, you know, and he's playing a blues record. And, you go, "Oh, yeah. I like the blues." He goes, "Really?" And, then he starting rattling--you know, "Hey. I don't like it like that. Like you got the encyclopedic knowledge that I ain't got." But, like a cool guy, supportive of what we're doing. And, I remember being on 42nd Street and there was TV outside and they were showing the trailer for the movie. And, the movie was the 'Evil Dead' ['Evil Dead II'], and, the trailer would play and there'd be two people, five people, ten people. By the time the trailer finished people would just buy tickets and go in. I mean, it was selling tickets, this trailer was so hot. And, it was just so many great shots. There's one shot, it was the point of view of an evil demon that ran through the woods up to this little cabin, ran through the cabin, run through the house, through--into the back, there's a guy chopping wood, the guy looks up, and then the demon goes into his throat. It was all this steady cam point of view. I was like, "That's incredible. That's who I want making my movie." So, we found who the cinematographer was, Peter Deming, you know, who worked with Sam Raimi. And, you know, he became the DP [director of photography] for 'House Party.' And, it's funny, 'cause he's, he's worked with me, with the Hughes brothers [Albert Hughes and Allen Hughes], with David Lynch, (laughter) you know, he's a favorite DP of a lot of really talented filmmakers. But, like, I was early in (laughter). We had a really good crew throughout. We had a really good crew.
Speaker 1: So, how long did it take to make a, you know, make 'House Party'? What was the--from the time that it was green lighted to--?
Speaker 2: It all came together pretty quickly. I mean, it was like a sho- thirty day shooting schedule, didn't have a lot of time. And, we just get it done.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, did you, but at the time, I mean, on hindsight, I know that, you know, it all seems like (unclear), but did you know pretty much what to do? I mean, L.A. [Los Angeles, California] was a new thing for you, wasn't it? I mean, even though you had done the Janet Jackson thing ['Janet Jackson and The Time'] it was still--?
Speaker 2: Sure. It was all new. I remember on one of the first days of shooting, there was a character--what's his name? Who went on to be a well known actor? He had just got L.A. I knew him from New York [New York]. I like met him on the beach the week before. I say, "Oh, you're out here, man? You should be in my movie." (Laughter) So, a week later he was on the set in the movie; Clifton Powell. And, so, in the scene, he didn't have a shirt on. So, and he had this dialogue. They were like, "Oh, we don't have a place to put the mic and the boom is gonna be in the shadow." I was like, "Okay, have him turn around so we don't see his face, so that way, you know, we'd just shoot him and do the dialogue later." And, some guys on the crew were like, hm. And, I realized I didn't know at the time, I just passed a test. Meaning, there was a production problem and I came up with a solution. And, they were--and, basically, some guys on the crew kind of said, "Yeah, the kid knows what he's doing," (laughter) you know. And, that was just about like every day that I didn't screw up, you just earned people's trust. And, that's basically it. But, because I had written the movie, I had storyboarded everything, we had two weeks of rehearsals. So, even though there was a lot of improv [improvisation] and stuff on set, I went in there very organized.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very much with a plan.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause that's what I had read that you had done a lot of storyboarding of it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, even though, so you had taken your short and storyboarded the movie itself?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 569428
Speaker 1: Now, I wanna ask another question. What about the casting? How did the casting come sort of together? And, who, I mean, you, you're talking about Clifton [Clifton Powell], I said, you know, come over. But, how did the rest of the casting sort of--? And, where did Kid, you know the Kid 'n Play [Christopher Reid and Christopher Martin]--?
Speaker 2: Right. Eileen Knight [Eileen Mack Knight] was the casting director. Kid 'n Play happened I think before. It was funny, New Line [New Line Cinema, Los Angeles, California] had won a lawsuit against, the Fresh Prince. They--for copy write infringement. 'Cause they did a song, 'Nightmare on I--on My Street,' ['Nightmare On My Street'], which they had illegally sampled some stuff from 'Nightmare on Elm Street' ['A Nightmare on Elm Street']. So, as part of the settlement, Will Smith had to do a movie for New Line. So, I was like "Well, I don't wanna make a movie with a guy who's doing it because he lost a lawsuit," (laughter). "He may not be very enthusiastic in the role." So, again, I ran into Russell [HistoryMaker Russell Simmons], who managed Will Smith, and I was like, "I'm making this movie, 'House Party,' love to have him in it," da-da-da. He was like, "He's not doing your movie. He's doing a big movie with Sony [Sony Pictures Entertainment, Culver City, California], with Peter Guber. He's not doing your little movie." I said, "Okay." So (laughter), so, that movie is about a camp, something stupid; never happened. Worked out for Will (laughter). But, we ended up not doing the movie with Will Smith. So, we're looking at other--I said, "What about these guys, Kid 'n Play?" And, I knew this girl who was working with them. I said, I said, they said, "Oh, they're good guys. They went to college, and they show up on time, and they're, and they're hard working." I was like, "Great. I think they look great, they're dancers, they got a sense of humor. Let's do it with them." So, I convinced New Line, I was like, "They got gold records." I mean, their records sales was nothing, but I tried to hype it up as best I could. And, they eventually went for it.
Speaker 1: Because they were a perf- I mean, it was, they was just, it was perfect.
Speaker 2: Perfect.
Speaker 1: Perfect.
Speaker 2: Perfect. Great. Just great.
Speaker 1: Now, what about Martin Lawrence and, you know, how did that come about? And, then Gin--Gina [sic.] his girlfriend?
Speaker 2: Right. Yeah, Tisha [Tisha Campbell-Martin].
Speaker 1: Tisha, sorry.
Speaker 2: Martin was an up and coming comic. He had a tiny part in 'Do The Right Thing.' But, he came in and read, I met him at a party, and I just liked him. He went and read. He wasn't--he didn't even do the best reading. But, I had a feeling about him. I said, "I just like this guy." So, I just knew I wanted him. And, Tisha was in 'School Daze.' And, I knew there was a whole little drama with him and Spike [Spike Lee] over the love scene or whatever, but she came in and she was just great. And, she came in with A.J. [A.J. Johnson] and I was like, "They're just great together. That's just great." So, it just, you just pick the best people for the parts.
