Story_ID: 67685
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson.  I'm the interviewer, and Scott Stearns is the videographer.  And I'd like you to state your name for us and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  State your name. Tell them what your name is.
Speaker 1: Tell us your name.
Speaker 2: Annie Rosetta Hall.
Speaker 1: And can I have your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Your birth date?
Speaker 2: March, 18 and 97 [1897], March the 30th.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Today's date.  It's March 20th--
Speaker 2: March the 30th.
Speaker 1: Twentieth.  March the 20th is today.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, today is March the 20th.
Speaker 1: Twentieth, 2002.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And our location.  What is our location?  We're at City Hall in mid-Milledgeville [Georgia].  And your profession?  Were you a teacher?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Teacher?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Say "yes" and--(unclear).
Speaker 1: And worked at the Post Office [the Hardwick Post Office in Milledgeville, Georgia].
Speaker 2: And worked at the Post Office?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 67686
Speaker 1: Ma'am, I wanna first ask you to give your mother's name?
Speaker 2: What did my mother do?
Speaker 1: I want her name and can you tell me about her?
Speaker 2: My mother was named Mary Ann Hall.  She stayed at home and taken care of the children.
Speaker 1: What was she like?
Speaker 2: A real good Christian and real good to everybody.  She was 75 when she died.
Speaker 1: Did she talk about her parents?  Did you know your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: What were they like?
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't know none of my grandparents.  I guess they was all right, but I didn't know any of 'em.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Didn't know, you know, my daddy's or either mother's.
Speaker 1: Did your mother talk at all about slavery?
Speaker 2: About who?
Speaker 1: Slavery?
Speaker 2: [No audible response.]
Speaker 1: Slavery.
Speaker 2: Cleveland.
Speaker 1: No. Jaquelyn Reeves:  Did you mama ever talk about slavery?  You know, when she was in slavery?
Speaker 2: Un-un, no.  She was born three years after slavery [March 9. 1867].
Story_ID: 67687
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Mary Ann Hall] talk at all about her growing up, when she grew up as a little girl?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Just all the time talk--she had three, three girls at the time.  She had four girls and one boy.  All of 'em gone but me.  I was the fifth child.
Speaker 1: You were the baby?
Speaker 2: Un-un, my baby sister died five years ago.  I'm next to the baby.
Speaker 1: Now, your father, what was his name?
Speaker 2: My father [Milus Hall] worked at the state, the asylum.  My father died in 1910.
Speaker 1: What was your father like?
Speaker 2: A real good Christian man, good to everybody.  I had real good parents.
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Can you tell them something--(unclear).
Speaker 2: I had to be half good on account of my parents.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us some stories about your parents?
Speaker 2: Tell some what?
Speaker 1: Is that how-
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Can you tell some stories about your parents?  What they did and how you raised--
Speaker 1: Some stories?
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Oh, some stories they would tell us?  Oh, Lordy.  I done forgot them.  See, my daddy was born in slavery.  He would tell us about slavery time, how they would do him, but his mother [Mary Hall] cooked for the overseer and said they had a better time than some of the slaves did.  So I said, oh, Lordy, glad I wasn't born then.  And my mother [Mary Ann Hall] she was born three years after freedom.  I don't know what her daddy was named, but I know her mother.  She was a Harris, but I done forgot her daddy.  Her mother was named Rosetta.  I was named after her.
Speaker 2: Now, what stories did your father tell you about slavery?  What did he tell you, what it was like?
Speaker 1: Oh, about slavery?  He would say, you know, tell us about the ones that was over them, they was real good.  They didn't have to work so hard and they didn't have, they didn't take 'em and beat 'em like they did some of 'em.
Speaker 2: Did he give the name of the overseer.
Speaker 1: He was a Hall.  I don't know, I done forgot his first name.
Speaker 2: So the overseer's name was Hall?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  That's where they got their name from, I think, from the overseer.
Story_ID: 67688
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Look, Rose, can you tell them some of the stories that your father [Melius Hall] told y'all when y'all was small about slavery?  Now, how did they treat your father when he was in slavery?  Can you remember any of that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Does she remember--do you think she knows--do you remember, did your father or mother [Mary Hall] teach you any songs, like songs that they learned when they were growing?
Speaker 2: [No audible response] [shaking head, no].
Speaker 1: No songs?
Speaker 2: Un-un.
Speaker 1: No church songs?
Speaker 2: Oh, songs, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, songs.  Did you know any slave songs?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, there was--my mother taught us, taught me church songs and I was in the church from the time I was born up until now.
Speaker 1: So what were--ask her about slave songs.  I should have you sit here.
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  No, no.  Okay, do you remember when you was--sit back, sit back.  Do you remember when you was small, when you was a little girl--
Speaker 1: Remember what?
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Do you remember when you was small, your mother used to teach you those old slave songs.  Do you remember any old slave songs?
Speaker 1: "Jesus, love me, this I know, for the bible tells me so".
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  When your mother was working in the field, along--
Speaker 1: Never worked in the field.
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  I said, your mother.
Speaker 1: My mother never worked in the field.
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Now, see her sister [Frances V. Hall] remembered all of this, but her sister died [August, 4, 1998].  She could tell you everything, but she [Annie Hall] never could tell you much about slavery.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 67689
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?  What was your earliest memory?
Speaker 2: What was what?
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  What was your early memories of growing up, with--you know, how old you was when you start remembering?
Speaker 2: Working where?
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Working anywhere?
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  When you was a little girl, what was your early memory?
Speaker 2: Or tell us about when you were a little girl?
Speaker 1: When I was a little girl?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Well, I don't know, I don't think (laughter) I ever been a little girl.  Oh, well, I remember we would have to help our mother [Mary Hall] because our father [Melius Hall] died when we was small [1910], when we all was small.  And she had five little children to raise.  But she seen to us going to school.  We got a good education.  She seen to that.  She washed and ironed, you know, to put us through school, such as that to take care of us.  And I always say I wish she would live long enough for us to take care of her, but she died before we was to take--oh, my brother, he was able to take care of, and two sisters, they mother.  Two of us was too small.  But I wish that I would have gotten so that I could help her because we had a good Christian mother.  She was, you know where this state is, don't you?  She would go, come to Sunday school, every Sunday church.  They say reason why I'm so (unclear), I had to walk from out there every Sunday morning.  I don't care what they had that night, she was right there, carried her children.  So we all should have been good children because she brought us up in a Christian home and in the church.
Story_ID: 67690
Speaker 1: Now, what school did you go to?
Speaker 2: I went to Eddy High [School] here, and I went to Snow Hill Alabama Institution [Snow Hill Normal and Industrial Institute in Alabama] and I went to--what the name of the school here?  Oh, my goodness (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Wait, you went to Eddy High School.  Let's first go to Eddy High School.
Speaker 2: All right.  That was my first school, Eddy High.
Speaker 1: Right, now did, you started what grade at Eddy High?  Did you start at five years old or six years old?
Speaker 2: Did I do what?
Speaker 1: What age were you when you started to school?
Speaker 2: Six years old.
Speaker 1: And what was school like?  Can you describe the school, what it looked like?
Speaker 2: I tell you, I didn't want to go.  But after I went a while, I was used to it.  And I finished from the Forsyth A and M School [Forsyth Agricultural and Mechanical State School in Georgia]
Speaker 1: But I wanna go back to Eddy High School.  Was it--who was your teacher?  Did you have lots of different teachers there?
Speaker 2: I know, I know my first-grade teacher, Ms. Styles (ph.).  I know my second grade teachers, Ms. Ann Louise, Ann Louise was I don't know.  And my third-grade teacher, Ms. Blunt.  I didn't like her.  I first went to private school, Reverend Houston, private.  I went to two private schools before going to Eddy High, Haddick (ph.) High (unclear) and then I went, went to Eddy High.
Speaker 1: Did you like any of your teachers, like the ones in private schools?
Speaker 2: I liked every one of my teachers but one.
Speaker 1: Except Ms. Blunt?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: You didn't like Ms. Blunt.
Speaker 2: Nah, I did not like her.
Speaker 1: Now, what was she--why didn't you like her?
Speaker 2: 'Cause she did not like black children.  She liked bright children.  She didn't treat them all the same.
Speaker 1: So what would she say to you?  What would she say to the black children?
Speaker 2: Oh, she didn't say nothing.  She just wasn't good to 'em.  She boarded my aunt [Lottie Hall], and her children was all bright.  She was crazy about them, and I didn't love her.  I loved all my other teachers.
Speaker 1: And when you say "bright", that means that they have, that they're mixed, right?  What do you mean by bright?
Speaker 2: They weren't dark like I was.  They mother and daddy was bright.  So, she was all right.  But, you know how children are when they coming up.
Speaker 1: So, do you remember anything else about going to the private schools or to Eddy High School?
Speaker 2: Oh, private schools, I liked private school.  And after I got up in, up in grades, I liked my teacher there.  I would have a different teacher every year until I went to Snow Hill Institute, Alabama [Snow Hill Normal and Industrial Institute in Alabama].
Story_ID: 67691
Speaker 1: Now, the other question I have for you is when, did you have black and white teachers?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, we just had all black teachers.
Speaker 1: I thought you said Mrs. Blunt was white?
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Un-un, she said Ms. Blunt liked light skinned--
Speaker 1: Oh, she didn't like light skin, okay, okay--she only liked light skinned.  She didn't like dark children, okay.  So you only had black teachers, right?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Teachers were all black?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We didn't have any white teachers at that time.
Speaker 1: Do you know where your teachers, where they went to school for training?  Do you know where they went?
Speaker 2: When they went to school?  I sure don't.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  (Unclear)
Speaker 2: They was real good though, all but one, all but Mrs. Blunt.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were you a good student?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Did you like any particular subject that they taught?  What would they teach you?
Speaker 2: What did they teach?  Reading, arithmetic, history, what else?  Something else.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what you learned in history?  Would they teach history about black people or they'd teach--what did they, what kind of history did they teach?
Speaker 2: They teached about the presidents and I don't know.  It's been too long, so long.
Speaker 1: You know I'd have a hard time answering myself.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, (laughter).  Now, (laughter), and I'm probably--okay.  The other thing I wanna ask you, do you remember anything about Eddy High School?
Speaker 2: In the white school?
Speaker 1: Eddy High School.
Speaker 2: In the white school?
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Eddy, Eddy High School?
Speaker 2: In the high school?
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Eddy, Eddy.
Speaker 2: Eddy High, Eddy was a high school, Eddy High School.  That's the first school I went to.  I first went to private school.  And then I went to Eddy High.
Story_ID: 67692
Speaker 1: What was--let me ask you, you were born in Milledgeville?
Speaker 2: Born where I live right now.
Speaker 1: And what was it like back then when you were young?
Speaker 2: I was, what?
Speaker 1: What was it like here when you were young?
Speaker 2: When I was young?  I know one thing, I had a better time than I am now (laughter).
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Tell us some of the things you used to when you was going to school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.  It's been so long.
Story_ID: 67693
Speaker 1: First, let me ask you.  Do you remember about church, the church you went to?
Speaker 2: I went to the First Baptist Church.  I was a Baptist.
Speaker 1: And in the Baptist church, were they--would they sing hymns or would they shout and holler?
Speaker 2: Sometimes, one or two people.
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  One or two people do what, dear?  Rose, one or two people, would they shout or--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, have to hold 'em, some of them, the men had to hold 'em, and it would tickle me to death to see 'em shouting (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you ever shout?
Speaker 2: [No audible response].
Speaker 1: And you liked the Baptist church, not the Methodist?
Speaker 2: I like all churches, but I was brought up in the Baptist church.  And I'm also the Mother of my church.
Story_ID: 67694
Speaker 1: Now, when you--what were the white people like back then?  What were they like?
Speaker 2: Some of 'em was mean.  You couldn't come in their front door.  You have to go 'round to the back.  So, I didn't come in contact with many white people.
Speaker 1: You didn't?
Speaker 2: Un-un.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: 'Cause, I don't know, just 'cause we just didn't come in contact with none of 'em very much.
Story_ID: 67695
Speaker 1: Now the other thing, 'cause even where they went to school--okay, so where is A and M Forsyth [Forsyth Agricultural and Mechanical State School in Georgia]?  It's in Georgia, okay.  Where is that?  Is that the school now?
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  I don't know, but that's what she told us she went (unclear).
Speaker 1: Forsyth?
Speaker 2: Yeah, A and M Forsyth?
Speaker 1: It was a boarding school.  And it was the real good school, A and M.
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  What was--what state it was in?
Speaker 1: [No audible response].
Speaker 2: Was it in Georgia?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: What was A and M Forsyth?  What was it like?  Why did you go there?
Speaker 1: Well, my aunt sent me there.  But my daddy's [Melius Hall] sister, she sent me to Forsyth.  That was the school she liked.
Speaker 2: And how old were you there, when you went there?
Speaker 1: When I went to Forsyth?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: I don't know.  About 14 or 15, about 16, I guess.
Speaker 2: And did you go away from home?  Did you have to leave home to go there?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, I stayed in school.
Speaker 2: And what were you studying?
Speaker 1: Reading, arithmetic, and, you know, just what they have in public schools now.
Speaker 2: And then you went there to Snowville [Snow Hill Normal and Industrial Institute in Alabama]?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Snowville [sic, Snow Hill]?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And where was Snowville [sic, Snow Hill]?
Speaker 1: Ah--
Speaker 2: Snowville [sic, Snow Hill] in Selma [Snow Hill, Alabama]?
Speaker 1: Snow Hill Institute, Alabama.  So, I stayed there, I stayed at Snow Hill, I finished at the age, I think, age 17, 18.  I think I was 19 when I finished on Snow Hill, 18.
Speaker 2: So who put--so you aunt paid for Snowville [sic, Snow Hill] too?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Who paid for you to go to Snowville [sic, Snow Hill]?
Speaker 1: My Auntie, my daddy's sister.
Speaker 2: She wanted you to be educated, right?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay, and what would she tell you?  Did she--she liked you a lot, your aunt, right?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, well, they say I was very much like her, and, Aunt Lottie.  She just, well as say, taken care of her until she died.
Speaker 2: And her name was Aunt Lottie?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, she was named Lottie Hall.  She didn't never marry.  She still was a Hall.
Speaker 2: And when you went to Snowville [sic, Snow Hill], what did you study?  Were you studying to be a teacher?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  And I taken those special studies at Forsyth for teaching.
Story_ID: 67696
Speaker 1: And when you finished school at Snowville [sic, Snow Hill Normal and Industrial Institute in Alabama], did you come back here?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, I come back home.
Speaker 1: And what did you do at that point?
Speaker 2: I come back home, I taught two years and then I went to Forsyth [Forsyth Agricultural and Mechanical State School in Georgia].  I decided I wanted to, wanted to pay for some of my schooling myself.  So I taught two years, I taught in Sparta [Georgia], public school.
Speaker 1: Did you like teaching?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, I liked teaching.
Speaker 1: Why did you like it?
Speaker 2: I just liked childrens , I guess.
Speaker 1: And what would the children, what would they call you?
Speaker 2: Ms. Hall.
Speaker 1: Now, what, when you came back home, had it changed much?
Speaker 2: Not so much.
Story_ID: 67697
Speaker 1: Tell me about your sister that you lived with?  Can you tell me about her?
Speaker 2: Oh, she was a good Christian.  I wasn't (laughter).  She was a good child.  But she talked too much.  She was a mother of our church--
Speaker 1: Now--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and she worked in the church.  I didn't.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: You didn't work in the church?
Speaker 1: Un-un.  I said if I ever got grown, I never would go to--my mama [Mary Hall], every time they had something, had me up on the stage.  I said if I ever get grown, I never will be, go up there no more.  I mean it.  I didn't either.
Speaker 2: Now, ma'am, were there people that--were there black--did they call them blacks--Negroes.  What did they call 'em back then?
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay, were there Colored people?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Other Colored people?
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Who?
Speaker 2: Okay, did you--let me ask you this, did you know of Booker T. Washington?
Speaker 1: I knew of him.  Yeah, I studied.
Speaker 2: You studied about him?
Speaker 1: [No audible response].
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Tell her, do you know of any--can you remember any black peoples besides your family that you was around?
Speaker 1: Know what?
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Any black peoples that you was around when you was small?
Speaker 1: When I was small?
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Oh, well, you see when I was, when I was small, right where we live now, it was four brothers.  And we all was kin then, but I knowed [sic] peoples in Midgrade, the Reese's and the Beale's, they all was old, the (unclear) and--
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Do you remember any peoples that was famous when you was small, coming up and when you was teaching?  Do you remember any famous peoples that you know now?
Speaker 1: Teachers?
Speaker 2: No, famous black--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Famous Colored people?
Speaker 1: Oh, famous, the doctors and preachers.
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Who was the doctor you knowed?
Speaker 1: Who was the doctor?
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Dr. Simmons, Dr. Simmons--Dr. Simmons was our doctor, Dr. Williams.  Those are the two, first two Colored doctors in Baldwin [Baldwin County, Georgia].  And the preachers, teachers.
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Give me some names, what their name was?
Speaker 1: Ms. Heddie Kyles (unclear), Reverend Houston, and Ms. Annie Louise Miles, Ms. Annie Louise Murray, Ms. Styles, and that was all our teachers.  Ms. Fannie Brown, Reverend Houston.
Story_ID: 67698
Speaker 1: Ma'am, did you know about--were there any black people that were, you know, did any of your family have Indian in them, Indian, American Indian?
Speaker 2: In the what?
Speaker 1: Indian?
Speaker 2: My mother had part Indian in her, and that's the only--
Speaker 1: Do you know what she had?  Was it Choctaw?
Speaker 2: I sure don't.
Speaker 1: You don't, okay.  Okay, do you remember names like W.E.B. DuBois?
Speaker 2: Know what?
Speaker 1: DuBois?
Speaker 2: The what?
Speaker 1: DuBois, W.E.B. DuBois?
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Okay, George Washington Carver?
Speaker 2: George Washington, uh-huh.  Yeah, I know George Washington.  You mean the--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember World War I?
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: World War I?
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Do you remember any war that your parents was in when you was born, when you was small?
Speaker 2: The war?
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  The war, yeah.
Speaker 2: My parents was in?
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Nah, I don't know nothing, but when my brother was in the war.  He was in the first [World War I].
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Your brother was in what war?
Speaker 2: In the first.
Speaker 1: World War?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So when he went to the War, do you remember when he went to the War?
Speaker 2: [No audible response].
Speaker 1: Do you know what it was like?  Did he go away?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: He did?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And was everyone--what was the family?  Was the family worried about him?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, because he was the oldest boy.
Speaker 1: And did he come back?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: What did he say about when he, about--when he came back, what did he tell you?
Speaker 2: Well, he would talk--he didn't go across.
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  And what did he say about the War?  Can you remember anything?
Speaker 2: He didn't like it.
Speaker 1: Why didn't he like it?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Brother was in the Army too, wasn't he, Lucille and them brother.
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  I don't know about him.
Story_ID: 67699
Speaker 1: Now, did you--church.  What things would you do in church?  Oh, she didn't like church.
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  She went, but she didn't--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, but other things did she do?
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  What did you do in church?
Speaker 1: When I was coming up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, what things did you do when you coming--
Speaker 1: I taught Sunday school.  That was all to be done.  I went to--we had BYPU [Baptist Young Peoples Union].  I taught BYPU.  And now I am the Mother of the church.
Speaker 2: So do you remember, did you get baptized?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: So do you remember when you got baptized?
Speaker 1: Baptized, 1910, Reverend R. W. Walker, nineteen hundred and ten [1910], which they baptized, which they baptized ninety-nine that--we had a pastor had pulled out from our church and built another one.  And then when they had revival, they, just as well say they had a young church because most of the old peoples went with the preacher.
Speaker 2: And so 99 people got baptized that day?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, we had 99 join, they baptized 99 on one Sunday, baptized 50 in the morning and 49 at night.
Speaker 2: And what was--how would they baptize?  Would you go to the river?
Speaker 1: Un-un, we had a pool in the church.
Speaker 2: Oh, you had a pool in the church?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Okay, and what would they do?  Describe what would happen when the baptism happened?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: What would happen when the minister was baptizing you?
Speaker 1: What would what?
Speaker 2: What would happen?  When he baptized you, would you have to get dressed in white?
Speaker 1: A white gown.
Speaker 2: And would they sing "Wade in the Water"?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Would they sing that?
Speaker 1: Who?
Speaker 2: What would they sing if you were being baptized?
Speaker 1: Oh, I don't know.  I don't remember what they sang then.  I know I didn't have no religion when I joined.  I just got tired of going to the morning thing (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Story_ID: 67700
Speaker 1: So what other things did you like doing when you were- when you grew up?
Speaker 2: I liked to, I don't know--
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  What did you like to play when you was a little girl?  Can you remember?
Speaker 2: I didn't like to, playing nothing 'cause mama always had me playing.
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Well, what did you like to do when you were a little girl?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  What did you like to do when you was a little girl?
Speaker 2: I liked to go to church and Sunday School.  I liked to teach children.
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  And didn't you like to--you didn't like to play games when you was little?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  What kind of games did you like to play?
Speaker 2: Every--I don't know.  I didn't play much because, I don't know, I didn't have nobody to play with.  I didn't play much.  I didn't have nobody but my brother, and he would almost kill me at times.  I would do anything he would do.  We had two big trees in our front yard.  He went up in the tree and I went up in there.  He told me he was coming down on his head.  And when he got way, half way down the tree, he turned around, and I come down on my head.  That's reason I told 'em I didn't have no sense (laughter).  But he say he thought I had better sense than to come--
Story_ID: 67701
Speaker 1: So what was your favorite, did you have a favorite food that you ate?
Speaker 2: Had what?
Speaker 1: Favorite food, your favorite, what you like to eat most?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, the thing about it, I didn't like to eat nothing.  They'd have to, had to make me eat.
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  On Sundays when y'all left church--
Speaker 2: I liked vegetables.  I liked cheese.  She cooks (unclear) now and bring me.  I like, I like anything boiled, but what them--greens have roots?
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Roots, turnips.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, but turnips, I don't like turnips.  I like any kind of--
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  On Sundays when you was small, didn't your mother [Mary Hall] cook dinner for the preacher a lots?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Did your mother cook dinner for the preacher a lot?
Speaker 2: Did your mother do what?
Speaker 1: Did your mother cook dinner for the preacher?
Speaker 2: For the preacher?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: All the time.  I'd get so tired of seeing the preacher coming, and we had to wait till he get through eating.
Speaker 1: You had to wait till--explain that, you had to wait till he gets through eating before you could eat?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, wait.  Mama would fix the preacher dinner, and then we would have to wait.  I said, "If I ever got grown I never would eat with a preacher"--and my preacher now, every time they have something, I have to sit up there and eat with him.
Story_ID: 67702
Speaker 1: Now, what other--did you ever, did you have--did she have a love interest?  You know, was she--
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Ever had a boyfriend?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Ask her.  Did you ever have a boyfriend when you was small?
Speaker 1: Did I have what?
Speaker 2: A boyfriend.
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  A boyfriend.
Speaker 2: What's she saying?
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Did you ever have a boyfriend when you was small?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: So what was his name?  And what was he like?
Speaker 2: I have a heap of boyfriends (laughter).  First boyfriend, I, I liked to have married him but I changed my mind.  I said I'd stay home and take care of my mama [Mary Hall].
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: He was real nice.
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  What was his name?
Speaker 2: Colin Broadster (ph.).  He would carry me, and he would bring me back before it got so late.
Speaker 1: Did you have another boyfriend?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Another boyfriend?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Huh?  He was good too.
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Why did you never get married then?
Speaker 2: Why did I what?  I just didn't like to get married.  I just didn't want to.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Why didn't you want to?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Why didn't you want to get married?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I just didn't like men that much.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Why didn't you like men that much?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I just didn't like 'em.
Story_ID: 67703
Speaker 1: Did you--do you have, like when you were, you know, when you finished school and you were teaching, do you have any stories to tell about, you know, living here and teaching and working?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Do you--okay, let me ask you.  Did--let me ask this question, do you remember ever seeing the Ku Klux Klan?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: I can talk about what they had, what they wore.  I don't know nothing about what they done.  I just seen 'em.
Speaker 1: So what did they wear?
Speaker 2: White, cap on their, white cap on (unclear) and white clothes.
Speaker 1: And did you ever hear them say anything?
Speaker 2: Un-un.
Speaker 1: Did you ever see any crosses burning?
Speaker 2: Un-un.
Speaker 1: Did you ever see anyone who was lynched?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Killed, a black man killed, lynched.
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Did you ever see anybody hung, by the neck?
Speaker 1: What, around the neck?
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Un-un.
Speaker 2: Never?
Speaker 1: If I did, I done forgot.
Story_ID: 67704
Speaker 1: So did you ever work on a farm?
Speaker 2: Did I never do what?
Speaker 1: Did you ever pick cotton?
Speaker 2: Un-un.  I ain't never worked in no field.
Speaker 1: Never?
Speaker 2: Un-un, never.
Speaker 1: Now, what about--who were the people who worked in the fields then?  Can you talk about them?  Who worked--why didn't you work in the field?
Speaker 2: 'Cause, I don't know.  We didn't, I didn't come up, I wasn't raised in a time to work in the field.  I ain't never worked in no field.  I worked, I worked with, with white peoples and then I went to teaching, from teaching to the Post Office, three jobs I was on.
Speaker 1: And the Post Office, when did you start with the Post Office?  Do you remember what year?
Speaker 2: Lord, have mercy.  I had it, but I think Mr. Floyd had it.
Speaker 1: Now, why did you wanna work for the Post Office?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Why did you wanna work for the Post Office?
Speaker 2: Because it was at home.  I was at home.  When I was teaching I was out in the rural, had to stay out and come home weekends.  And then another thing, I got more money.
Speaker 1: Do you remember how much you were getting paid with the Post Office?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: How much were you getting paid?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: How much did you get paid?
Speaker 2: What, at the Post Office?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  But I got more than I got for teaching.  I got enough to, to take up another course of teaching.
Speaker 1: And did you, with the Post Office, that was a good job, wasn't it?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Post Office was a good job.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that was a real good job.
Speaker 1: And how long did you work for the Post Office.
Speaker 2: Five years [thirty-five years].
Speaker 1: And then what did you do after that?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What did you do after that?
Speaker 2: I taught school.  I, uh-huh, I taught--no, I taught school.  I taught school five years.  What did I do after that?  After I stopped working at the Post Office, I didn't do nothing, stayed at home.  I thought I had done worked enough.
Story_ID: 67705
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember any music you liked?  Did you like music?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: You liked music?  Did you have--
Speaker 2: I used to play for my Sunday school.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Did you ever listen to the radio?
Speaker 1: Radio?  Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And who were some of the people you would listen to on the radio?
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: On the radio?
Speaker 1: Who were--
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Who were some of the people, who were some of the singers you used to listen to on the radio when you was small?  Did y'all have a radio?
Speaker 1: On the radio, my--our church used to sing on radio every Sunday morning.
Speaker 2: They would sing on the radio?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  They'd go to Macon [Georgia].  They sang from the station.
Speaker 2: Did you ever go to Macon?
Speaker 1: Un-un.
Speaker 2: You never--were you in the choir?
Speaker 1: No, I told you, if I ever got grown, no more, I wasn't going on, nowhere with the church and nothing else.
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  You didn't go--well, your church didn't go to Macon when you was little, did they?
Story_ID: 67706
Speaker 1: Do you like the fact that you were born black, Colored?
Speaker 2: Do what?
Speaker 1: Do you like the fact that you were born Colored?
Speaker 2: Do I like what?
Speaker 1: That you were born black?  What did they call it?  Negro?
Speaker 2: Negro?
Speaker 1: Yeah, are you glad that you were born Negro?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: I don't know, but I'm glad I am a Negro.
Speaker 1: And why is that?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Story_ID: 67707
Speaker 1: How did you glad, why are you glad that you were born--Did you ever hear about Africa?
Speaker 2: I heard about it.  My daddy [Melius Hall] would talk about it.
Speaker 1: What would he say?
Speaker 2: Talk about how mean the folks was, said they slaves and, but they had good slaves--they had a good, whatever they call 'em.
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Master.
Speaker 2: His mama and--
Speaker 1: Did he ever mention any place in Africa?  Did he ever mention Ethiopia or anything?
Speaker 2: If he did, I done forgot.
Speaker 1: Okay, are you getting tired now?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: You getting tired?
Speaker 2: [No audible response].
Speaker 1: We've talked a long time, haven't we?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, we can stop right now.  You wanna stop?
Speaker 2: If you're ready. (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  Okay, well, I wanna thank you for coming in.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you, ma'am, you're gonna be 105 in 10 days, right?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: You're gonna be 105, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: A hundred and five [105], right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: How do you feel?
Speaker 2: I feel sometimes like I ain't but about 99, and I feel, I feel like my niece.  I could, I feel I can get up and do more than she do.
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  She loves to do things.  My mama won't let her do things.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  She like to go in the kitchen and wash dishes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I clean up the kitchen.  I clean up the kitchen every day, clean up my bedroom, have a lady come and stay with me (laughter).
Speaker 1: She doesn't do a good job?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: That lady doesn't do a good job, huh?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, she don't do a good job.
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  The lady comes in and bathes her every--
Speaker 2: Okay, she doesn't do a good job?
Speaker 1: Un-un.
Speaker 2: And she comes in and bathes you?
Speaker 1: Oh, she come every day.
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  But she cooks, she tries to, but we had to stop her.
Speaker 1: Yeah, see, the doctor don't want me to get in the tub by myself.  She comes and put, to give me a bath every day.
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  She iron her clothes.
Speaker 1: But the thing about it, if my niece go home, if she stayed long enough, I'd get in the kitchen and cook, if I think she gonna stay long enough and they won't catch me in the kitchen.
Speaker 2: Well, thank you, ma'am.  Thank you for coming in, okay.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: I thank you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I will not forget you.
Speaker 2: You won't forget me?  Well, that's wonderful.  I won't forget you either.
Story_ID: 67708
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  And your relationship to Ms. Hall?
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  This is my great aunt.
Speaker 1: And you know what, these children, it's three sisters and one brother, and they're better--they're so good to me.  They're better to me as some children are to their mothers.  They're just really good.  They got me rotten for one thing (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, it looks like they take very good care of you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but they're really good to me.
Speaker 2: I can see it.  That's a lots of blessing, it's a blessing to be a hundred, going to be 105.
Speaker 1: And then, not being in a nursing home.
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's right, not being in a nursing home.  And being able to walk up those steps the way I saw you walk up those steps.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: You were--
Speaker 1: Now, I worry her more than I do any of 'em because she next door to me.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And she carry me riding in the evening.  They all good to me.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Just as good as they can be.  I wouldn't want nobody, no better.
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  She's sweet.
Story_ID: 67709
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Ms. Hall when she was working at the Hardwick Post Office [Hardwick, Georgia].  I think she had just start working there.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  Good, now which post office was that?
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Hardwick [in Milledgeville, Georgia].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  Could you spell it for us?
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  H-A-R-D-W-I-C-K.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  Would you know approximately what year this might have been?
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  No, no, no.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  Okay, next photo here (unclear).
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  This is when we had a birthday party, probably for her, and don't ask me what year because we have, we give her birthday parties all the time.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  And this is her standing?
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Uh-huh, this is her standing.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  Was that (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  I couldn't, I don't know.  I can't, I can't make it out.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  Okay, and then let's try the next photo on the right.  And a description of this photo here?
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  This is where, this is her church, Flagg Chapel Baptist Church on Franklin Street [Milledgeville, Georgia].  And the person with her is--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  A member of the church?
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  --and one of the members of the church.  And the man behind her is Reverend Reeves.  And that's, I don't know who that lady is.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  Okay, I'm gonna pause just for a moment.  If you can--go ahead and give a description for this photo?
Speaker 1: Jaquelyn Reeves:  Okay, this is Ms. Hall.  I think she was a hundred [100] when we took this picture here.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  Describe this photo?
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  This is Ms. Hall, but I can't remember how old she was when she took that one 'cause I don't remember that one.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  Okay, do you remember a place, an occasion?
Speaker 2: Jaquelyn Reeves:  That's what I'm trying to find the house that she in.  I don't know who house is that?  It's just a picture.
