Story_ID: 74463
Speaker 1: --I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  And ma'am could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Maycie, M-A-Y-C-I-E, Copeland, C-O-P-E-L-A-N-D, Herrington, H-E-R-R-I-N-G-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: And ma'am, would you please give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born November 7, 1918 in Raleigh, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm retired now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Retired from what occupation?
Speaker 2: I retired from the Los Angeles County Department of Public Social Services.  I worked there for thirty-two years starting as a social worker in 1949.  And I worked ten years as a social worker, became a supervisor.  And in 1972, a special program was set up with the county where you had what you call a resource coordinator.  There were only five resource coordinators for the entire County of Los Angeles, and I was fortunate enough to get the one for my area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the last ten years that I worked, I was a resource coordinator.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is November 19, 2002.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at my home, 5412 Oleta, O-L-E-T-A, Street; Long Beach, California, 90815-4428.
Story_ID: 74464
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now before we go into depth, there are five People Magazinish-type questions that I'm compelled to ask you.  And the first one is, and they just require a short answer.  The first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yams.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I would... not really.  I usually try to go to my hometown if I can, Raleigh, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I guess I would take my father's saying, "Let me live in the house by the side of the road and be a friend to man."
Story_ID: 74465
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's talk about your family background.  Do you have any idea or stories about where your family comes from, and what the family history is?
Speaker 2: A little bit.  On my father's [Thomas Edward Copeland] side of the family, we, he was born in North Carolina.  And there are members of his family who are Indian.  I'm not sure exactly...  His grandmother, great-grandmother, was Indian, I know.  And so, he had to have Indian parents there, too.  And his mother was part Indian.  And his father, on the father's side of the family are the Copelands.  We were, I think, related to John Anthony Copeland [Jr.].  And my father's part Indian too, yeah.  Because on my mother's [Dicie Chavis Copeland] side of the family, she's part Caucasian.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And are there any stories that are passed down about life in the nineteenth century or life, you know, before the Civil War in your family?
Speaker 2: No, I've never heard too many stories about the Civil War.  The only thing my parents have told me that is there was never any slaves in our family--that on my mother's side of the family they were basically Caucasian, and on my father's side, it was basically Indian and Indian descent.  So, there was never any slaves in our family.  And the only problem is that they lived in North Carolina, and according to the book that I have read, North Carolina was one of the states that favored people who were not slaves, and were more lenient to the slaves than many other states, especially southern states.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Even more so than Virginia.
Speaker 1: But you do have African-Americans in your family?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, I would gather, yes, on my...  My mother's father was brown-skinned.  Chavis, Atlas Chavis was his name.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Okay, now, what was your... oh, can you spell his name for us, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Atlas, A-T-L-A-S, Chavis, C-H-A-V-I-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my mother's name was Dicie, D-I-C-I-E, Chavis, before she married my father.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Can you give us your father's name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Thomas, T-H-O-M-A-S, Edward, E-D-W-A-R-D, Copeland, C-O-P-E-L-A-N-D.
Speaker 1: And when was he born, and where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Franklin County, North Carolina in 1884.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 74466
Speaker 1: And what kind of a person was he, and what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: My father [Thomas Edward Copeland] was a part-time minister and a farmer.  He was the most wonderful person in the world.  He was one of these people who always believed in helping people.  And the thing that was greatest to us was he did not believe in whipping his children.  He always said, "When you whip your children, you are not punishing them, you're just taking out your anger on them."  He just used to talk to us.  He said he didn't believe in it.
Speaker 1: That's remarkable (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was remarkable for that time.  Because in the old days people used to have their razor straps, and they were always beating up the kids no matter what they did.  But my father felt that was wrong.
Speaker 1: That is remarkable for those days.  Did he ever talk about how his, how he developed that philosophy?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not sure.  And I think back now and I vaguely remember his father, who happened to operate a mill.  And I have a feeling that his father was lenient, too, so far as the punishment was concerned.
Speaker 1: So, your dad did talk about his father?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well that is remarkable for those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I had five brothers, too.  But everybody did their job, and that was the interesting thing.  My father could put candy on the shelf, nobody would touch it.  Everybody respected him.  If he said don't touch it, you didn't touch it.
Speaker 1: So, he--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Alright, now, so your father was able to inspire obedience to rules--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: -- based on his, his--
Speaker 2: His philosophy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, rather than threats.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, rather than the threat, at least the threat of a beating?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, what his technique now?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Now, if you did something he didn't like, well, what would he do?
Speaker 2: He would just sit down and talk to you about it.
Speaker 1: Would he talk to you in front of everybody or would he talk to you in private?
Speaker 2: Well no, just privately.  To tell you the truth, I was so obedient, I can't even remember him having to say anything to me.  But once in a while, he would get on my brothers.  But everybody seemed to just fall right in line.  Every Sunday morning we had devotions.  We went to church and we had to walk five miles from where we lived in the hot sun.  But nobody even gave it a second thought, because everybody did the same thing.
Speaker 1: So, he inspired a tremendous amount of respect--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --in his children.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah.
Story_ID: 74467
Speaker 1: Now, how did the rest of the community feel about him?  Did they feel that--?
Speaker 2: Oh, my...  I think... I've never heard anybody say a negative thing about my father [Thomas Edward Copeland].  He was considered to be very, you know, good to everybody.  As I said, his philosophy was, "Let me live in the house by the side of the road and be a friend to man."  You know, we were, lived on a farm.  Farm families helped each other.  That's why it seems so hard for me today to understand why families won't do anything to help anybody.  Now, the family, the closest family to us, was about a mile to a mile and a half away.  Whenever we killed hogs, they came over and helped us.  Whenever they killed hogs, my father and brothers helped them.  If they were running short on getting their crops in, and it was going to rain or something, we all ran over and helped.  And they did the same thing for us.  But that was the way we grew up.
Story_ID: 74468
Speaker 1: Now, now, your father [Thomas Edward Copeland] had a farm.  He was basically a farmer and--
Speaker 2: He was a sharecropper.  We were very poor.  But he also preached.  See, he had gotten to college part-time, but you couldn't earn a living preaching.  He had seven children.
Speaker 1: Where did he attend college?
Speaker 2: St. Aug--Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Shaw University?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And what denomination was he?
Speaker 2: Baptist, Southern Baptist.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.  So, is there anything else about your father you would like to tell us?
Speaker 2: Well, he... one time... I'm sorry I can't--I didn't find that article.  One time he was nominated as the outstanding minister for North Carolina.  I have an article on him, and I'll try to find it for you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, that is remarkable.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, did he play a role in a lot of community decisions, and you know, that sort of thing?  Did he, was he a part of organizations?
Speaker 2: We, at that time we didn't have that many organizations, you see.  Between doing your farm work and going to church and being a deacon in the church, or being a minister when he preached at the country church--it was, you know--they didn't do a lot of stuff like people do today.  We didn't have activities for the kids except work on the farm; we all worked.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the thing was, my father was very wise though.  We used to have to get up about four o'clock in the morning and go in the fields.  And he always made us wear the big, wide straw hats.  And then you'd come in about eleven o'clock, and we'd have our dinner as we called it... lunchtime.  And then we'd go back about two o'clock.  He didn't let you be out there in the heat of the day.  And now I realized why, when I realized that the heat of the day is the worst time for you.  But we always wore the wide hats so that we wouldn't get sunburned.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, today more than ever people are having sun can--cancer because of that.
Speaker 1: Skin cancer, yeah.
Speaker 2: Skin cancer, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yes ma'am.
Story_ID: 74469
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your mother [Dicie Chavis Copeland].  What was her name, and could you spell it?
Speaker 2: Dicie, D-I-C-I-E.
Speaker 1: Now, before my mother got married, she was a schoolteacher.
Speaker 2: What was her maiden name?
Speaker 1: Chavis, C-H-A-V-I-S.
Speaker 2: And when was she born, and where was she born?
Speaker 1: She was born I guess right outside of Raleigh in a little country part.  And she was born in... my father was born in 1886, and she was born in 1888, October 14, 1888.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And you said that she went to school too, and became a schoolteacher?
Speaker 1: She was a schoolteacher before she married.  And her mother was a schoolteacher before her.
Speaker 2: Oh (unclear).
Speaker 1: They taught in the one-room country school.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What was the name of the school?
Speaker 1: I don't remember that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My mother only had one sister.
Speaker 2: Alright.
Speaker 1: They were not a big family.
Speaker 2: Well, what kind of a person was your mother?
Speaker 1: She was a very easy-going person.  But she would always, I guess she was over-protective.  You know, she worried about us all the time.  She worried a lot, worried that we would get bit by the moccasins or the...  You know, in the old days in North Carolina, they had these bridges.  And every time it would rain real hard, we all wanted to go down to the creek so we could see the water rise.  She'd worry that we'd fall in.  But our father [Thomas Edward Copeland] would always take us, we never went by ourselves.
Story_ID: 74470
Speaker 1: And then gypsies would camp out near where we lived.  I never went anywhere by myself.  They would steal people's children.  And there was no way you could find them.  The gypsies would steal anything that wasn't nailed down.  So, I remember as a child I never went anywhere by myself.  Of course, I had five brothers, so there was always somebody to go with you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's something that...  Yeah, I've heard stories about gypsies before, but I never really...
Speaker 1: You have to learn the gypsy culture.  I didn't learn that until I got a book on it.  Because when I was a social worker, we had problems when the gypsies came to California.  And the legal aids people were complaining that the social workers were mistreating them because they were trying to ID [identify] them.  I said, "Oh, no, no.  You don't understand their culture."  They would bring in each other's children and pass them off as their own.  They couldn't read and write, but they could try their best to outwit you.  Yeah, that's... but you have to understand they've always lived by their wits.  And so, they steal; that's their way of life.
Story_ID: 74471
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I want you to, you know, reflect back, and give us some idea of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in the country, in North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that I always remember is the spring of the year and the dogwoods blooming.  That was my favorite time of year.  Because by then, the cold weather was gonna be gone soon.  And we would go out and just enjoy the dogwood blossoms.  Of course, we were getting ready to pick--chop cotton, too.  Because you plant the cotton in the spring and pick it in the fall.  But we always could pick blackberries, grapes, apples--all kinds of things grew right out in the woods.  And in, also in the summer we would, we lived not too far from a peach farm.  And you'd go to the peach farm and you're sharecropping again, you pick a bushel for yourself and two bushels for the owner.  And then we used to can.  One of the things that my mother [Dicie Chavis Copeland] used to make me do was wash the jars, because my hand could down in there.  And I used to kind of hate that because... but we had... she'd can three and four hundred jars of everything each summer.  And in the winter then you had the canned stuff.  And she used to make the big pots of soup.  I remember when we'd come home from school, you'd have yams baked, cornbread, buttermilk and that soup, and we always enjoyed it.  And we used to have potato hills.  Do you know what a potato hill is like?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: You, did you ever see the movie, what is the one?  Oklahoma? They had this potato hill.  Well, we raised lots of potatoes... yams.  And what you do is, you put down a layer of straw and you put your yams on it.  Then you put another layer of straw and then you put dirt on it.  Then you put another layer of straw and then you put your potatoes.  And it comes up to a, it comes up to a point.  And then when you want potatoes in the winter, you just put your hand down in there and take them out.  And so, we had potatoes all winter.  And we always killed hogs in the fall, and we had a smokehouse, as they called it.  And your ham and all this would keep during the winter.  And of course, we had lots and lots of chickens.  So, we had lots of chicken, eggs, ham, pork, and stuff like that growing up, and lots and lots of vegetables.  It was Depression years, and there would be people who were hungry... we called them hobos, that were always coming through on the trains.  And they would come to the house begging, so my mother would always have food to give them.  We didn't have any money, but we had food.  We raised, I remember we used to raise these great big watermelons and put them in the spring to cool, cantaloupes and all that, and that kind of a thing.
Story_ID: 74472
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what were race relations like in that part--?
Speaker 2: Well, it was total segregation.  And you just took it for granted, you never worried about it.  Now, it's like they were saying the segregation on the buses.  I said that really didn't bother us, because we were so poor we didn't have a nickel to ride the bus.  It was five of us, and my father [Thomas Edward Copeland] couldn't afford that kind of money.  So, we walked everywhere we went.  So at that time it didn't really make an impact, because I never gave it a second thought until later on, when you hear people talking about it.  Because we walked everywhere we went unless we rode in the wagon.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If we went to church in the country or went to visit [maternal] Grandma Chavis, we rode in the wagon because it was too far to walk.
Speaker 1: What about in other matters?  Did black people own much land down there?
Speaker 2: I don't know anybody who owned any land, to tell you the truth.  Everybody I knew that farmed, they were sharecroppers just like we were.  Basically, I just thought everybody was poor (laughter) except the people who, you know, could afford to hire people to work for them.  And we just, everybody...  You know, in the old days people didn't compare what they had to what the other people had.  You just earned a living the best way you could, and that was it.  But my father was very education oriented.  He drilled in us from the time we were little that "Silver and gold will fade away, but a good education will never decay."  His goal was for each one of us to get a good education.
Story_ID: 74473
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That leads right into school.  So, let's talk about...  What school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Well, the first school that I attended was what is now St. Augustine's College.  Then it was St. Augustine's Normal School.  And I went there in the first, second, and third grade.  And I remember Mrs. Chippey was my teacher.  And we went there until they built a public school.  And when they built the public school, well, they phased out the grade school at the college.  It was then a normal school.  And they started a teacher's school, which was their original goal anyway.  But they took students after they had completed high school, or completed whatever grade they went through.  And in 1933, they got certified as a four-year college.  They were certified by the Southern Association of Colleges.  And I'm one of the few students who went there in grade school and returned and got a college degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, Mrs. Chippey was... can you spell her name for me?
Speaker 2: C-H-I-P-P-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Now, she's someone you've kept up with over the years, right?
Speaker 2: Well, slightly.  She's dead now.  But I'm thinking, I don't know if her daughter is still living.  Her daughter used to work at Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], and off and on she kept in touch with me.  And I know that Mr. Chippey died a number of years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I assume that by now, she's dead.  I'm not sure, because she'd be well over a hundred years old if she was still living.
Story_ID: 74474
Speaker 1: Now, how did you like school?  And what kind of a little girl were you?
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved school.  You know, the first thing I was, was going to be a teacher.  (Laughter).  You know, I was so fascinated with school and teaching.  And because we had to work so much on the farm, school was the greatest thing in the world to us.  And if you'd get to go to school, you weren't out there chopping cotton or picking cotton all day.  We all loved school.  See, I have five brothers.  And I had a brother, we always went to school together--my brother who is just older than I, and the brother who's just younger than me.  Because unfortunately when we started going to Lucille Hunter School, I guess I wasn't aware of it, but prejudice was there.  And the real dark kids would call us ole yellow niggers, and would beat you up and pull your hair and all that stuff.  And I remember my mother [Dicie Chavis Copeland] used to put my hair in two braids and put thread on it.  (Laughter).  I didn't like it, but that's what happened.  So, I learned never to go anywhere by myself.  I didn't come home from school by myself; I never came without having my brothers with me.  I had a cousin, too, who was considered a bully, and nobody messed with us when he was around.  He was a little older than my brother, who is now eighty-six.
Story_ID: 74475
Speaker 1: But I completed Lucille Hunter School [Raleigh, North Carolina], which was the public school, in February.  Because I was born November the seventh, they wouldn't let you start school until January.  So, I was always a semester behind.  And I went to, started Washington High School [Raleigh, North Carolina] in February.  And in order to graduate in 1936, I had to go to summer school one summer, and that's what I did.  So, I graduated in 1936 from high school, and 1940 from college [St. Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Now, did you have any, were there any mentors or any teachers that took a special interest in you?  Or were there any remarkable students in school with you?
Speaker 1: Well, I remember that my chemistry teacher in high school seemed to.  And we also had an English teacher who was very good to us.  In fact, I thought all my teachers were.  So, because they made a special effort to help you get through.  Teachers were very dedicated in those days, yeah.
Story_ID: 74476
Speaker 1: Now, what were your favorite subjects in school?
Speaker 2: Well, I liked English and I liked chemistry, I liked the sciences.  Well, I was planning to be a doctor and I took Latin in high school [Washington High School, Raleigh, North Carolina], can you believe it?  (Laughter).  So, it was a requirement if you were going to go to med school.  So, but then I took typing and shorthand.  Because unfortunately one of the worst things that happened to me was I was left-handed; I'm normally left-handed.  And Miss Chippey was left-handed, it didn't bother her one bit.  Then when I got at--over to Lucille Hunter School, the principal happened to come in one day and see me writing with my left hand.  And she says, "Don't ever let me catch you writing with your left hand again."  And I thought, "How can I do that?"  So, I talked to my parents and they were the old-fashioned kind.  "Well, if the principal said you had to write with your right hand, you have to write with your right hand."  So, I was forced to write with my right hand, and I didn't write very well.  So when I was taking psychology in college [St. Augustine's College, Raleigh, North Carolina], he said, "They never should have changed you."  But I wasn't smart enough to switch myself back.  I didn't switch myself back until the late seventies [1970s], the early seventies [1970s], when I realized...   I was sitting at a table one day and everybody at the table was left-handed.  I said, if I wrote with my left hand, I could write.  So, I've been writing with my left hand ever since.  But that's one of the reasons I took typing.  And I found out that if I'm doing something important, even today, I function better on my typewriter or computer.  So, everything I do that's real important, I go in there and get on my computer.  If I don't like what I said, I can just wipe it off.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: See, but then when I became a social worker, I kind of lost my shorthand skills.  Because the way L.A. [Los Angeles] County operated was you made your home calls two days a week, and you dictated everything.  Well, I could dictate ad lib.  I didn't have to give it a second thought, because I wasn't writing or making notes or anything.  Then I learned and realized later that my brain is on the other side.  And trying to write... and I was always worried about my writing.  So, everything I did, even in high school... luckily I worked in the office, I mean in college.  I could type my papers.  See, I could type everything.  That way I could get by.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. Okay, now that's an interesting story.  You know, that's pretty--
Speaker 2: I think that was the only...  If I had my life to live over and could, that would be the one thing I would change.
Speaker 1: It's funny how this teacher could mess so much up...
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --with that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: --that one backward idea.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And if I had been smart--but I was such an obedient thing, because my father [Thomas Edward Copeland] said that if the teacher said do it...  I could have changed myself when I got in high school, because I had left that woman.  (Laughter).  But I was always so afraid of people.  I don't know, she used to be a very strict disciplinarian.  So, I just don't know.
Story_ID: 74477
Speaker 1: Well, did, were you involved in activities in high school [Washington High School, Raleigh, North Carolina]?  Did you--
Speaker 2: No.  See, when I went to school you milked the cows in the morning, fed the chickens, and did this.  Then you came home in the afternoon and did chores.  We never had time for any activities.  And besides, we walked five miles to school.  And we just... there were... to my knowledge I can't remember in grade school [Lucille Hunter School, Raleigh, North Carolina] if there were any such thing as activities other than recess.  And then we got to high school that was even further to walk.  So... and besides I had to go... my brothers and I always went and... we walked together.  So, none of us ever participated in the after-school activities.
Speaker 1: How long would it take you to get to school?
Speaker 2: About an hour.  And then you had to lug your books, you know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. Okay.  That's a lot of activity right there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Coming and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to and from school.
Speaker 2: And especially, now when it would start snowing the teachers would send us home, so that we could get home before the snow got up to our knees, because we lived so far out.
Speaker 1: How many...  When you were in grade school, how many months during a year did they let you go to school?  Or, did they--
Speaker 2: It seems to me we went to school from September to May.  And even in college, you see... and the reason they did that back there in North Carolina was to give people a chance for the children to work the farms.
Story_ID: 75292
Speaker 1: Okay, we're rolling again.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So when you were in high school [Washington High School, Raleigh, North Carolina], did you have an idea of what you wanted to be when you got out of high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted... my father [Thomas Edward Copeland] had convinced me I wanted to be a doctor.  (Laughter).  That's why I took chemistry and all those hard courses.  Latin, can you imagine taking Latin in high school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well they, I know they discontinued it in the early sixties [1960s].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Nobody does it anymore.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  But Latin was required, so I took the Latin in high school and French in college [St. Augustine's College, Raleigh, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when you graduated what was your plan?  Did you plan to go to college to study pre-medicine?
Speaker 2: That's what I did do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I planned to do that.  So, see, I graduated in May.  And then I worked in the summer as a live-in babysitter where I earned seven dollars a week, my uniforms and everything.  I--luckily, I worked for a wealthy family, so I didn't have to do that much; I just took care of the children.  They had a cook and a chauffeur, so it was really nice.  And they had a gorgeous home, he was the son of the governor [Governor John C.B. Eringhaus].  So, then it was during the days when Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] had just come in after the Depression, and he had set up a program called the NYA [National Youth Administration], to help people go to school and do this, that, and the other.
Speaker 1: That's the National Youth Administration?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the National Youth Administration.  And so, my mother [Dicie Chavis Copeland] got an application for me, and I signed up for college and also signed up to work.  And since I could do shorthand and type, I was hired in the registrar's office.  And I would work after school two to four hours, depending on what the needs were, and then I earned the money for my tuition.  The tuition at that time was thirty-two dollars a semester.  So, I never had to pay any extra cash.  But I saved the money I made babysitting and bought my books and clothes with it.  Because see, my parents couldn't afford to send me to school.  They didn't make that much money.
Story_ID: 75293
Speaker 1: That's at St. Augustine's [College, Raleigh, North Carolina] right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They... I walked... St. Augustine's...  There again, we had moved off of the farm and we lived just about a mile from the college.  So, it was easy to walk back and forth to college, it wasn't hard.  And in those days they had school six days a week.  Now, after my freshman year... I was always into the sciences.  I can't remember if I took biology my freshman year or not.  But I know I started my chemistry classes, and you always had to do your lab work on Saturdays.  And we had a professor by the name of Dr. Woods, and he lived... at that time many of the teachers lived on campus.  And he would come over, open up the lab and give us our assignment, and go home and then come back and lock up when we were supposed to go home.  And I remember when we were in advanced chemistry, I was the only female in the class.  There were seven of us, six boys and myself.  And we would, they would do all the experiments, and I would write them all down.  (Laughter).  So, we did that.  And I took biology, I think, in my... I took chemistry for two years, or three years.  And I took biology in my freshman year, I guess.  But the hardest course I had to take was calculus.  Oh, it was so difficult.  And then I took English in my senior year.  I didn't take history because I didn't like it.  And I've always kind of regretted it, because John Hope Franklin [HM] was teaching it; he was a new professor there at the college in 1939.  But Julia Delany taught English Lit, and I loved English, so I just took English Lit.
Story_ID: 75294
Speaker 1: Now, is she related to Julia Delany, that's--
Speaker 2: She was the wife, she was the wife of Lemuel Delany, Dr. Delany.  So the Delany sisters were a part of, very much a part of St. Augustine's College [Raleigh, North Carolina].  And of course, we as kids went to school with Dr. Delany's children.  Now, Logan and I were in the same class.  And then Lemuel and Nan were younger than myself.  And I saw Lemuel when I was back at St. Aug [St. Augustine's College, Raleigh, North Carolina] last year for my sixtieth college class reunion.  But he's the only one of the Delanys living now.  All the rest are dead.  I always visit the cemetery when I go back there to see my parents' graves.  And I looked at all the Delany sisters' graves; they're all there, even the ones from New York are buried there.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But people talk about the Delany sisters and the wonderful story they had, which was very interesting and fascinating.  And I said my life story should really put theirs to shame, because I had so many interesting experiences.  I not only had the upbringing and the problems that they had... but actually they didn't face the same problems we faced, because financially they were always better off.  They never--
Speaker 1: Yeah, because their father was a Bishop in the Episcopal Church, right.
Speaker 2: Their father was a Bishop in--
Speaker 1: Henry Delany.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so they always had a nice house to live in and all of that, and we didn't--
Story_ID: 75295
Speaker 1: We lived... I used to... as a little girl I used to say, "Ooh, if I could just live in a house that's painted."  We lived in one of these old houses that I'm sure was what the slaves lived in, in the old days.  Never... and I... and we just, I just couldn't believe it.  And finally when my father [Thomas Edward Copeland] moved on Davey Street we did live in a house that was painted, for the first time.  And then I was, let me see.  I think I was into high school [Washington High School, Raleigh, North Carolina], or almost ready to finish high school when we got him to buy a house.  I talked him into buying the house, telling him that "As soon as I finish school, I'll help you pay for it."  (Laughter).  So, anyway, we had our first house that had paint on it.  And that was the first time we had indoor plumbing.  So, it was a long way from the beginning.
Story_ID: 75296
Speaker 1: So, we were talking about St. Augustine's College [Raleigh, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was campus life like at St. Augustine's?
Speaker 2: Well, for the students who lived on campus, it was different to the day students.  See, I lived at home.  You had to go to chapel three days a week if you were a day student.  And the students who lived on campus had to go five nights a week.  They had to go at night, too.  And you could work your way through.  St. Augustine's was a college that encouraged students to work.  That's how my husband [Aaron Herrington] got through.  I met him when he came there to go to school.  But he was as poor as I was.  Even though he came from Newark, New Jersey, his dad couldn't afford to send him, and he came with the understanding that he would work, and he did.  He used to fire the furnace, ring the bell, and all that.  But the teachers were very strict on your being in class on time--that was one thing.  The bell rang five minutes of the class time, two and a half minutes of, and then about right on the time... if it was eight o'clock, it rang.  If you weren't in your seat by eight o'clock... if you were going to class, you had cut the class.  I remember I had a French teacher, she was...  Dr. Woods was the same way.  I can't remember if Mr. Chippey was quite as strict, but most of them were very strict on that.  And the same thing was true with chapel, you had to be there right on time, in your seat.  And chapel was compulsory, yeah.  And I remember they used to have forums for the students about once a month and bring in outstanding speakers.  I always thought that was very interesting.
Speaker 1: Who did you hear?
Speaker 2: I remember there was a man named Granger, I was very impressed with him.  And then we heard a lot of the, oh, I can't remember many of the people that came, because it's been so long.  But they would just be, just be like an hour's length of time.  And the students would all go to the forum.  See, at that time, St. Augustine's College did not have that big of an enrollment.  Now, in my graduating class there were twenty-three people.  And when I went back for my fifty-fifth college reunion... or was it... the fiftieth college reunion... only five of us showed up.  And when I went back for the sixtieth, I was the only one that showed up.  I think many of the people are dead.  And then the others are--I contacted a couple of people who were incapacitated and couldn't make it.  But I can remember years ago when I went back there, and this lady came for her sixtieth college class reunion.  I said, "I can't believe you're coming for your sixtieth college class reunion."  (Laughter).  Yeah.  So, my college days were mostly going to school and working.  I can remember people asking me about football games.  I don't know a thing about football, I never went to a football game.  While the kids were going to football games, I was working, and then I had to go home and study.   And in those days when we were still living outside of St. Augustine's College, we had kerosene lamps.  People today don't even know what that is.
Speaker 1: So, how many students were enrolled do you think in the whole school?
Speaker 2: In the whole school, I would say maybe two hundred or a little over.
Story_ID: 75297
Speaker 1: Alright.  So when you graduated, I mean, what did you plan to do after you graduated?
Speaker 2: Well, see, if I had had enough money, I was going to try to go to med school.  And I think I might have gone had I not gotten married, I don't know.  Because see, I went to work at the Mechanics and Farmers Bank as a secretary when I finished; I first started out as a secretary.  And then I got to be a teller, and eventually I got to be a bookkeeper.  That was the ideal job, because you made more money.  (Laughter).  But anyway, I was saving my money so I could go to med school.  And in the meanwhile I met my husband, and then he talked me into getting married [Aaron Herrington].  (Laughter).  And then the war [World War II] came along and, you see, my brother, Thomas was at Pearl Harbor.  And I had already had a brother that, Ruben, who had been killed in a car accident in October of 1940.  And when Pearl Harbor came along and my brother was there, oh, it was so hard on the family, because we had no idea what was happening over there.  And my mother had really not gotten over my brother's death, it was very difficult for her.  Because she was home and the rest of us were out doing other things, I think it was harder on her than anyone else.  So, when we couldn't get any word about my brother in Pearl Harbor for months and months and months, we just were praying that he was still living.  And eventually, we got the telegram saying, "Regret to inform you that he was injured in action."  And when we got down to "injured in action," at least he's still living.  That--and it was a long time before he could communicate with us, because he was in the hospital on the hospital ship.  And I guess with the confusion and everything--getting letters out--in fact I guess he wasn't even capable of writing for a month or so.  But he wrote as soon as he could to let us know what was going on.  But ironically before they bombed Pearl Harbor, my brother had sent all of his Christmas gifts home.  And he had written a letter which had been censored; they cut out half of it.  And in there, I think he was trying to tell us something, that they were worried about something going wrong, because we had his Christmas gifts late in November.  And I can remember he sent me a kimono, and he sent Mama, I forgot what he sent her.  But he said, "I'm sending them early because I think things are going to go bad over here," or something to that effect.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there were rumors that people knew--
Speaker 2: Knew what was going on, but they didn't--
Speaker 1: Some people knew, but they didn't--
Speaker 2: But they didn't pay attention.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 2: There was a lot of loss because of negligence.  Yeah, that's what happened.
Speaker 1: Now, what boat was he on?  Did--
Speaker 2: The USS Curtis.
Speaker 1: Curtis?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: And they were hit.  Now, he was a captain's steward and everybody was--there were very few men on the ships.  All the men were on pass, and they had to go down to pass up ammunition.  And he and the other man that was helping him, the bomb hit right between them, and the other man was killed.  And he as lucky enough to come out.  And then they got on a hospital ship and were trying to make their way to the Red Cross ship, and the Japanese plane came down and scraped them again and killed the guy who was piloting the boat.  And my brother said he was able to crawl over to the thing and guide the boat on over to the hospital ship, and they put him on the hospital ship.  And that's where he stayed until he recovered.  But he said that they asked him if he wanted to get out, and the captain talked to him and wanted him to stay.  And he said he decided to stay, because he knew he wouldn't have a job when he got home.  So, he just stayed in the [U.S.] Navy and he made a career out of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 75298
Speaker 1: So, so you're at the bank [Mechanics and Farmers Bank, Raleigh, North Carolina] at this time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you're married now... a newlywed, right?  And so, well, tell us about...  Now, you eventually, eventually your husband [Aaron Herrington] joins the Tuskegee-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --air program.
Speaker 2: What happened is we got married on August 14, 1942.  And he was... in those days they told the men in college if you sign up--there was some kind of program you could sign up for, where you'd technically be in the Army but you were supposed to be able to graduate.  Well, when the war [World War II] got bad, they forgot about the promise that they were going to let them graduate, and they started drafting them.  Well, Aaron [Herrington] didn't want to get drafted.  And there was a classmate named Henry Curry who finished in--I had known him; he finished a year behind me, 1941.  Well, Henry, apparently he was from Georgia.  So he went to Tuskegee and he was in one of the early classes.  He came back to St. Augustine's College showing off his wings and his uniform.  And my husband knew him, of course, and he had seen him, and he just went bananas.  (Laughter).  And he went down and signed up immediately.  And then in March of 1943--this was in late '42 [1942]--he got called to go to Biloxi, Mississippi.  They send you down there and make you take a lot of tests.  I didn't realize if he hadn't passed those tests, he'd been in the regular Army.  But he was lucky enough to pass the test, and in May they sent him to Tuskegee.
Story_ID: 75299
Speaker 1: And of course at that time the cadets lived in the emmaries (ph), as they called them.  That was the campus; they lived on campus for the first three months.  And they to pass all the primary planes and all that before they could get on the base.  Well, as soon as he [Aaron Herrington, husband] got settled in down there, he decided he wanted me to come.  So, as I said, if you could type and do shorthand, you could always get a job.  So, the interesting thing is he talked the lady who was the Red Cross director into hiring me as her secretary, sight unseen.  (Laughter).  I said, "He can charm anybody."  (Laughter).  So when I got there, he had a job for me.
Speaker 2: That's great, that's great.
Speaker 1: So, yeah we found--
Speaker 2: So, you started working for the Red Cross?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Alright.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That was the first part, when I first got there.
Story_ID: 75300
Speaker 1: And then I got pregnant, and I...  When you got pregnant, you reported to the commander, the commanding officer of the hospital, to have a doctor assigned.  And I assumed that he would assign Dr. Weeks or somebody as my doctor.  So, when I went in for my assignment, he says, "Oh, I'll take you."  I said, "Oh, my Gosh, the colonel's going to take me."  (Laughter).  So, he was the commanding officer.  But it worked out pretty well because I worked right there in the base hospital.  And he would... sometimes I'd have to wait; he'd be busy when my appointment time was.  But when it came to... he decided...  He was a specialist, and about two weeks before your baby was born, he would predict the sex and the date that the baby would be born.  He predicted that she'd be a girl, and would be born March 17th.  But he said, "Since you live six miles into town, you come in on the 16th."  So on the morning of the 16th I had labor pains and all that stuff, even though I was reporting out there.  So, the nurse got me all ready and everything, and she decided that I was ready to deliver.  And she sent word to Colonel Cummings that he needed to come on down to the delivery room.  Colonel Cummings sent word back, "Tell her to wait.  I told her the baby is due tomorrow."  (Laughter).  So, the little orderly was afraid to go back and tell Colonel Cummings that.  So, the nurse said, "You just wheel her into the delivery room, I'll get the colonel."  So, she came back holding Colonel Cummings' hand, and said, "Didn't I tell you she was ready?"  He couldn't even scrub up.  And he said to me, "You've ruined my reputation."  He said, "I've always been perfect."  (Laughter).  I said, "Well, you have to tell Ann that.  She's the one who decided to show up on the 16th instead of the 17th."
Speaker 2: Now, this is your daughter--
Speaker 1: That's my oldest daughter, Ann.  She was born March 16, 1944, Tuskegee Army Airfield.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 75301
Speaker 1: We're not supposed to use wheelchairs, technically.
Speaker 2: So, anyway, then after she [Ann Herrington] was born, I didn't work for a while.  And when I went back to work, I went to work for the [U.S.] Army.  The reason I was there, though, I really came back to Raleigh [North Carolina] after Aaron [Herrington] graduated, and was planning to stay there because he was supposed to go overseas.  But then he had a crash in June.  And I went back, because when the guy called and told me he had the crash I had hardly unpacked.  And I really didn't have a place to stay, but the lady I had been living with let me stay with her until we could find another place.  And Aaron didn't get back on flying status because he happened to have a concussion and everything.  So, he got assigned as the Officer's Club officer.  Well, since it seemed like he was going to be there awhile, I went back to work with the Army.  This time I worked in the base hospital as a secretary to the doctor who did all the x-rays.  And I made the appointments, typed up all the stuff.  So I got to see all the cadets.  But do you think I could remember who they are?  (Laughter).  No.  So, everybody had to come through once a month for a physical.  They were very strict, you had to be perfect to fly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 75302
Speaker 1: Alright.  There are... I know the Tuskegee Airmen from what I heard were trained and trained and re-trained and over-trained because... for several reasons, I guess?
Speaker 2: Well, actually the problem was--now, see the first class went in--now this is where I wanted to remember the dates--went in I think in March and graduated in July.  They were kind of an accelerated class.  There were twelve of them that started out, but five of them graduated.  Now that's the class that Bill Davis was in.  He was the only officer in the class.  And they were the first class, and there was only five of them in that class.  And I wish I could remember the date now.  But I know it was in 1941.  They started the program in '41 [1941].  And at the time they went there, they had, they really didn't have the field ready for them.  But they trained the... at Moton Field [Tuskegee, Alabama], and then they eventually got to go out to the base.  They got the runways laid and so forth and so on, so that... You know, they had a little problem getting started because they had to get the planes, and had to start from scratch and all of that.  But they started out with a quota of ten men a month, and they found out that that wasn't going to work out.  So, they had to increase that.  And by the time my husband [Aaron Herrington] went in--now, he went in May of 1943 and didn't graduate until May of 1944.  They had increased the length of time they were to remain in training.  And what they had started to do by that time...  The men were finally overseas.  They had a little problem getting to go... to begin with.  And they were sent to Africa, and Ramitelli [Airfield, Apulia, Italy].  And the guys that were in my husband's class were replacement pilots.  And they were sending them over as fast as they could get them ready.  So, when they claimed that the Tuskegee Airmen were not doing an effective job, Bill Davis came back from overseas and reported to the Pentagon and stressed to them the problems they were having.  In the first place, the white pilots were not cooperating with them at all.  And they didn't put them on real missions.  They had them flying, shooting up... steady things.  So, they weren't shooting down planes.  They were doing runs over the trains--shooting up the trains and shooting up places on the ground and things like that.  And finally, they got into combat.  And when they got into combat, I didn't realize, but they have a camera in each plane that shows what you do.  And they became quite outstanding in their combat experiences.  And then they began to escort the bombers.  Now, they're the only outfit that escorted bombers that never lost a bomber to enemy aircraft.  And when the bomber, when the bomber pilots found out who they were, they always asked for them.  They knew they had a Red Tail plane, but they didn't know they were Negroes.  So, finally one day they saw a guy take off his helmet and realized what they were.  But they really deserve more credit than they have ever gotten.  They'd never been recognized for... with a Presidential recognition.  And we've been trying for years to get a postage stamp.  And as of now, we still don't have one.  But my congressman has been trying to help us with this.  The congressman from Alabama promised he would help, because he did help in getting money for the monument that is being done there at Tuskegee. Now 996 single engine pilots graduated from Tuskegee.  The bomber pilots were sent for training at Godman Field [Hardin County, Kentucky] and eventually Freeman Field [Seymour, Indiana].
Story_ID: 75303
Speaker 1: And the Tuskegee Airmen should be credited with the first civil rights movements.  Because on April 5, 1945 at Freeman Field [Seymour, Indiana], they wanted to exercise what was their due right by going to the Officer's Club.  But they had a couple of officers in charge there who were extremely prejudiced, and decided that they could not the Officer's Club, even though Army regulations stated that if you're stationed on the base, you have a right to use the club.  And the men said that they had gone through all of these struggles to sacrifice for the country, and they felt they a right to go to the Officer's Club.  So, they continued to make efforts to go.  Then they were placed under house arrest.  And the amazing thing was that when they placed them under house arrest they took away all their privileges.  They wouldn't let them telephone anybody, they wouldn't let them send out letters, and the families couldn't contact them or anything.  But as Roger Terry tells the story, the saddest part of all that happened for us was that there was some Tuskegee Airman who had relatives that worked at the White House.  And when they had a problem they would get in touch with the relative, and the relative would talk with Eleanor [Roosevelt], Eleanor would talk with Franklin [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt], and things would be worked out.  But the most unfortunate thing that happened this time, first thing they had a problem being able to communicate.  And by the time they could communicate, as the world knows, on April 12, 1945, was the day Franklin died.  And you see, they couldn't get in touch with Mrs. Roosevelt at the time because she was back in New York, not at the White House.  So, what happened was the guys--I hope I'm getting this correct--had to, they had some friend--and I know how--I can't remember all the details now--that had a car.  They got a message to this friend that there was a reporter back there for the Indianapolis paper, who was trying to get on base.  He had been on base once, and the commanding officer had refused to let him come back, because he was trying to interview the men about what was going on.  But they slipped him on base because she came in and they...  He was in the car, and they covered him so that the guard on the gate couldn't see him.  And they got him in there, and he got to some of the men.  They told him the story.  He got out and it hit the paper, and all you know what broke loose.  Congress was down there trying to see what was going on.  Roger Terry's mother was getting in touch with her congressman, "Get this stuff straightened out right now."  And she was a very prominent lady in Los Angeles [California], and so these guys knew they were in trouble.  They had violated the law, and they tried to cover it by getting the men transferred out of Freeman Field.
Speaker 2: Okay.  We have to pause right there and change tapes.
Story_ID: 74490
Speaker 1: Okay, we're rolling again.  How did--yeah. So, how did you feel about all of this, and how did this affect your husband [Aaron Herrington]?  I mean was he one of the ones that was incarcerated?
Speaker 2: No, my husband was a fighter pilot.  No, he had nothing to do with it.
Speaker 1: He had something to do with the Officer's Club, you said.  Didn't he--
Speaker 2: See, what happened is the people, the bomber pilots, were transferred to Freeman Field [Seymour, Indiana] and Godman Field [Hardin County, Kentucky].  The single engine pilots were the ones at Tuskegee [Moton Field, Tuskegee, Alabama].  So, actually--
Speaker 1: At Tuskegee, he wasn't--
Speaker 2: He wasn't there.  Actually, when all of this was happening, nobody knew it.  We were there at Tuskegee, and at Tuskegee there were no newspapers except the Atlanta [Journal] Constitution.  And you really didn't know what was going on in the world.  You had very limited... there weren't... you didn't have radios and TVs giving you any news like we have today.  So, now, he became the Officer's Club officer, and of course we did have... I lived in town and he could come home at night.  But he didn't get back on flying status until--now this happened in '44' [1944].  He got back on flying status, I would imagine about January or February of '45' [1945].  And then you have to go up so many hours.  But he could not fly high enough to pass the test to get trained to go overseas.  And by the time that he did, they were going to send him to Maxwell Field [Montgomery, Alabama] for training to go to the Japanese Theater.  Because they sent word that they had the war in Europe under control.  That was August, August 14, 1945.  They didn't need any more pilots over there.  But before they could get the training in at Maxwell Field, Truman [President Harry S. Truman] had decided he was going to drop the bomb, but we didn't know that.  The people at Tuskegee didn't know that.  All the people at Tuskegee knew was we don't need any more pilots.  So, if you're going for additional training, you don't... we don't need it.  So, all the people there, like my husband, they stayed there until they got discharged or something.  My husband wasn't discharged until 1946. So, and then he had to go back to St. Augustine's College [Raleigh, North Carolina] to finish his two years.  And since I was so thrilled with the money I was making working for the federal government--more money than I had ever made before--about twice as much--we decided that since we were going to move to California and I had a nice place to live, that we would just stay there and he would go back to Raleigh [North Carolina] and stay with my sister and finish school.  And my brother who lived here had already made arrangements for us to move out here.  So, he finished and got his degree and teaching credential, and then we came out here in 1948 to California.
Story_ID: 74491
Speaker 1: Now, what was your pre-conception of California before you came here?  Were you, well, what did you... did you see this as like a--
Speaker 2: Land of sunshine, milk and honey, just like everybody else.  And I was so thrilled when I saw all the palm trees and all this stuff; I thought it was the greatest.  California was just wonderful.  We loved the sunshine.  But you know, when you first come here you have to get used to the weather, though.  It was, I came in October and it was a little bit chilly.  And Alabama weather was chilly, but it was a different type of chill.  And so, but after a while you get used to it, except you remember when you go out at night it's not like back East, you always take a jacket.  Even now you take a jacket.
Story_ID: 74492
Speaker 1: But this apartment I had when I moved here was... since I was a secretary working for the VA [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs], I took leave of absence assuming I would automatically get a transfer here.  But do you know, I could not get a transfer here?  And they had a VA Hospital right here, right across the street from me, a Navy hospital, that's what it was then.  And the VA Hospital at Sawtelle [Los Angeles, California] offered me a job, but I couldn't drive forty miles a day to go to work.  So, I couldn't get a job; that was the biggest problem I faced.  I was still drawing money from my salary back there because I had six weeks of leave due me, and all of that.  And I started looking for a job, and had a very difficult time getting a job.  And I thought, oh God, they are prejudiced in California.  But certain jobs, they were prejudiced.  And then I had a friend who worked for the county, and she told me they were looking for social workers.  And I had been to the Department of Employment and told the man I was a college graduate and I needed a job, and gave him all the information, all my stuff.  And he never offered me a seat to sit down.  As I was walking out, I remember he never bothered to write down my name and address, so I knew he wasn't going to help me, see.  So I finally got, went into the county and applied to Mr. Lopez who was the director, for a job as a social worker.  He asked me all the routine questions, and he was concerned about whether or not I planned to remain in Long Beach [California].  He said, "We've had so many Navy wives, and by the time we get them trained--that was the Korean War time--they leave.  I assured him that we intended to live here, and that I would not be transferring out.  My husband [Aaron Herrington] was out of the military and so he... in the course of the interview, he was asking me about my background.  And I told him about my social work experience with the Red Cross and all the things I had done.  And just before we finished the interview he said, "I assume you have colored blood."  And I said, "Oh, yes, and I hope it's not a problem."  And I went on to tell him all the problems I had had and the hard time, and I assured him that if he'd just gave me a chance I could do it.  And then he said, "Well, all I wanted to tell you was we don't discriminate."  (Laughter).  So, within four days he had hired me.  And then I went to work January 17, 1949 as a social case worker for, it was called the Bureau of Public Assistance then.  And then later they changed it to the Department of Public Social Services.
Story_ID: 74493
Speaker 1: I enjoyed social work, because I felt like I was really able to make a difference in a lot of people's lives.  I tried to be objective, and because I had been poor, I could empathize with people.  But I learned that people are their own worst enemies when you're trying to help them, because they had such a low self-image and no awareness of how to help themselves.  And a lot of times it was very difficult to get across to them, "You are the person.  You are the most important person in your life.  It's you that can do it.  You don't need me to tell you what to do, you can do it.  But you have to make up your mind to do it."  So, I felt in my ten years as a social worker I really made a difference in the lives of quite a few people.  Because if they were willing to go to school and had to buy books, I'd find them a way to get books.  We didn't have any money to give them through the county but I found out there were clubs, there were organizations and things.  And you could call them up and give them a sob story, and they'd give you money for the books.  That's how I got involved with the club I'm in today, the Altrusa Club [Altrusa International, Inc.].  I found out that they would give the money and the people didn't even have to worry about paying it back if they were going to school and wanted to better themselves.  So, I developed a lot of resources that way.  And then when I became a supervisor, I still did basically the same... basically helped my workers help their clients, by providing them with resources.  And sometimes when you want something so bad and you don't get it, through default you get something that's better.  Because my husband [Aaron Herrington] and I, for the first time we went on vacation to Europe.  And I, we did budgets at the county.  And I wanted to be the person who taught budgeting to the new workers.  See, if you were a supervisor, you had to teach a class of new workers.  So, while I was gone on vacation, they assigned that to another social work supervisor.  And I was so unhappy when I came back.  And Mr. Lopez said, "Well, you can just do the resources."  Well, I figured, "Well, if I'm going to do resources, we're going to really (Laughter) do a bang-up job.  So, you'd have these social workers, and you'd be in there talking to them for a couple of hours telling them, "Well, you can get child care here and you can get so-and-so here and here."  And they don't write that stuff down; they don't remember it.  So, I started writing everything down and developed flyers that I handed out.  So, this went on for a number of years.  And then the county--during the Johnson Administration they had what we call--I call it the free-flowing Johnson money--when we set up neighborhood centers and all this. And I was assigned to work with the neighborhood centers as a liaison rep for the county.  And I did the Christmas program, too.  That was a special program... and the campus program.  So, I had a lot of experience in working directly with the community and the community organizations.
Story_ID: 74494
Speaker 1: So, in 1972 when they came out with a program that if the county can't help a person, they need to provide the client with resource information.  Well, I immediately applied to my director for the job as the resource coordinator.  As large as LA [Los Angeles] County is, they only had five resource coordinators in the entire county.  And his message back to me was, "Well, Maycie, you've been doing it all the time, so go ahead and do it."  And that... if I had gotten the job as teaching the budgets, I wouldn't have had the experience and the buildup of the resource information, which turned out to be the most wonderful ten years of my career.  Because I used to go to a meeting and say, "If you don't know me, you haven't lived in Long Beach [California] long."  Everybody knew me because I did all these talks.  I went to the United Way meetings, the Coordinating Council meetings, the...  I worked with the school district when they started Head Start.  They had me train all of the new Head Start people in the areas of social work to help them understand what happens with needy families.  And I had a real close relationship with the guy who was the head of attendance service, and I could call the school board and get information.  I worked with the Social Security, because we were transferring the aged over to Social Security, and I worked very closely with the guy there.  And I could call him up on the phone and his answer would be, "What's your problem now, my dear?"  (Laughter).  So, we knew each other.  Because it's a strict regulation; if you work for the county you don't give out any confidential information.  And when people used to call me--people like--if they were for probation and I didn't know their voice, I would just simply tell them, "I'll call you back, because I don't know who I'm talking to."
Story_ID: 74495
Speaker 1: And I had a couple of real interesting incidents.  I was doing late duty once, and I got a call from the County Coroner's Office.  Now, nobody knows the problems of the County Coroner, the LA [Los Angeles] County Coroner.  They have to take every body that--you know, where there's any type of violent death, plus poor people who die at Harbor Hospital.  If they don't have a record of the next of kin or somebody to come and move the body, that goes to the County Coroner's Office.  So, this particular afternoon I happened to be on late duty and I got this call from this very upset gentleman at the County Coroner's Office, and he was fit to be tied.  And he said, "Mrs. Herrington, I don't know what's going on in your office.  I talked to this gal today and asked her to give me the name and address of the next of kin of Mr. 'so-and-so,' and she told me, "I take care of the living; I don't take care of the dead."  (Laughter).  So, I thought, oh, my Lord, what am I going to do?  So, I researched the file and gave him the information.  And then I notified the woman's supervisor that she was wrong, because she should have called him back and given him the information of next of kin.  That's why we have it in our records.  They've got to move those bodies.  LA County is the largest in the world, and when the--they only have so many vaults there to keep a body in.  So, they wanted to move the bodies.  And of course this was a problem.  But I thought, gosh, can you believe this gal had the nerve to tell him, "I don't take care of the dead."  (Laughter).  I let her know that was a part of her job.  So, it was one of those things.
Story_ID: 74496
Speaker 1: But I've had a lot of interesting experiences in social work.  And we don't want to get into too many of them, but my husband [Aaron Herrington] happened to be a deputy probation officer and I got real friendly with a judge.  Because he... and so I said, "I can't understand, Aaron, why you are the only probation officer that gets invited to all the affairs for the attorneys and all this stuff."  But anyway, I had a lot of clients that I thought was mistreated by the police from time to time.  And so, I was telling the judge that I think this is so unfair.  They get all these fines, and they don't have enough money to live on.  And he said, "Well, listen, if you have a situation that you think is unjustified, if you'll send me a letter I'll take care of it."  So, this worked out great.  And so then a situation came up.  This was in Long Beach [California] where a client had a problem, and the case was in San Pedro [Los Angeles, California].  And I had a nephew who was an attorney.  So this guy's name was Judge Benz, he was a tough judge.  And this gal had come here from Kentucky.  And she had a Kentucky driver's license but not a California driver's license.  And let me tell you, if you're in San Pedro you're under the LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department], so be careful.  (Laughter).  Not Long Beach.  But anyhow she had a neighbor who--well, she had loaned...  Let me get the story straight.  This gal had let her child go to her neighbor's house to play, and she had fallen and injured herself.  So, she had a neighbor who would loan--take her places.  And she went next door to the neighbor and said to the neighbor, "Can you take me to so-and-so's house, because I have to take my little girl to the hospital if her arm is broken."  The neighbor was in the process of baking a cake.  And she said, "Emma, here are the car keys, you drive on over there."  So, Emma was driving on down Pacific Avenue real slow looking for the street where she was going to make the left turn.  And as fate would have it, this LAPD officer got in back of her, waited until she made a left turn, and pulled her over and cited her.  He cited her for driving without a driver's license and for driving too slow in the left lane.  Well, anyway, so the worker was so worried about it.  I was a resource coordinator by this time.  She asked me to help her, and I started calling all my lawyer friends about what must I do.  And my nephew says, "Oh, he's tough, but just talk up to him.  Don't let him run over you, don't let him run over you."  So, I called up the district attorney over there.  They have a district attorney's representative.  And I told him the story.  And he says, "Oh, Mrs. Herrington, I'm not supposed to help you, because that's a misdemeanor, and I'm only supposed to do it if it's a criminal case."  And I sweet-talked him and I said, "But you can help me, you know you can help me."  He said, "Okay, okay."  So, I took a letter over to him and he gave it to the judge.  And we showed up there and they had the hearing.  And the judge, she was pregnant at the time.  And the judge said to me, "Well, we'll give her sixty days."  I think she said sixty days.  "You help her get her driver's license and we'll dismiss the fine."  I said, "Oh, fine."  As fate would have it, the first thing Emma did was she flunked the test.  (Laughter).  Well, she passed the written test.  She was very smart, although she had a sixth grade education.  That's what was so amazing; she could do all the crossword puzzles, and I couldn't.  So, I did something that I could never let my supervisors know; I had to let her use my car to take the test.  But what happened is she flunked the driving part of it.  So, they have a rule that if you fail the driver's part, you have to wait two weeks to come back.  And I knew we had to go to court the next day and... no, a couple of days later.  So, I said, oh gosh we've got to work this out.
Story_ID: 74497
Speaker 1: And I figure I can get my story across almost anybody.  So, I go into the Department of Motor Vehicles and asked for the director.  And the lady asked me what I wanted, and I told her I wanted to make special arrangements for a driver's test.  And she says, "Oh, you don't want to talk to the director, you want the driver's analyst."  So, I go back there to the driver's analyst and I tell him my story.  He says, "Oh, she can take it tomorrow, no problem."  So, I took her out and made her drive the course... and drive the course until she felt comfortable.  So, I took her back the next day and she passed the test.  Then I sent my letter to the judge.  No, I prepared a letter for the judge explaining to him she's passed the test and everything, and I want the charges dismissed.  So, I call over there and my district attorney's been transferred.  So, I said, oh, my goodness, I don't know anybody there to talk to.  So, I had to take the letter with me.  And I got there and I talked to a bailiff who wasn't too friendly.  I said, "I want you to give this to the judge."  He said, "What for?"  I said, "Just give it to the judge.  Don't worry about what for."  (Laughter).  So, well, he gave the letter to the judge.  And if you've ever been to the court here in LA [Los Angeles] County, the way they do it is they bring the prisoners down in the prison bus.  And so, you sit there and you wait while they go through the preliminaries.  And he was sending everybody to jail; oh, my Gosh.  You know, they'd call the guy's name and, "You go to jail for thirty days," and so and so on.  I said, "Oh, my Gosh, he is tough."  So, when he got to my letter, he looked at my letter and he looked up and he said, "Maycie Herrington, who do you think you are, telling me how to run my court?"  He called me up there; he didn't call the client up there at all.  I said, "I'm not telling you how to run the court."  I said, "You promised me you'd let her get dismissed.  We've got the driver's license, we've got everything here for you.  What else do you want?"  "You--I didn't tell you that."  I said, "Oh, yes you did."  "Oh, no, I didn't."  "Oh, yes, you did."  So, we went through this.  And locks me in, you know, so I can't get out.  So, I sat there.  You know, he wants me to pay the fine.  So, I said this is illegal for me as a social worker; I'm not supposed to be paying any fine.  But I did have my checkbook with me.  So, when he got ready to go on the lunch break, I walked right out behind him.  And I said, "Now, Judge Benz, can I talk to you?"  "I don't want to talk to you."  I said, "But I want to talk to you."  "No, no, no," he wouldn't talk to me, he just went on and had his coffee.  Well, meanwhile as fate would have it, the lady that loaned Emma the car was there.  And she gave Emma the money to pay the twenty-five dollar fine.  But I said, my Gosh.  And the next time I saw Judge Benz, my nephew had become a judge.  And he was being robed, and he was sitting right next to me at the robing.  And I said, "Do you remember me?"  He said, "You look vaguely familiar."  I said, "Yes, you were kind of mean to me when I was in your court."  He looked at me and stared.  (Laughter).  But you don't want to hear all those stories.  But I'll tell you, I had some interesting stories working for that.
Story_ID: 74498
Speaker 1: Now, you served on a couple of grand juries?
Speaker 2: I served on... a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: As I said, when I got on the LA [Los Angeles] County Grand Jury I went from being a nobody to a somebody.
Speaker 2: Now this is, about what year is this?
Speaker 1: This is... I retired in 1981.  My nephew nominated me.  See, one of the problems was minorities didn't get on the grand jury because they had to be nominated by a judge, and they were very few black judges.  But my nephew happened to be a judge at this time.  So, he nominated me.  But the first year I didn't even get in the group that called, got called.  So, he nominated me, and I was on the '82' [1982] '83' [1983] Grand Jury.  And when they nominate you for the grand jury, they have three hundred people, and they do a very formal thing to select the members that are going to be on the jury.  They have a court session.  Everyone whose name has been nominated gets put into a big container, like a ball.  And then they have court... call the court to order.  They have two newspaper reporters, a bailiff, and a court reporter taking records.  And they draw, have somebody draw the numbers.  I think it's the... is it... it was the person who worked for the court that drew the numbers.  And then they have a name with each number.  And of course, the first year I didn't even get drawn at all.  The second year I got drawn.  They draw forty-three numbers.  And if you're in the forty-three, they ask you if you're willing to serve a year.  And if you are, you agree to go through the CII investigation.  They investigate you to see if you have any criminal history.  You have to go over to the sheriff's department, run your fingerprints, and do your history.  If you pass that, then they put your names back in the pot and draw again.  So, they only really have twenty-three grand jurors that they draw.  They draw twenty-three and then three alternates.  And I happened to be number fourteen that got drawn that time.  And then the Grand Jury year starts June 1st and ends May 31st.  And you have to have orientation and you serve a year.
Story_ID: 74499
Speaker 1: And the, my reservations at first was driving to Los Angeles [California] every day.  But I found out I could leave home...  We didn't have to be there at 8 o'clock in the morning.  They agreed that we would be there... start, start at 9:30, and they wanted you there at 9 o'clock.  And then we would get out... unless we had a case or something, we'd try to get out of there by 4 or 4:15, so it wasn't too bad.  And you served four days a week.  They--each jury votes what day they want to take off.  So, we took, I think we took Mondays off when I was on it.  But you hear... at the time I was on it, you'd hear the criminal cases and the civil cases.  It was the most interesting experience I think I have ever had.  Because as I said, when you get on the LA [Los Angeles] County Grand Jury, you are really considered elite.  Because you can talk to any member of the Board of Supervisors, you can talk to anybody in high level government, and you are investigating other cities and counties.  And when you walk into that city office, they start trembling. "What do you want?"  Because the Grand Jury has so much clout, you see.  And they aren't allowed to have lawyers when you appear before the Grand Jury.
Story_ID: 74500
Speaker 1: Now, two of the cases I remember distinctively was the Twilight Zone case and the John Belushi case.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Both of those cases were during my grand jury time.
Speaker 2: Well, tell us about your impressions of the Twilight Zone case.  This is the trial of director John Landis.
Speaker 1: John Landis.  Well, we were put in buses and taken to the theater so we could see the thing from all angles.  And my impression was that John Landis, he was probably a very dictatorial director, because I really felt sorry for the airline pilot.  A lot of people would not work with him.  But this pilot was so anxious to get into the movies that he took the job.  And he had been a very successful pilot in Vietnam.  He was one of the few pilots that had gone in under flight conditions, you know, when the bullets were flying, and brought out the injured.  He had a good record of that.  And--
Speaker 2: Now just briefly now, the case against John Landis was--I mean the accusations was that...that...  Well on the set there were two people killed, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Vic Morrow... no, three people were killed.  Vic Morrow and three [sic, two] children were killed.  And they violated all kind of regulations.
Speaker 2: These were Vietnamese children?
Speaker 1: That's what they said, but that is not true.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: They were Chinese children.
Speaker 2: As opposed to Vietnamese children.
Speaker 1: No, they weren't.  That, well, the reason they got the job is because somebody worked for the county, and they knew the director and so forth.  But the most, the saddest part about the whole situation in my opinion was that he wanted it so real that he did a lot of things that were illegal.  See, he used real bullets in firing across that water, which we found out in the investigation was illegal.  Then he had what they call a special effects man that was very nervous.  And in my opinion it was the special effects man that created the problem.  Because the way they demonstrated it on the Grand Jury to us was this special effects man had a board, like.  And he was supposed to punch the thing at the time that they were to release the, you know, the bullets.  And they, he was so nervous.  We had to excuse him several times to take drugs to keep him from passing out on the stand.  And John Landis kept telling them--and you could hear him giving directions, "Lower, lower, lower," wanting the aircraft to come down so low.
Speaker 2: The helicopter, right?
Speaker 1: The helicopter, yeah, it was a helicopter.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: And what happened is by their releasing... If he had been two seconds later, I think they would have been saved.  By releasing it at the wrong time, the bamboo from in the lake where they were filming it--they were filming it in county territory out there--it went into the rotor of the plane and caused the plane to fall.
Speaker 2: The helicopter.
Speaker 1: The helicopter, yeah.  And that's the sad part.
Speaker 2: And the blades killed--
Speaker 1: The blades killed... yeah.  See, they, if they had been just five steps further, they would have missed it.  I mean, the blades wouldn't have hit them.  But that was the most unfortunate thing.  And then we indicted John Landis because of that.  But when it came to trial, the district attorney's office had this woman lawyer who was trying it.  And apparently, she wasn't able to convince the jury that he was guilty, so we convicted him.  And then we had the John Belushi case.  And the lady who gave him the drugs was convicted of his murder, too.
Story_ID: 74501
Speaker 1: So, tell us about the John Belushi case.
Speaker 2: Now, you know, I don't know the life of movie stars, but I was sure shocked when I learned how they lived, to some degree.  I guess I'm kind of naive.  And they say he arrived in town in the evening.  And he was supposed to be, according to the girl who was one of the managers, he was just supposed to rest and then they had a four o'clock meeting with somebody, I think she said.  He was supposed to meet some friends, so, because they were getting off from work at that time.  And now, I understand why.  And then I guess he got bored and he wanted this friend of his, he wanted to know if she knew where he could get any drugs.  And she said, no.  And meanwhile, this gal, Cathy Smith, had come down to the building where he was staying. She just made herself at home there, according to what this young lady said.  He had never met her before.  And they were sitting there talking, and this gal said to John, "You know, you need to go to bed."  He said he didn't want to go to bed.  She said, "Well, you know you've got to get up and meet these people." And he said, "Oh, I want to find some action." I don't know how they worded it, but anyway this gal said well, she knew where she could get some drugs.  So, he had a limousine at his disposal apparently.  So, he had the limousine driver take her wherever it was she knew she could get some drugs.  And she came back, and this friend was still there waiting.  And she came back and eventually she went, took him into the bathroom and supposedly injected it in his arm.  And I guess she just didn't know what she was doing.  But then this friend, I think she said she left about two o'clock and John was supposed to be meeting this other person at four.  And I guess he--I don't know whether she said what time Cathy Smith left or not.  But anyway, apparently he finally went to bed.  And then when the friends met up at four o'clock, he never showed.  So they just felt that he was tired and was sleeping, so they didn't bother until about six o'clock.  Because I think they had an important engagement around seven or something.  So they went over at six to get him up and they couldn't wake him up, and that's when they had to call the police.  And when the police came, would you believe Cathy Smith had taken his car, and she showed up bringing it back.  And of course, then they had her.  And they questioned her, but they kind of let her go because they didn't have enough details at the time.  And then as it turns out, they made pictures of him which was- and so passing them around.  And he had apparently used drugs before.  I don't know whether he had been a drug user or not, but he had the marks on his arms.  So, they knew that evidently--I don't know whether it was bad drugs or what that they got that caused his death, but they had to take the body to the County Coroner.  And within less than a week the coroner ruled that it was death by drug overdose.  So then of course, we had questioned her.  Did we have her?  No, we didn't have the opportunity to question her, that's what happened; she left the state and went to Canada.  But we knew that this reporter had questioned her because it was a story in the [National] Enquirer.  So they subpoenaed the reporter from Florida, and when he came he brought his tape, he was smart.  And on the tape, he was interviewing her.  And she went on to explain what she had done and so forth and so on, and that's how she got indicted.  They sent her to jail.
Story_ID: 74502
Speaker 1: Now tell me.  Is there--you say there are very few minority people that end up as members of the grand jury.  Was there ever a time when you felt--or tell me about a time that you can remember where it was really important that you were on the grand jury and you were glad that you were there instead of it being an all-white grand jury.  Can you think of a time when your presence made a difference?
Speaker 2: Well, I think on the grand jury I was on, we had, let me see.  We had one gal who was Mexican.  Well, she wasn't Mexican, she was from El Salvador or somewhere.  Then we had a guy who is Mexican, and then we had one lady who was so light I thought she was white, but she said she was colored.  And then we had one other guy that was colored on the jury.  But--
Speaker 1: Out of how many?
Speaker 2: Out of twenty-three people.
Speaker 1: Twenty-three?
Speaker 2: Twenty-three people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, that was a little bit better than it had been, because they had two or three black judges by this time.  But the problem was that only judges could nominate people for the County Grand Jury, and very few people knew judges.  You know, ordinarily you just don't know a judge.  And so, my nephew became a judge and he started nominating minorities.  So, I think one of the first black men that was on the jury was one he had nominated.  Was a man from Compton [Los Angeles, California].
Story_ID: 74503
Speaker 1: But now after our grand jury, we decided that instead of the judges nominating them, that it should be the public.  And anybody can nominate themselves.  All they have to do is go before a judge and be approved now, to get on the County Grand Jury.  But as supervisor [Kenneth] Hahn said when he came to talk to us, he said, "You are the most powerful people in the county."  Now, we indicted a sitting judge, very interesting story.  He was corrupt, and he was reputed to be a tough judge.  But I don't know if you remember one of the first black announcers in LA [Los Angeles, California].  His name was [Stan] Duke.  I can't remember his first name.  He and his wife were getting a divorce and they owned some property or something, and he didn't want to split fifty-fifty with her.  And he did what they call check--check knitting or something, I don't know.  He got involved with some gal who worked for the bank; he was having a romance with her.  And she worked for the manager of the bank.  And he lost his job.  He was on Channel 2.  And he got--wait a minute.  I think he got off.  Because this gal who worked for the bank knew an attorney who was a friend of this judge's.  So, this judge would take payoff and then he would dismiss the cases.  So, what happened in this particular case, her boss got his third drunk driving thing.  And if you get your third drunk driving thing in the state of California, you don't have a license for a couple of years, and you may go to jail.  So, his case was coming up before this particular judge.  And he didn't want to lose his job and do all this.  But he had already hired an attorney.  And this attorney had said, "Well, we'll see what we can do.  It's a tough situation, knowing this judge."  So, then he talked to this lady and she says, "Oh, I've got an attorney who can fix everything for you."  So, she referred him to the other attorney, and the other attorney said, "Yes, we can take care of it.  I play golf with him," and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  But then this guy had to tell his own attorney; somehow he had chickened out.  So when he told his own attorney, his own attorney says, "Oh, oh, this isn't right."  So, his own attorney had to report it to the district attorney.  So, when he reported it to the district attorney, the district attorney called the guy in and made a deal with him.  "You work with us, we won't file any charges against you."  Okay, so the district attorney has women investigators.  So, what they did was they had a woman investigator pretend to be this man's wife.  So she called up the attorney and said, "Do you know we're paying you a lot of money.  I want to know what kind of guarantee you're going to give us that we're going to get off."  And she says, "Oh, you don't have to worry.  He's going to walk, he's going to walk."  "Oh no, I want some guarantee."  So, they have all this on tape.  So, this woman kept pressing, and finally they told her, "I know this judge is going to do so and so and so.  We've got everything all set up," blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  So, they got it all on tape.  This goes back to the district attorney's office.  So when this man's case came up and he got dismissed, they got the judge.  And so, they got him out.  That was the three cases I remember specifically.
Story_ID: 74504
Speaker 1: Now you got involved in--I know your husband Aaron [Herrington] was involved with the Los Angeles Chapter of the Tuskegee Airmen?
Speaker 2: Yes.  When they first started, they started- the first chapter was started in 1972.  And I think it was in Chicago [Illinois].  And the Los Angeles [California] chapter was organized in 1974.  And Lowell Steward, bless his heart, he used to call down here all the time for Aaron.  And I said, "Aaron, you know, you guys, you'd better stick together and get involved with the chapter."  I forgot to tell you, Aaron joined the National Guard after we first came here.  And then the National Guard got drafted, everybody but his unit during the Korean War.  And he got into the Army Reserve.  So, he served in the Army Reserve until he was sixty, and then they retire you.  But anyhow, he was working in Los Angeles by this time.  And he was, they were trying to get organized.  And he did help quite a bit, but he didn't go to all of the meetings.  But they got organized in 1974, and he took out a membership because all the guys were real proud of the Tuskegee Airmen getting organized and so forth and so on.  And he went to quite a few of the meetings and he went to quite a few of the conventions.  And when we had a stroke in 1995 and was totally incapacitated--the thing- the head was--I didn't realize they had what they called contact- a calling unit.  If a person is sick, they call to check on you.  And I remember Mitch Higginbotham used to call me every week to see how Aaron was.  And I have a letter in his book now that they wrote and sent him.  All the guys signed it.  I thought that was really neat.  And so, after he passed I decided to keep his membership.  And then I started going to the meetings.  At first I figured, "I don't drive the freeways at night.  Now how am I going to work this out?"  Then I said, "Oh, to heck, my daughter Ann lives right up there."  Ann lives not too far from the airport.  So, what I did is I drive up to Ann's house, and then one of the Tuskegee Airmen picks me up and takes me to the meeting.  Now Bradley had been doing it; he lived right around the corner from her.  But he's sick and isn't going now.  So, either Andrew Wallace or Roger Terry or somebody picks me up and takes me to the meeting, then I stay overnight at her house and I come home.  I shop at the [U.S.] Navy base on Saturday morning and come on home, so it works out fine.
Story_ID: 74505
Speaker 1: And in 1998 I got nominated for the secretary, because nobody wants to be secretary (laughter).  It seems a permanent job.  And as secretary, I do the voicemail.  When people call in for the Tuskegee Airmen, it comes on the voicemail.  So, I pick up the messages and try to see what happens there.  But the Los Angeles [California] chapter set up a scholarship fund, and it's quite successful.  We give scholarships to forty-five students every year who are graduating from high school and going into college; it's fifteen hundred dollar scholarships.  So, I thought the Tuskegee Airmen history has never been told.  And my son-in-law is a fireman for the City of Long Beach [California].  And all of a sudden the Fire Department puts out these PR [public relations] baseball sized cards.  And I looked at it and I said, "You know, that would be terrific if we got the guys in their uniform in World War II, put their history on the back of the card, then we could more history of the Tuskegee Airmen out to the public."  So, I sent in a request in 1998 to the national office to approve the baseball cards.  You have to go through all the formality and get the national organization to approve it.  They approved in 1998.  But 1999 nothing happened, 2000 nothing happened.  At the time we put it through, [HistoryMaker] Alexander Jefferson in Detroit [Michigan] was the person who put them through.  And I called Alexander and I said, "What's happening on my baseball cards?  You guys aren't doing anything."  "Oh, Maycie you--they aren't going to do anything.  You're going to have to do it."  So, for the 2000 convention I put through a request to let the Los Angeles chapter do it, knowing I'm going to do it.  So, Roger Terry, who was the president at the time, said "Sure, we'll help you."  And he did help me.  In a way, he didn't do anything but let me use his name (laughter).  (Laughter).  Anyway we put it through, and we got the first batch of cards done, let me see, in 19- in 2000.  No, we didn't get it approved until 2000, 2001.  So then I had a--see, what happened, the national office has the national membership list.  So, they gave me the list and I was able to contact many of the people.  A lot of them didn't send it back and others were dead.  But some of the widows sent me really good stuff.  And I'm just real pleased with the cards we've done as of now, even though no one has really helped me market them.  And I'm hoping that I will get more help on that.  So--
Speaker 2: I hope so, they're beautiful.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm getting calls now from various parts of the country.  When people see them they're very impressed, because that's why I put the sixteen cards together, because you can see everybody.  And I also have them in packages.  But you only see the person on the front.  You don't see the person, you know, inside.  You got to open them up and try to wonder who's in there.  But I'm very proud of it because I think it's just wonderful, you know.  So--
Story_ID: 74506
Speaker 1: So, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community now?
Speaker 2: Well, my concern is, you know, I've always said if people treat everybody the way my father [Thomas Edward Copeland] said they should treat them- is treat them the way you want to be treated.  If people could learn to live with each other and help each other, I think the world would be a much better place.  I'm praying right now that we don't go to war, because wars have never solved anybody's problems.  We need to negotiate what we can do, you know.  And if people were concerned about other people--now, I cook for my neighbor across the street because she's totally incapacitated.  That's what blew my time for the last two weeks.  I had a neighbor up the street that had a car accident.  She had no business driving.  (Laughter).  I had to take her to the hospital three times, and all this kind of stuff.  And yet my daughter Kay says, "Mom, why do you do it?"  I said, "Well, because she's a human being, and I just can't leave her out there by herself."  She has no relatives, absolutely nobody.  And it's kind of sad when these people have outlived everybody.  And she didn't have any children, and everybody is dead.  So, I have to give her credit for hanging in there.  She lives by herself, even though she does a lot of things I recommend she not do.  Unfortunately, she's losing her sight, and she's so dependent on me.  And they say that I'm the only one that fools with her.  Now for years, the last four or five years, she's just like a part of our family.  When we go to Los Angeles [California], we take her.  Somebody asked me if was going to bring her for Thanksgiving.  I said, "I don't think she's strong enough to go, because we're going to have Thanksgiving at my daughter's house in Los Angeles.  If we were having it here, it wouldn't be so bad, because if she got sick you could run her home."
Story_ID: 74507
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: As a community minded person and as someone who's had a career in social work and a volunteer career, what do you see as your legacy?
Speaker 1: Well, I hope to get my life's book published.  I've gotten quite a few awards that I'm proud of every one of them for my services in the City of Long Beach [California].  I was honored I think in 1984 by the National Council of Jewish Women with the Hannah G. Solomon Award.  And then in 1989, the Soroptimist Club honored me with Women Helping Women.  And then in 1996--I was so proud of this--I got Rick Racker Woman of the Year, which I thought was great.  For the whole city of Long Beach, I got to be honored as the Outstanding Woman of the Year.  And then last year I was really surprised when the National Council of Conference of Justice honored me with a Humanitarian Award for the things I have done in the community.  Well, I have done a lot of things, because I have served on commissions.  I served eight years on the--no, is it eight, eight years on the Community Development Commission for the City of Long Beach.  I've been a member of the Altrusa Club since 1973.  I served on Plymouth West Board; that's a home for independent living for elderly low-income people, for twenty years.  I currently serve on the Beachwood Board, which is the only housing in the City of Long Beach with roll-in showers for the handicapped, and that type of thing.  And I currently serve on that board.  And let's see, I also serve on the Los Angeles County Grand Jurors Association.  Last year I was the president.  And let's see, and I met--and I used to do lectures all the time, too, when I was working, the last few years I worked.  I lectured out at the college and- when I was a resource coordinator.  So, that's how everybody knew me.  Because when people had problems with welfare and they couldn't get through, no matter what the problem was they called me, because I tried to trouble-shoot it for them.  I'm one of these people that believes there's a solution to every problem, all you have to do is look for it.  Even though there are a lot of things you can't do much about, but you have to try.  So, and I kind of have my father's [Thomas Edward Copeland] philosophy, "Let me live in the house by the side of the road and be a friend to man."
Story_ID: 74508
Speaker 1: That's just--
Speaker 2: Now, did your parents get a chance to see you become successful?  I know your mother--
Speaker 1: Well, no.  My mother [Dicie Chavis Copeland], my mother died in 1963 and my father [Thomas Edward Copeland] did too.  But I was doing social work, and we were successful according to their standards.  Because we had been able to buy a home; we bought a home.  Now, you see, my brother found a house for us to buy, even before we moved here.  And during the war [World War II], I worked.  Very few wives worked, especially if they had a husband that was a pilot.  They were so important; they'd sit in the Officer's Club and play cards.  But I worked all my life.  So, I continue to work.  And I had bought a house just before the war.  Because I worked in the bank, and the boss talked me into buying the last house they built.  So, I had a house in Raleigh [North Carolina] before I even got married.  And so, I was always a person who believed in saving, and we had saved money.  I had bought war bonds.  And when we came out here and bought that property on 15th Street, they needed thirty-five hundred dollars down.  And there were a lot of people who wanted to buy it, but they couldn't pay thirty-five hundred dollars down.  So, even though Aaron [Herrington] was going to school on the GI Bill, we paid that.  And there was a duplex with a cottage in the back.  So, the guy said, "Well, you can just live in the cottage in the back.  You'll have enough rent coming in to pay for your notes," even though neither one of us were working.  And that's what we did, and it worked out.  And then I finally got a job and Aaron went to school at UCLA [University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] for another year, because he was trying to get into graduate--he was in graduate school.  And then when he joined the National Guard and went on active duty, he didn't go back because he had to be on active duty through September.  And when he wanted to go back in February, he couldn't get the classes he wanted because he had missed the fall semester.  So, he started working in the same office I worked in, in February of 1951.  And then he went, from there he transferred over to the probation department, and eventually as a consultant for the County Human Relations Commission.
Story_ID: 74509
Speaker 1: Now, he was very active in the community, and he has all kinds of honors up there.  He was one of the probation officers that got honored by the Bar Association, which I thought was outstanding.  And he was honored by the Lions Club a number of times.  And then he got this kind of unique invitation to go to Mineola, Mississippi, which is the hometown of Willie Brown.  Willie Brown is an outstanding character in the State of California.  He used to be an assemblyman, and he is now Mayor of San Francisco [California].  So Haywood Epperson, who was a friend of Aaron's, said every year, every five years, they have this big affair there and Willie was supposed to be the speaker, and all of a sudden he said he couldn't make it.  So, Mr. Epperson decided that a Tuskegee Airman would be the next best thing.  And they wanted to find somebody who lived in Mississippi, but they couldn't.  So they took Aaron [Herrington], and I understand he did a very good job.  I know he used to talk all the time, he did.  The only thing I regret is I never videotaped one of his talks so that I would have him on tape, telling his experiences as a Tuskegee Airman.  But he did so many things in the City of Long Beach [California].  He was the first black on the Civil Service Commission; he served twelve years on the Civil Service Commission.
Story_ID: 74510
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me this.  I know you're still involved in a lot of activities, and especially the Tuskegee Airmen.  But how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, I tell my daughter, just put on there "She cared."  (Laughter).  Because, you know, I do care about people, and I think that's one of the major concerns.  And I am so fortunate in that I have the most wonderful neighbors in the world.  Now the guy who lives across the street from me that's selling his house, it breaks my heart.  Because he comes over and sets my timer, puts up my Christmas tree lights if my son-in-law doesn't have time.  I can remember one day the thing on my garage, the catch on there, the hinge on the garage broke.  I couldn't get my car out.  I said, "Oh, Bob, you have to help me.  I can't lift the door."  And he came over and lifted the door, and not only lifted the door, but took the catch and went and bought a new one and replaced it for me.  So, but I just feel that I'm right at home there.  They're, you know--I'm just so lucky.  But I think you do unto others as you would have them do unto you.  And if it's anything I can do to help somebody, I'll do it.  And I think that's the legacy I would like to leave.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.  It's been wonderful talking to you.
Story_ID: 74511
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: Scott Stearns: Do you want to just briefly talk about the--
Speaker 1: Picture cards.
Speaker 2: But also about what you're wearing.
Speaker 1: Oh, we--
Speaker 2: Talk about the cards, though.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  Each, we have forty-three chapters throughout the country.  Each chapter chooses a uniform for their members.  And this is the chapter--the blue and tan is the colors for the Los Angeles Chapter.  And now the chapter in Washington, D.C., they have red coats, believe it or not.  And I thought at first red coats wouldn't look good, but they do look good.  And when General Bill Davis was finally given his four-star general, they presented President [William Jefferson] Clinton with one of their red coats for the Washington Chapter.
Speaker 2: Now, can you point to each insignia and tell us what it means?  That's just the name of the--
Speaker 1: That's the name tag, and this is our logo.  These are the three planes that they flew.  This represents the 332nd Fighter Group.  And this of course are my wings.  And--
Speaker 2: Above that, I mean-
Speaker 1: Above--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that.
Speaker 1: Above is a picture of Bill Davis, Sr.  And the reason I have that is because you guys were contacted and Derra Tucker is with the [Long Beach African American] Heritage Society we have.  And I'm an original initial member of the Heritage Society.  Each of us got a stamp of Bill Davis, Sr.
Speaker 2: Now, the eagle at the top is--what is that at the top, the blue and gold piece right above Bill Davis?  What is that?
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: Yes, that.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's an Air Force pin.  I forgot that was on there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I got that at the convention.  The Air Force always attends our conventions, and they give these things out.
Speaker 2: Okay, thank you very much.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you.
Story_ID: 74512
Speaker 1: Left to right, that's my nephew, Jay Wesley Copeland, Jr. III.  And then my father, Thomas Copeland, and my mother Dicie Copeland, and my niece Hostina Copeland.  We were celebrating their anniversary.  Right now, I can't remember exactly which anniversary it was, but I think it was their 60th anniversary or something.  They were living here in California with us at the time.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a picture made at the time that my mother died.  That's, to the left... left to right that's my brother, Jay Wesley Copeland.  And then behind him is my brother, Clinton Copeland.  And behind him is my sister, Naomi Ricks.  And then my brother Thomas to the right, and then that's my picture in the center.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my daughter Ann and I.   We made a cross-country trip, and we are somewhere in the Midwest, and we stopped and made a picture.  I don't know what town we were in.  That was about 1948.
Speaker 2: Great, next.  Yeah, what is this?
Speaker 1: Oh, that's a picture of my sister Naomi Ricks, and her son Everett, Jr.  That's the only sister I had.  And Everett is the nephew who became a Superior Court Judge for Los Angeles County.
Speaker 2: That's the one that reported you to the Grand Jury?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now, this is a group of the Tuskegee Airmen made on the base.  I don't happen to know the names of any of them, because these are pictures that my husband [Aaron Herrington] made when we were there.  But they are the real McCoy...  (Laughter)... Tuskegee Airmen.  In the back, you see one of the barracks.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of the four of us--myself to the left, my brother Jay Wesley Copeland, my brother Thomas Copeland, my sister Naomi Ricks.  We made these pictures a few years ago when my brother came out from New York to visit us.
Speaker 2: That's in this very room, isn't it?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right here in front of the little cars.
Speaker 2: Okay, next, go ahead.
Speaker 1: That's a picture made on UCLA [University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] campus in 1966 when my daughter Ann graduated.  To the left is my daughter, Kay Marie Anthony now, and my daughter Ann Victoria Herrington Stewart.  Then, she was Ann Herrington.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my daughter Ann getting married.  This is the chapel where she was married.  Ann is to the left and I'm to the right.
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my husband and Kay, and that was made about 1960.  No, maybe it was made about 1958, because Kay isn't four years old there.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's my husband, Aaron.
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: That's my daughters Ann and Kay Marie.  And Ann is to the left, and Kay Marie is the little one to the right.
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead, next.
Speaker 1: And Ann made those dresses that they are wearing.
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This picture is my daughter Ann and myself, made in the backyard at 904 E. 15th Street.
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my brother, Thomas Copeland, who was stationed at Pearl Harbor when the bombs fell.
Speaker 2: What year is this, do you know?
Speaker 1: This must have been made about, let me see, about 1940.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's a picture of myself and Aaron, and we are at St. Augustine's College attending his 25th college class reunion.  I'm to the left, and Aaron is to the right.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: And that, I'm glad that picture is there.  Because that's my husband, Aaron, standing in front of the chapel building on St. Augustine's College campus.  The thing about that building is it's been declared a national historical monument.
Speaker 2: Very good, next.
Speaker 1: And that's a picture of me at Tuskegee, Alabama at my desk.  And this is when I was working for the Veteran's Hospital, if I remember correctly.  You can see my name on the name tag.
Speaker 2: Right.  Is this your brother?  Next.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a good one.  I'd like that one.  This is a picture of my brother, Thomas, in his Navy, full-dressed Navy uniform.  And in the other, he was in the informal uniform.  And as you can see, that's a Christmas card he sent to me.  So--
Speaker 2: Okay, next, go ahead.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of the Tuskegee Airmen, made at a party we were having.  Now, that's a whole group of people there, including a number of Tuskegee Airmen.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Now, this is the Tuskegee Airmen's picture made at the Proud Bird Restaurant where we dedicated a monument to them.  And if you see the background, the plane there, there's a replica of the plane that they flew, the Red Tail plane.  This picture was made during the dedication services.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my husband... myself and my husband at the time he was being installed as president of the Long Beach downtown Lions.  And he's shaking the hand of a friend, Milt Smith... Milt Hicks.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of an Altrusa Club meeting where we're having an orientation session.  And that's Rebecca Cowen to the right, and myself to the left.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of a group of the Tuskegee Airmen that we made during one of the Tuskegee Airmen parties.  To the left is Oliver Goodall, Ed Bradley, myself, and Lowell Stewart.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of the three of us, my daughter Kay Marie Anthony, myself, and my daughter Ann Victoria Herrington Stewart.
Speaker 2: Very good.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the four of us, myself, my daughter Kay, Ann, and Aaron.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my daughter Ann and myself made in the early days.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: What year?
Speaker 1: Oh, let's see.  Ann is about six or seven years old.  She was born in '44' [1944].  That would make it about 50... I think maybe about '51' [1951] or '52' [1952].
Speaker 2: Okay, good, next.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a wonderful picture.  That is my daughter Ann celebrating her Christmas, the second year.  She was two years old this Christmas, it was her second Christmas.  We got her a little rocking thing.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, and a doll, of course.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my husband Aaron in his Elks outfit.  He became an Elk, and it was very helpful for him.  Because after he retired and was kind of disabled, he had a place close by he could go and spend time.  He became a member of the board of directors of the Long Beach Elks Club.  Incidentally, he was the first minority to get into the Elks; oh, this is a picture of myself and Tom Bradley, who became the Mayor of Los Angeles [California], and my sister Naomi.  We were at a function in Carson when this picture was made.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is one of our family pictures.  Let's see, I think we've got most of us in there.  My daughter Ann to the left.  Back of her is her husband, Eddie.  And he's holding my grandson, Aaron.  And then next to him is... wait a minute... is Jacquim, my other grandson.  And then in the back, the next person is Lee Anthony.  And in the front next to my daughter Ann is her daughter Anika, and my daughter Kay Marie, and then my husband to the right, Aaron.
Speaker 2: Keep going.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a picture made at my brother's home.  That's my brother's wife, Goldie.  And then my brother from New York, Wesley, myself, and my brother Thomas and my sister Naomi.
Speaker 2: Okay, very good, next.
Story_ID: 74513
Speaker 1: That is a picture from Raleigh, North Carolina, and her name was Thelma Johnson, and myself.  And we worked in the bank together, and I really enjoyed her.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture made in Raleigh, North Carolina at St. Augustine's College.  We had Copeland family reunions, and this was our first Copeland family reunion, and I was emceeing it.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Now, this is my famous picture.  This is a picture of myself with Alex Haley.  And he's to the left and I'm to the right.  And it was made at a program in Carson, California where he was a speaker.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Let's see.  This is a picture of group of Tuskegee Airmen--Mitch Higginbotham, Flora Lane, myself, Joselyn Tomlin, and Oliver Goodall.  And in the background, you see Bill Davis and some of our other Tuskegee Airmen material.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my mother, Dicie Copeland, and she's sitting by the telephone.
Speaker 2: Okay.  About what year is this?
Speaker 1: Well, let's see.  That was made, I don't know what year that was made.  But I would think that that was made about 1955 or '54' [1954].  That's my daughter Ann Victoria... Stewart now.  That was made at Tuskegee, and it was made by Mr. Polk, the famous photographer there.
Speaker 2: And that's T.H. Polk, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: P-O-L-K.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: T.H. Polk.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And that's my mother to the left, myself, and my father standing on the steps of Washington High School at the time I graduated from high school in May of 1936.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my husband Aaron, my daughter Kay Marie Anthony, and myself.  At the time, Kay Marie received her A.A. degree from Long Beach City College, as well her nursing degree.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my husband Aaron, my daughter Ann, and myself, made on the campus of Tuskegee Institute at the foot of the statue of Booker T. Washington.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my daughter Ann made by Mr. Polk at Tuskegee.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the train station at Cheaha, Alabama.  It's the station that everyone had to go through during the war when you went there to get to Tuskegee; you went to Cheaha first.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a picture where I was having them honor a friend of mine.  My husband Aaron and I... and that was made at the Sheriff's Center in Biscailuz, the Biscailuz Sheriff's Center in Los Angeles.  At the time, he was leaving the probation department to move over to the County Human Relations Commission.  He's cutting his farewell cake there.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Dr. Tom Clark to the left, Loraine Barber, myself, and supervisor Dean Daynor at the time.  And this was a situation where we were honoring some people who had started the Cedar House Program.  And I was also receiving a presentation from supervisor Daynor.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's my husband Aaron standing on the wings of his plane about to take off on a flight.  Aaron Herrington, made at Tuskegee, Alabama Air Field.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's my, when I... I worked for the County, and you get a thirty-year pin.  This is a picture of the group that received thirty-year pins when I did.  To the left, I'm the second person from the left on the front row.  And the county has a policy of inviting you to Discotto Guns for your 25th, 30th, and 35th anniversaries.  And this was my 30th anniversary with the county.
Speaker 2: Go ahead, next.
Speaker 1: All I can tell you is this picture was made in Tuskegee, Alabama.  I'm not sure whether it was made in '44' [1944] or '45' [1945], (Laughter) or '43' [1943].  But anyway, you can see from the way I wore my hair, that it was--
Speaker 2: A forties picture.
Speaker 1: It's a forties picture, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Now, this picture was made in 1948 in Raleigh, North Carolina in my parents' home.  To the left you will see my daughter Kay, I mean Ann, I'm sorry.  And on my left, that's me, and that's my grandmother Nannie Chavez, and my mother Dicie Copeland.  That's four generations in that picture.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This gentleman to the left is now Congressman Steve Horn.  It's a group picture made at the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors office when I got them to honor Mrs. Mildred Fox, because she had made and donated so many dolls for me to give away to children who were on welfare.  And to the left is Loraine Barber, and then that's Mr. Fox and Mrs. Fox, and supervisor James Hayes, myself, Ron Hansen, Gwen Young, and I don't know the gentleman on the end or to the right.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Congressman Steve Horn when he was President of Long Beach State University.  He's the person to the left.  Next to him is Dr. Marion R. Johnson, who is my neighbor across the street.  And it's myself and Mrs. Horn to the right.
Speaker 2: Okay, next photo please.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of myself and Aaron made in Taylor Hall at St. Augustine's College at the time we were dating.  They used to have a party once a month.  And we, he always took me to the parties.  And this must have been a special party, because we were all dressed up in formal clothes.  And it was made about 1942, I would say, '41' [1941] or '42' [1942].
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's my husband.  That's a picture of my husband, Aaron Herrington, in his flying outfit.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is another picture made by Mr. Polk at Tuskegee Institute.  That's my, to the left my husband Aaron, my daughter Ann, and myself.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: My grandmother and great-grandmother on my father's side of the family.  To the left is Maggie Wiggins and her mother Polly Wiggins; this is a picture of my husband Aaron to the left, my daughter Kay in the middle, and myself to the right.  And this was made in our home in Tuskegee.  I'm pretty sure we were still in Tuskegee when that was made.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: We've got to get that one in there.
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is the only picture we have of every member of our family.  It was made in May of 1940 at the time I graduated from St. Augustine's College.  In the front row to the left is my sister Naomi Ricks, my father Thomas Copeland, my mother Dicie Copeland, and myself, Maycie Copeland Herrington.  And in the back of my sister, to the left is my brother Clinton, my brother Jay Wesley Copeland, my brother Thomas Copeland, and my brother Atlas Copeland and Ruben Copeland.  Soon after this picture was made, my brother Ruben was killed in a car accident.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We just did that one.
Speaker 2: No, that was because it was curled.
Speaker 1: Oh, it was curled, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is my grandmother, Maggie Wiggins, and her mother Polly Wiggins.  Maggie Wiggins to the left.
Speaker 2: And this is, about what year is this?
Speaker 1: Oh, gee, I don't know.  That was probably made before I was born.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: I was born in 1918.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me, Maycie Herrington, made by Mr. Polk while I was at Tuskegee, Alabama.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is a copy of a picture made in Memphis, Tennessee in 2001, standing by the P-51 plane flown by the original Tuskegee Airmen.  I was there attending the Tuskegee Airmen convention, and this was in the Fed Ex terminal.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself with supervisor, Kenneth Hahn, who was the supervisor for the Second District of Los Angeles County and myself.  And I was very impressed that he was the supervisor.  But when he sent me my picture, he put on there, "To Maycie, my fellow county employee.  Good luck, Kenny Hahn."
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Now this is a picture of myself to the left, my daughter Ann in the center, and my husband Aaron to the right.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my youngest grandson, Aaron, in his football uniform.  He plays football at Wilson High School in Long Beach.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: We're going to put the picture cards up.  This is a picture card.  On the top row, we have General Parrish, General Davis, Colonel McGee, and Roger Terry.  They are the three people who were... well, Colonel Parrish and General Davis... General Parrish and General Davis were very influential in helping the Tuskegee Airmen become successful.  So--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Do you want me to tell the names of everybody on there?
Speaker 2: No, because there are technical limitations.
Speaker 1: That's what I thought.
Speaker 2: Which is that--
Speaker 1: That we need to wind it down.
Speaker 2: The resolution that we can get with this, because every single image has a separate image, it won't be really adequate to re-produce it.
Speaker 1: I know it.  So, yeah.
Speaker 2: There you are, and your husband.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And down in the third row is my husband and myself.  Left is my husband, and I'm to the right of him.
