Story_ID: 31971
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Russel, R-U-S-S-E-L, middle name is Luke, Honore, H-O-N-O-R-E.
Speaker 1: So is that L-U-K-E?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that's--that seems--a couple of ways of how to pronounce your name, but it's--
Speaker 2: Honore.
Speaker 1: Honore.  Okay.  All right.  And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born 15 September 1947, in Lakeland, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: All right.  And so, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Right now I'm a public speaker, but Army Officer, thirty-seven years, three months and three days.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You're a retired Lieutenant General?
Speaker 2: Retired Lieutenant General, correct.
Speaker 1: All right.  From the U.S. Army?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is 29 of February 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're currently located in the Union League Club in Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 31972
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask as a warm-up, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is:  Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's gumbo.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation designation?
Speaker 2: Home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is:  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I think, "Ignorance can be fixed, stupidity is for life."
Speaker 1: Okay (laughs).  All right.
Story_ID: 31973
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side separately so we don't get them mixed up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Udell, U-D-E-L-L, Marie, Saint, S-T, capital A, M-A-N-T. Honore of course.
Speaker 1: St. Amant.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't have that information.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a sense that she was born around Lakeland [Louisiana] or some other--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  She was born in Pointe Coupee Parish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How do you spell that Parish?
Speaker 2: P-O-I-N-T-E-E [sic, Pointe], C-O-U-P-E-E.  And I want to say she was born in the Erwinville Area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Erwinville.
Speaker 1: Erwinville.  And judging from your own birth, do you have any idea how old she was when you were born?  Maybe we can figure out when she might have been born.
Speaker 2: I imagine she was born around 1921.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Around 1921.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I've got a whole genealogy thing I can send you--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If it's important, but all those things have those dates in there.
Speaker 1: Well, that would be good because we can file it in the archives, and it'll be good to have that.
Speaker 2: Good.  That goes all the way back to as far as it can be traced.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how far back can you trace your mother's side of the family, and who were the significant people that you remember and the stories associated with them?
Speaker 2: I only knew my grandfather, my mother's father.  He was a--when I was old enough to remember, he had retired from farming, but he was a carpenter.  And he used to do repair work for the farmers in the community; anything from adding on a small room to fixing porches and screen doors is what he mostly did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he did contracting work, and he was kind of a handyman too?
Speaker 2: Maybe he was a handyman.  They used to raise barns and stuff like that.  So he was an accomplished carpenter.  I wouldn't say he was a contractor, but he did a lot of repair work.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.  Now, was he born around the same area?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Pointe Coupee Parish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, as far as you know, all of the ancestors on your mother's side from as far back as you know, were from around--
Speaker 2: Pointe Coupee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And now, your mother is Creole, right?  That's we've come to know.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: And I know a lot of people get Creole mixed up with Cajun.
Speaker 2: All right. We're from the Creole.  And in Pointe Coupee Parish, the word they use is "Less Creole."  And back in the day, people with--we're supposed to be people of mixed race with primarily French names and some Spanish names.  But that's where the concept of Creole originated between French and Spaniards, and then local native Indians as well as African Americans.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the word "Less Creole."  And there was a large population of our people up in the rich farming land up in Pointe Coupee Parish.  That's how most of us ended up there, the families.  Many of them originated in and around the New Orleans area and Natchitoches area, and ended up in Pointe Coupee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So (they originated?) around New Orleans and then migrated?
Speaker 2: Right.  Right up to Point Coupee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  About when do you think that took place, the migration?
Speaker 2: Oh, man.
Speaker 1: Would it be in the nineteenth century?
Speaker 2: No, before that.
Speaker 1: Even before that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: In the 1800s.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 31974
Speaker 1: Now, what is it in terms of your family, what is significant about Creole culture from that side of the family [mother's, Udell Marie St. Amant, side]?
Speaker 2: Well, it's unique in that it--the food that we share, the primarily Catholic, primarily French origin names as opposed to English.  For that part of Louisiana, and I'm speaking from where I came from.  I can't speak for other places, but that was the general--  And most agriculture or construction background.  When they weren't farming, they were off doing temporary work as builders; thus, several of my brothers grew up and they were in the construction business.  And again, it's hard to see, you know, what one might think is unique because as you travel the world, you find out those things you thought were very unique to your culture that happen, it's all over the world like.  (unclear) the idea of the wake, when somebody pass away.  When I was growing up, we always--they did them at home.  And then as people got a little more money and the funeral homes would provide a little more service so you go to the funeral home or hall at the church as opposed to doing them at the house.  And the wake, we'd sit there for hours, and there always be a rosary, probably, most likely led by a priest, and then there was food and stuff there at the rosary, normally in another room.  And maybe a couple sips of whiskey outside on the back of some farmer's truck.  So, I thought that was unique.  But as I traveled the world, you know, you find people deal with that in similar ways, in terms of the Going-Home Ceremony.  But I thought that was pretty unique.  I guess the other thing is, as I left Pointe Coupee [Louisiana] and went around the world, I thought it was pretty unique to be poor.  But you find out there are a lot of people who are poor around the country and around the world.  And being poor in other places around the world is lot different than being poor in America.  But much of that came on later.  Those lessons came later in life.  When you're growing up you think, man, golly, it's twelve of us in a family, and we raised about--you worked about one hundred twenty-five acres of farmland, and at the end of the day it was basically a subsistence farm.  We sold some sugarcane and we sold cotton.  But the rest of the farm was focused on having pigs to eat and cows to milk and chickens to eat.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how--
Speaker 2: And vegetables.
Speaker 1: --I'm going to ask you about all that a little later.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I just want to find out what, maybe if you could maybe give us some insight into the distinction between--I know one of your nicknames is the Ragin' Cajun, they call you.  But you're not a Cajun.
Speaker 2: Nah.
Speaker 1: And people don't know the difference between a Creole and a Cajun.
Speaker 2: Yeah, by the definition that it is generally (set up?), and even when you use the word Creole, there are some people who say, well, that because you look a mixed race, and that the Creoles are--they're out in New Orleans, they were centered between New Orleans and Biloxi were strictly a pass over between the French and Spanish.  But since I grew up, I mean people referred to is as Creole people, and the other names people have used, English people, you know, the English origin, mulatto and others, but our heritage go back.  It is what it is.  I can't change it.  And--but much is not documented, is a part of the problem.  That what is, is steered, you know, toward the people who wrote it, and not much has been written internally about our culture.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There been a couple books, but that's about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know we interviewed Leah Chase and some other key people that have the Creole culture (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah, know her well.
Speaker 1: They thought by the distinct kind of food and music and other things (that?) come out.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  And those similarities are there.  Much of that distinguished our culture, and you know that when I was growing up, it was internal culture.  It was most of the socialization was done in tone to that culture.
Story_ID: 31975
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother (Udell Marie St. Amant] have a chance to go to school when she was growing up? I mean, to finish high school?
Speaker 2: My mother knew how to read.  She could do some mathematics problems, you know.  But I want to say my mother went to school, maybe sixth or seventh as I recall her saying.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In many cases there was--when she was growing up, there was no school beyond that.  There were no high school for our people in Pointe Coupee Parish [Louisiana].  Those that went to high school had to go to Baton Rouge [Louisiana] and live with a relative.  So, in many cases it wasn't by choice you didn't.  People of her age didn't go on to high school, but there wasn't none.  There was no integrated high school to go to.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you had to, if you wanted to go to high school, you had to really plan for it and go out of your way to go, I mean.
Speaker 2: And your people had to have means to send you.  The nearest public school was in Baton Rouge, about twenty-seven miles away.  And we had a couple people of my mom's age a little later went to school, but they went to live with relatives in Baton Rouge in order to go to high school, because there were no high school for our people in Pointe Coupee Parish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did she have any stories about growing up that she shared with you then?
Speaker 2: She used to tell a story that was passed down to her from her grandmother, during the Civil War of a Union soldier being injured and the people kept him for days on weeks, you know, to,  until he recovered.  But there wasn't a whole lot of specifics to it, but it's something I always remembered because every time somebody asks me about or we talk about the Civil War, that little story come back to mind.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So her ancestors helped this person (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And hid him from the Confederate troops.  As you know, Louisiana is second only to Virginia in the number of battles fought during the Civil War inside the United States.  A lot of battles were fought between Natchez and New Orleans along the Mississippi and up towards Shreveport.  And I used to (unintelligible) story, I remember that story.
Story_ID: 31976
Speaker 1: Did she [mother, Udell Marie St. Amant] have any stories concerning the weather in the sense, you know, Katrina's such a big part(simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the flood of 1927 was significant in that it caused a lot of our people to have to be displaced in Pointe Coupee Parish [Louisiana].  And quite a few people in the northern part of the Parish, up around the Morganza area had to--displaced to--all over the state in many cases, because some of that land, the federal government started to do work on to build a levee system in 1937 to 19--was a time of much change in the levee system, because it had flooded the northern part of Pointe Coupee Parish.
Speaker 1: Now, that's the celebrated 1927 flood public television did a whole hour on, I think, where Mississippi had flooded?
Speaker 2: Oh, it had a significant impact on the South.  It did--it was a game changer.  Some people never went back home and many of them might say it was the beginning of the Great Migration of a lot of our people north, because there was nothing to go back to.  It was sad.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay.  Now, your mother [Udell Marie St. Amant] would have been child, I guess, then, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Must have been.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, in 1937 she was--she would have been grown.
Speaker 1: Right, '37 [1937].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Now, the flood of 1912, my grandfather used to talk about it a lot; whereas the flood defined our lives, weather systems.  Whereas my mom and dad [Lloyd Charles Honore] would talk about the 1937 flood, my grandfather would talk about the flood of 1912.
Speaker 1: Now, is it '37 [1937] or '27 [1927]?  I know the '27 [1927] is a big one when the Mississippi flooded, but '37 [1937] too?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You got 1912, you got 1927, you got your 1937.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Those were significant floods.  But the one my grandfather used to talk about, 1912.  The flood of 1912.  People would talk about 1937, 1927, he say, "Ya'll didn't see nothing.  You should have seen--because there was no levee system in 1912."  (laughs).  And people were literally on their own.  Wherein, in '37 [1937] they had a lot of help from the Army, came in.  And '27 [1927], you know, there was--there was some work had been done to try and control the river and give people an early warning and stuff.  But those floods kind of defined our lives in Pointe Coupee Parish, and even until last year, when the Mississippi River started to become threatening, Missouri, and where it just had flooded Mississippi.  I went to that levee where it was about to break in the same place it broke in 1937, right there at Morganza.  And, again, that's a pivotal point because you have the couple rivers come together there, the old river, Mississippi River that links to the Atchafalaya River.  So all our water is coming south, and Batchelor there in the river, and then the water put pressure on Pointe Coupee Parish.  That's how it flooded before.  And this time, from the lessons of '37 [1937], they put the spillway--and the spillway land is the land that a lot of our people had to move from as a result of floods that had happened previously.  A lot of our people were displaced because of what they call a spillway land.
Speaker 1: In those days now, I'm just thinking about it.  In those days there was no FEMA [Federal Emergency Management Agency], I guess.
Speaker 2: No, no.  There was no FEMA.  It's just basically, the Red Cross and the Army.
Speaker 1: But who compensated people if you owned land and it flowed up over like that?  I mean, who compensated you for it?  Did it--was there any--?  You just lost it?
Speaker 2: You lost it.  And they would give--they would give out what they called "commodities," you know, food to help people.  And, but no.  None of that was created yet, those type of organizations
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So now, I think they did pay people some money when they had to tell them they had to leave.  You know, the federal government.  I don't know today what that compensation could have been, you know.  I don't have record to that.  But you're asking some questions that build up my curiosity.  Maybe that's something I'll back and take a look at.
Speaker 1: They're occurring to me as I'm talking about it.  To tell the truth, I, you know, I really don't (unclear), and as you're kind of telling me these questions that are coming up, you know I wonder how they dealt with those crises.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No, there was very little other than the armies at that time, and the National Guards.
Story_ID: 31977
Speaker 1: Well, let me just go to your father's side, and then we'll put your mother and father together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Lloyd Charles Honore, H-O-N-O-R E.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I want to say it's 1912.
Speaker 1: About 1912 you think?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And where was he born?  Was he born in--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Lakeland.  In Pointe Coupee Parish [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Pointe Coupee Parish.  Okay.  All right.  Now, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, and are there any stories that have passed down about what they were doing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, primarily a farmer with--much of my dad's relatives lived in New Orleans.
Speaker 1: So they migrated to New Orleans [Louisiana] from Pointe Coupee?
Speaker 2: Right.  From Pointe Coupee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the best I can figure out, his mom died at an early age, so he was raised with an aunt in Pointe Coupee, and the rest of his family were in New Orleans.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: His brothers, and they all went to New Orleans; migrated from Pointe Coupee to New Orleans.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There're more jobs and stuff like that down there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So growing up, you probably, you didn't see as much of his relatives (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No.  And then some of my dad's relatives, when they moved to New Orleans, they went into what we call Passing.  Passing.  They moved to the other side, they passed for white.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: So we had very little interaction with them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, not all of them, but most of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is also the migration of his relatives as a result of the disaster.
Speaker 2: Of the floods--
Speaker 1: Floods, okay.
Speaker 2: -- and of those that moved people around.
Speaker 1: 1912, the big flood of 1912.  Okay.  So this is interesting.  I never would have guessed that so much of your history was defined by these disasters.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  You look at it, after every one of these floods, it had a significant influence on the migration of people.
Story_ID: 31978
Speaker 1: Did your father [Lloyd Charles Honore] get a chance to finish school in Pointe Coupee [Parrish, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: No.  He may have gone a couple of grades, because I would see him look at a newspaper, and I'm not quite sure if it was intuitive or what, he could--  If there was a picture, obviously, he knew it was Iraq, and he could see the dates and stuff like that.  But he, too--he could not pick up the paper and read it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But your mother [Udell Marie St. Amant] could.
Speaker 2: My mother could.  She'd read the paper to him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Or one of us.  We'd say, "What does that say?"
Speaker 1: And now, what about his math skills?  Could he, could he--.
Speaker 2: Oh, he could handle his money and you know, deal with that, but he signed his name with an "X."
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there--did he have any stories about growing up that he told?
Speaker 2: The ones I remember were in two categories; one of them I think I may write a book about it.  They used to talk about their mules a lot, of how strong they were. And--.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us one?  Can you remember one?  The strong mule story.
Speaker 2: I guess it's a lovely reflection of how life--simple life was because we didn't have television.  And these old farmers would show up, and sometime they were on the porch, and sometime they would gather around on chairs underneath the tree.  And regardless of what the story of the day was, it always ended up with a story of them either moving a log or moving dirt with one of these big scoop machines or a cart full of sugar cane that gotten stuck.  And one farmer coming over to help the other said, "Let me you hook into it," and then take one set of mules out and bring the other ones in.  That's the--told the story, sometimes they get to so emotional, they cry.  I remember that.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember that. (unclear) because it--when, you know, as I look back on it and traveled around the world to see, you know, what makes people happy, what moves the spirit.  And to see something so simple; yet, that made such an impact in the way they told the story, and, you know, if there was any other collaboration around, if somebody else said, "I remember that," and to them, and at that moment in their life, it was like their Academy Awards.  I mean, it was like them catching them all at the Super Bowl, and it kind of put life in perspective that, it doesn't have to be on the six o' clock news to have a significant impact in what lessons you might learn from that.  And then the other part of it is the significance of being able to tell that story, you understand, where people will listen.  And some of them I'd heard several times, but each time, you know, everybody sat and respect each one's story.  The other story I remember they would talk about is these people that they knew, that under Jim Crow law and other things that were happening in the South when they were growing up, that people would get lynched.  And those two always stuck with me.  And then they would talk about what happened.  It was either because of an insult by chance contact at a store or someone demanding that somebody get out of the way and let them go first or--that would start the argument.
Story_ID: 31979
Speaker 1: I said, I guess the lessons that I learned from listening to my parents [Lloyd Charles Honore and Udell Marie St. Amant] share their experiences and things that moved them emotionally, and things that, that were great moments for them, kind of put things in perspective, because many times people describe their great moments as to what clubs they belong to and what kind of car they drive, what neighborhood they live in, or whether they have their own airplane and stuff.  But, you know, in essence, when they were telling those stories and sharing those ideas, it was their moments in life that, when you look at the opposite end of that, people, at the end, we all end up in the same place.  Those emotional moments, those significant things, it was things that say what defined your legacy.  One of them might be having a great pair of mules.  The other one might be having a building named after you at the end of the day.  It--we all end up at the same place.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, I got another question about this, but I'll ask it a little later.  But is there a story about how your parents met?  Or how they fell in love and got together?
Speaker 1: I knew they were in the same community, that's all.  And they went to the same church.
Speaker 2: What was the name of the church?  Do you remember?
Speaker 1: Immaculate Conception Church in Lakeland, Louisiana.
Speaker 2: So chances are they, you know, it wasn't hard to meet, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah, around the church.  And the only other thing about that church, my father would tell us he--well, that church is still there today--as a young boy, he would--they volunteered him to haul the bricks for that church, which had come in to a rail spur that ran into the sugar plantation, which is the largest track of land and farm in that area, which is still open today.  St. Alma Sugar Plantation and Sugar Mill.  Back in the day, there was a rail spur that came in to get the sugar to ship it off to New Orleans.  Today they use trucks.  But that rail spur was used to bring in the bricks.  And they had to transport them for about a mile-and-a-half from that rail spur over to what is today the church in Lakeland.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So--well--.  Okay.  So they didn't have a story about how they got together or met or anything, but they--.
Speaker 1: No, sir.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So when did they get married?
Speaker 1: There are people in my family that are better at this than I am.  I don't remember.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: I don't remember.
Speaker 2: Now, did you have any idea if the families were for them getting married or not or--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think so.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Heard my who grandfather lived with us, our dad, when I was young (unintelligible).  I think my oldest brother was born like 1930; somewhere around '31 [1931].
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, you think they got married around that time or--.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Around 1931.
Story_ID: 31980
Speaker 1: Now, now when you think about your parents's personalities, their mannerisms, their different characteristics, hobbies, talents, and their looks; who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I guess the things I do, when I'm not working, like, my hobby-types, I would take pretty much from my dad [Lloyd Charles Honore].  I like to cook and I like to fool around with a garden, I like to fool around with animals.  And, I guess, emotionally I'm more like my mom [Udell Marie St. Amant].
Speaker 1: Okay.  In what sense?
Speaker 2: In--I guess in things that might cause me to become emotional as opposed to staying rational and talking something through.  For a lot of reasons, my mom was very defensive of our family and our culture, because in many ways that was all they had (laughs).  You understand what I'm saying?  So, I think in that regard and still today, the things that my dad did, which is to cook a lot, cooked too much (laughs); and family socials, pulling those together, and even following his steps sometime during it, and when my wife, who is saying something else.  So, I think that's two big things.  Me and my dad always had animals.  He was--then when I went to college, I majored in agriculture.  And my dad would do work for other farmers, like, castrating their pigs for them.  And then when I was in college and he was getting up in age, I took that job over and people would pay me to do that, or the young bulls.  And then he always had a garden.  And the whole time I was in the Army, I always had a garden, even if it was in the buckets, I always had a garden.  And I think my dad always tried to work to be a--well, he tried to try to work across racial lines to be--and try to get along with everybody.  And I think I've done the same thing throughout my military career.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Is to try to get along with everyone, knowing that there're differences, but let's work through our differences and get the job done.
Story_ID: 31981
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this now.  I want to get back to some of these subjects you just raised, but I want to ask you like, can you name your brothers and sisters?  Now, you had eleven siblings, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: And I think there's eight boys in a row.  So, can you name the oldest and (unclear)(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I've got that if you want me to name it on tape, I can, but I also have all those.  I can give you one of my books so you can get that out of the book.  My oldest brother is John, he's deceased; second brother, Clarence, better known as Cookie, Cookie, as in the cookie.  He's deceased.  My third brother is Marshall.  And fourth brother is Anthony, better known as Roderick.  Then my next brother is Lloyd, he's deceased.  Next brother is James, better known as Jimmy.  And the brother before me is Al, Alvin, also known as Al.  And then behind me is my sister, Mary Joy.  And behind Mary Joy is our twin sisters, Lorraine and Loretta.  And then our youngest brother is (Judala?), also known as Pete.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, that's a pretty big household.  Is that basically the household you grew up in, your mother [Udell Marie St. Amant] and your father [Lloyd Charles Honore] and your brothers and sisters, and--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you're the youngest?
Speaker 2: I'm number eight.
Speaker 1: Number eight, okay.  You're number eight, okay.
Speaker 2: Of twelve.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that-- sometimes people think I'm the twelfth of twelve.  That got mixed up in a 'Washington Post' story or somewhere along the line.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: It's often misquoted.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're number eight, and--.
Speaker 2: Eight straight boys.
Speaker 1: I think I read that your grandfather, Ferdinand--
Speaker 2: St. Amant.
Speaker 1: Yeah. St. Amant.  He lived with you.
Speaker 2: Right, he did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that--that's the household?
Speaker 2: That was the household.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But as the kids grew up, the older ones moved off.  So by the time my younger sisters were born, the older brothers had already moved on to Baton Rouge and New Orleans [Louisiana] to seek work.  Then they went into construction building, and bricklayers, and carpenters, and electricians.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now did any of them go to college prior to you?
Speaker 2: No, sir.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Two of my older brothers finished high school and one had a GED [General Education Development degree], as I recall.  But they were all successful.  My older brother, John, he was a construction supervisor with L.A. County.  He learned his brick trade with the--spent most of his life in--adult life in Los Angeles [California] raising his family, and he was a master bricklayer, then became the supervisor dealing with these old sewer systems in Los Angeles County, then he retired there from thirty-something years.  And my second brother, Clarence "Cookie," he was a contractor.  He lived all his life in Louisiana.  And then Marshall was a--worked on a farm; had stayed to spend all his working life in Lakeland [Louisiana] either doing tractor work or working on heavy equipment.  And then brother Roderick, he was quite successful in the construction business and became a general contractor out in Los Angeles.  Then my brother Lloyd, he was a general contractor and electrician out in California, Los Angeles.  And then Jimmy was vice president of Sony Pictures, and just retired from Sony after over thirty years.  But he went--
Speaker 1: Now that's a departure.
Speaker 2: --from high school to film room.  He was the editor when they used to cut film.  And he learned that skill.  After learning the skill of editing, then he learned the art of editing.  Then when he retired, he was vice president of post-production for Sony.  So, kind of grew up in that business.  And then Al, he was an electrical contractor, then went in the restaurant business, and he owns a restaurant in Los Angeles called Harold and Belle's Creole Restaurant on Jefferson in Los Angeles.
Story_ID: 31982
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: (laughs).  Yeah.  I guess it could be the one I remember most vividly, I was--.  The public school I went to was adjoining our farm, and I guess I was in the first or second grade.  And the first- and second-graders, while it was a public school, we went to school inside an AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Baptist Church, being there wasn't enough room in the little--it was like a little three-wing school, if you can imagine that.  Kind of shaped like a T.  And--but the first- and second-graders, it wasn't enough room there, so as I say, we went in the church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This was an AME Church?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because we had outdoor bathrooms and stuff like that.  And sometimes I'd ask the teacher to go to the bathroom, and I'd walk through the fence and run home (laughs).  And my mom [Udell Marie St. Amant] would try to run me back to--get me back before I was missing, because literally it was a hole in the garden fence.  We'd just walk through to go to school.
Story_ID: 31983
Speaker 1: What was the name of the school, you remember?
Speaker 2: St. Alma.
Speaker 1: Okay.  St. Alma.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was the name of the church, as was the name of the plantation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, because you said the sugar plantation, so--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Those were all associated there with the sugar plantation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And most of the kids went there.  A lot of them lived on the plantation.  We didn't.  We had our farm adjacent to it, but a lot of them did live on the plantation.
Speaker 1: Now, would they be like tenant farmers?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The parents were all people who ran the plantation; tractor drivers and mill workers and alike.
Speaker 1: Now, was this--
Speaker 2: They were provided a little shack and Creole-type houses, a little porch on it, tin roof, and they lived in a place called the Quarter.  And it was a main road that ran in front of the plantation into the mill and houses on both sides.  In most of my growing up years, it was gravel road.  So, I mean, you know.  And, but a lot of folks I went to school with, that's where they lived, on that plantation.
Speaker 1: Is the Quarter as in French Quarter?
Speaker 2: The word, it's Quarter, you know, it's a throwback word from that era of Quarter.  In this case, the name of it was Pitcher Quarter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Pitcher, old man George Pitcher was one of the original owners of the St. Alma Plantation.  And it was called Pitcher Quarter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I grew up calling it Pitcher Quarter.  I think it's more Quarters, you know, Pitcher Quarters where the people lived.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, the area that you--the school.  Was the school like a Creole school, if such, or--.
Speaker 2: No, it was a public school with people who happened to be Creole.  It was a segregated school for African Americans.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I just wondered if it was just Creole.
Speaker 2: No, no.  It was a public school.
Speaker 1: So it was a public school.
Speaker 2: Because I grew up, you know, African American.  I mean, that's what's on all my paperwork.  First Colored, then Negro, now African American.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But our culture is Creole.  It might be the best way to describe that.  But, no, it was a segregated African American school.  On the other hand, there was another school right down the road about a half a mile away, and it was referred then as a white school.
Speaker 1: So, were there other African Americans in school with you other than Creoles or just Creoles?
Speaker 2: No.  African Americans.
Speaker 1: Did you hear me?  I was asking were there other African Americans there other than Creoles?
Speaker 2: Yes, there were.
Speaker 1: Oh, all right.
Speaker 2: That was the predominant numbers in the school were African Americans.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Who lived there on the plantation.
Story_ID: 31984
Speaker 1: Now, did they make a--  When you were growing up, was there a cultural distinction--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or popular distinction in terms of you being a Creole and somebody else just being a regular African American--,
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in terms of how, and how did that play out in (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it disables your people where that--that didn't look like me, we didn't socialize together, even though as I grew up, that kind of grew out of the-- (laughs) kind of the last beginning of that generation where people were segregated, even at dances and parties on the weekend.  I mean, that dissipated as I went through high school.  And the great movement to end segregation also did away with that as an acceptable cultural standard.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Where people would segregate themselves inside the Negro race.
Speaker 1: So internally, in terms of African Americans, we had, like, skin color differences.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean--
Speaker 1: I guess we had it all over in Detroit [Michigan] or Columbus [Ohio] (unclear)(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Wherever you were.  It wasn't just economic separation, it was skin tone separation.  I think economic separation still remain today, but what you see there existed inside our community.
Speaker 1: So, would you say, I know you weren't everywhere then.  You were just where you were, but would you say that it is probably more pronounced there because of the language and other, you know, cultural frames of reference than it would be, say, in another city, where we'd just like, talk about somebody lighter than somebody else (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I couldn't make reference to other cities.  I just know where I lived and, you know, we were three--in my early years, it was like literally three different groups; the whites, the Creole and Negroes or African Americans.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, of course, as I said, with the integration movement, and the work of Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], and the exposure in public media about that three distinctive cultures, and then the--it was dysfunctional for our people.  Everybody realized that, in that sense, as for a good reason (as abnormal?).  It sort of melted away.  While people still had their cultural distinction, the distinction about who go in where and all that, thank God it's all in the past.
Story_ID: 31985
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, man.  In my early years, the road in the front of our house was a gravel road.  For whatever reason, some of the same people would pass.  You'd see them every day on that road.  And sometimes they would come along and it's like, what were they thinking.  They pass there every day.  They would misjudge the road and start sliding and slide off into the ditch or something (laughs), and it's like, they pass here every day.  How could you mess that up?  And those were always, when nobody got hurt, pretty humorous (laughs), to see people misjudge that.  Like a T in the road and, actually, it was more like a Y because it was kind of like a no-man-land out at the middle.  So when people got lost, you get pulled in the no-man-land, and folks would try to pass them and invariably sit there and watch a wreck happen.  But I'll always remember the sound of that road.  I'll always remember the--  We lived in an old clabber board house, and when the wind blowed, it blowed like--  I can remember Hurricane Audrey in 1957 came through, and that's probably the scariest I'd been as a kid because we stayed home.  It was coming through Cameron Parish [Louisiana], and we sat there and that old radio, that thing would be tuning in and out and it blew a lot of trees down.  And the sound of that was just horrific.
Speaker 1: Now, you were ten years old then, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I'll always remember that, and--  Be as scared to the point of sweating (laughs).
Speaker 1: Where did you go?  Did you go down to a cellar or something?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't have that.
Speaker 1: You're in the house?
Speaker 2: We're in the house.  It was pretty frightening, the sound of that wind as it came through.  And so, that was-- That's the sound I'll always remember.  And I guess the smell, again of springtime when you walk out the house, it'll be so much pollen in the air.  Everything would be covered with it.  And then the mixture of all those fragrances would mask the smell of a farm, if you understand what I'm saying.  It's just like, wow, this is nice.  You couldn't smell the pig pen or the drainage ditch that ran off.  I mean, that was a special time of year.  The (other?), the smell of fresh cut grass is still today.  If I'm out cutting myself or if somebody else is cutting grass, I remember that smell of cut-- fresh-cut grass.  And working on a farm, the smell and anticipation of a hay field ready to be picked up; that had a distinctive smell.  The other one is, I had a part-time job from the age of twelve until my junior year of high school.  I milked cows when a neighbor had a dairy farm, which more of a cash operation, because they got a check every two weeks from selling their milk.  So that was--that was a big part of my life, on my weekends and after school.  That's where I went, to the dairy farm.
Speaker 1: I remember you had to milk how many cows?
Speaker 2: They had, normally between up to about sixty-five or seventy cows he ran.  And we had milking machines, of course.  So that facilitated that.
Speaker 1: So you didn't have to do it by hand?  You just had--
Speaker 2: No (unclear).  We only milked our house cow by hand, the cow that we used for house milk.  But, no, the cows over at the dairy farm were all milked by machine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that was an experience.  And the smell of that dairy farm, I'll never forget that.
Speaker 1: Did it smell good or bad?
Speaker 2: Well--.
Speaker 1: I don't like that.  I think I already know (laughs).
Speaker 2: (laughs).  It gave me a phrase that I used later on as a General Officer.  It's the smell of money.  And I used that phrase later on when I was the 'Ragin' Cajun' Commander, people would call and complain about the noise that our bombs and jets and helicopters were making.  And I'd remind them it's the sound of freedom.  Which, yeah, there is a smell, but there's--  On the other side, that smell is something that we need to do.  And in that case, that concept, as I say, growing up with it, that it might be--it may not be pleasant, but it's something you got to learn to live with if you're going to have a safe supply of food.  And this other case, it may be inconvenient, but it's for a good cause.  And that's the smell of a farm.
Story_ID: 31986
Speaker 1: Now, now did you like school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But I wasn't--  I think, and anyone will tell you along the way.  I mean, I wasn't the sharpest knife in the drawer.  You know, in high school I was the proverbial weak B student.  Much of that had to do with my extracurricular activities in the 4-H Club; dealing with my animals.  I had my own herd.  When I was in high school, I had seven animals.
Speaker 1: Herds (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Cows.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And pigs, four or five pigs.  And at the same time I worked at the dairy farm, so I would leave school, and my high school was thirteen miles away.  It took us an hour.  Now, there was another school down the road about a mile-and-a-half away, but we were still in segregated schools.  So, as opposed to you going to school a mile-and-a-half away, I had to go to one thirteen miles away.  But the way the bus ran, it took--
Speaker 1: What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: My high school was Rosenwald.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: High school in New Roads [Louisiana].
Story_ID: 31987
Speaker 1: We were talking about Rosenwald High School.  Now, this is--this is one of the high schools, I guess, built by Julius Rosenwald, I guess, with--
Speaker 2: Throughout the South.
Speaker 1: --the Rosenwald Fund.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Throughout the South.  Absolutely.  Again, segregated high school.  Principal was E.C. Nelson.  Mr. Nelson was a distinguished gentleman in our community.  His wife was also a teacher in that school.
Speaker 1: Now, was he a Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: No, sir.
Speaker 1: I know a lot of those teachers in those days were, you know, I mean, the principals and such.
Speaker 2: No, sir.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The best I recall he wasn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very well respected, again, his wife also was in that school.  And as I recall, Ms. Nelson taught typing.  She taught me how to type, I swear, right next to the library.  And then, as I mentioned earlier, a significant part of my growing up was dealing with the 4-H Club.  When I got to high school, that involved not just my projects, as they called them, my animal project, but also involved leadership exposure in that the 4-H would offer you to go to camps, which were primarily focused on leadership and the environment.  We didn't call it environment at that time, but it had much to do with--  We went to a camp in Colfax, Louisiana; again, a segregated camp where we spent a week and a half doing nothing but studying trees, I mean.  And the lumber business is still one of the largest industries in Louisiana today.  But, now that I look back at that class, it was much about appreciation for the environment as it was about anything.  And then we would go out in the forest, and we'd come back and we would have class or sketches on parliamentary procedures, how you run a meeting.
Speaker 1: Now, discuss the significance of that for a farmer.  You know, most people probably wouldn't guess a farmer would need to know much about a meeting.
Speaker 2: It's amazing how they came about engineering there, but the people who did this had a lot of forethought.  And then they would organize open time that we had to figure out what we wanted to do as a group; whether we wanted to go back and study what we learned earlier in the day, and how do you measure the board for what, that a tree could produce or if we wanted to have someone who had done a paper on Booker T. Washington or some person of historical significance.  And we had to figure that out.  And then sometimes we were told, "Hey, at the end of this evening session after supper, you all responsible for entertainment."  And some of us said, "Well, it's not our turn."  And we'll be reminded, "You don't always have your choices.  You have to adapt.  Now y'all figure it out."  But, I mean, it was--and it always was run or maintained by the 4-H leaders and the home economic leaders who taught those classes.  But, as I said, I tell today, they had a significant impact.  And then other time in the summer, sometime I went to two camps.  We'd go to Southern University in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] and primarily focused on the 4-H State Convention, which would be held on the southern campus in the summer.  And from that, you could run for state-wide office, you could participate in public speaking, you could participate in state cattle judging, tractor driving, poultry judging, some other skill, industrial arts, woodworking, leather working, music.  It gave you a chance to find out what you were good at.  And then in a competitive nature, how good you think you are compared with others.  And it gave you a chance to seek your talents, you know, what's your talent.  You know, what might be--concern that art or that gift that you were given.  And I guess how that helped me was, I wasn't born with that athletic gene.
Story_ID: 31988
Speaker 1: I mean, I couldn't shoot a ball if I tried to or to hold onto it if I caught it.  That just wasn't my--that wasn't in my gene space.
Speaker 2: Did people try to encourage for sports because you're six-foot two, you're a pretty big guy, so?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I tried.  But when I got to high school, we didn't have early development sports in my school for all the obvious reasons.  School's out and you went home and you went to work.  So the elementary school system I grew up--didn't have organized basketball, baseball, nothing.  So my first exposure of organized sports was in high school, which I said, thirteen miles away, but it took you an hour plus on a bus, because, the bus just didn't pick you up and went straight to school.  We'd have to go around the--that part of the Parish, and in order to participate in sports, you had to stay after school.  And there was no late bus, so you would have to figure out how you would get home.  Now, if you were good enough, the coach would bring you home (laughs).  And I wasn't good enough (laughs).  Yeah, if you were good enough, the coach would just say, "I'll take you."  (laughs)  "We'll bring you home after school."  And coaches did that for the better players, if that's what it took to do it.  But I imagine when you're a freshman in high school and you hadn't touched a football in competitive play, you might be a little late.  Whereas, the kids who lived in town, I say in town; in the--inside of New Roads where our school was, they were a lot more competitive in basketball, baseball and football.  And we didn't play soccer back then.  That was not a competitive sport when I was in high school.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you say your school was in New Roads?
Speaker 1: Louisiana, yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Roads, R-H-O-A-D?
Speaker 1: No, Road, R-O-A-D.
Speaker 2: New Road.  Okay.
Speaker 1: New Roads.
Speaker 2: Okay.  R-O-A-D-S.  Okay.
Story_ID: 31989
Speaker 1: Nobody else in your family had gone to college, right, you were saying?  And who was there, a mentor in school or somebody that--or in 4-H they directed you towards college?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  That's my 4-H leader, Mr. Tom Smith, and my New Farmers of America leader, Mr. Roland Roberts.  Now, you may not recall New Farmers of America [NFA], but it was the black version of Future Farmers of America.  And in 1966, I think it was, they put the two organizations together, New Farmers of America and Future Farmers of America.  And New Farmers got integrated in with Future Farmers of America.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this was Roland--
Speaker 2: Roland Roberts.
Speaker 1: --Roberts, okay.
Speaker 2: He was a World War II veteran.  And Mr. Tom Smith, who was the County Agent who ran the 4-H program.  And then Mr. Roland Roberts, he was the agriculture teacher, and he ran the New Farmers of America.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And both of them encouraged me to--.  That they knew that the future of me as a farmer not owning any land, because we didn't own land, would be a hard road.  So, they said, "Get your education.  And if you want to be a dairy farmer--," which would--I really wanted, that's what I wanted when I went off to college, was to go to college and put myself in the position to own a dairy farm.
Story_ID: 31990
Speaker 1: And then my mother [Udell Marie St. Amant], she really pushed hard for me too.  Most of my-- On my mother's side, her brother who lived right on the Southern University Campus [Baton Rouge, Louisiana]; he was--worked in maintenance on the campus, Norman St. Amant, because all of their kids were going to college, and my mother thought that at that point in time, I, because I finished high school, that I really didn't have a choice; I needed to go to college.  The other thing is, Vietnam War was pressing harder at that time, and if you didn't go to college, you, able-bodied man, you went off to Vietnam.  My inspiration was if I go to Vietnam, I wanted to get my college degree and get my commission.  I wanted to go as a Commission Officer.  I remember asking a gentleman in the neighborhood who owned a store--his son had gone to West Point [The United States Military Academy at West Point, West Point, New York].  And I remember walking in that store one day and asking this old man, and his son was there home from West Point from leave, and I said, "What can you tell me about--.  You're going to West Point, I think that's something I'd be interested in doing."  He said, "Well," it came kind of like a hard, cold fact.  He said, "If I was you, I'd forget about it."  And initially, I thought-- I almost grew up--I grew up as an adult thinking that the guy, he was there as a cadet, may have told me that because who I was.  As I grew up in the Army, if some kid walked up to you two months before he graduated from high school and said, "Hey, I'd like to go to West Point this year, what do you think?"  You don't tell him forget about it, if he hadn't started, you know.  If you don't have these grades, if, you know, "What's your grade?"  "C-plus."  You know, or "Are you athletic?"  "No."  You know, you tell him forget about it, you know.  Now, there is a preparatory school now.  But, I grew up my younger life thinking the guy told me that because of my color.  Later on, I've learned that, and parents do this all the time until where it became a joke, say, "Hey, I finally convinced my kid to go to West Point."  "Yeah, okay.  What grade is he in?"  "He's in twelfth."  "Okay."  "He graduates in two months."  "Forget about it.  I mean, it's too late for this year."  You know, and then, "What's his S.A.T. score?"  "Well, you know, we just don't take them there.  You got to be competitive against a lot of people who get admitted."
Speaker 2: You got to get on that track real early.
Speaker 1: Right.  And you got to start early.  So, and it's very competitive.  But, you know, I grew up, again, thinking that guy told me that because he was prejudiced against me.  Whereas, he probably gave me the best advice I could have gotten in a very short sentence, "Forget about it.  Go to college and go to ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  It literally was too late, but I left that conversation thinking that the guy did it because of--and he may have, but looking at it in prep, it would have been a waste of my time and energy, because I wouldn't have been competitive at that time.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So when you graduated, you said your grades were kind of middle of the road?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But they were good enough to get into Southern?
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: But, did you consider going to some other place, Grambling [State University, Grambling, Louisiana] or anything like that?
Speaker 1: I considered going to LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] in--.
Speaker 2: Now this is 1965?  Is this '65 [1965]?
Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966]?
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And by that time, people who--were being accepted at LSU at larger numbers.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So that--it just recently integrated though, right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But it was happening.  But I didn't think about that long because, I mean, everybody that, and I want to say everybody, yet I'm saying that pretty emphatically.  I think all my teachers until, except maybe one in high school, all graduated from Southern.
Story_ID: 31991
Speaker 1: So, you would have known other students matriculating into Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], too, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  The majority of my class that went to school, went to school at Southern.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's interesting to note that they got in many small communities like that.  My cohort that I grew up with, I think the smartest guy in our classroom from first grade through tenth, when he was in the tenth grade, his dad bought him a car, and he didn't finish high school.  And he was the smartest guy in the class.  But he decided he wanted to act like an adult and not finish school.  And, then the second smartest guy in my class lived right down the road from me.  They were farmers like we were, and small farm, they did piecework wherever you could get it.  And when we're getting ready to graduate and we were going to apply to go to school at Southern, and you know, I remember talking to him.  He said, "I'm not going to go.  We don't have the money for me to go to school."  I said, "Well, you got as much money as we've got, that I have."  I said, "We need to go to college together."  So he said, "I don't know, man."  He said, "I can go up to Baton Rouge and in about five or six weeks get my barber's license, and I'll be cutting hair and get my car."  Now, this guy's got--had brains.  I mean, that was his natural talent, to be able to memorize things that deduce things that, far clearer than I could of equal age, if you understand what I'm saying.
Speaker 1: So, you basically saying that your mentors, the people who mentored you and guided you, really gave you the boost that you needed to go on.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: These guys, I guess they didn't have anybody to really motivate (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: They were not as involved as I was in 4-H and NFA [New Farmers of America, now integrated with Future Farmers of America] for me.  That's the big difference.  So these mentors made a big difference.  But I still look back today.  I tell that story when I go around the country, the two smartest--and there were other people smarter than me in my high school class--but the two smartest people that I grew up with from first grade on through middle of high school, if they graduated from high school, they'd go to college.  One of them didn't finish, and the other, I still think today, sold himself short of what he could have done.  This guy could have been a great mathematician.  He could look at algebra and, you know, some people with that gift to miss all of this and put the answer at the end, figure it out in their head.   And then, the smartest girl in my high school, she got a scholarship to Stanford University [Stanford, California].  She became a Ph.D.  So they're out there.  But those two were gifted, they just didn't go to school.  And, you know, at the end of the day, they'd done well; I mean, relatively speaking.  But, you think of the potential of how much more they could have done had they done that exposure to college, and what they could have done, and problems they could have solved or other contributions they could have made to the community at large because of their natural talent that had not been exploited.
Story_ID: 31992
Speaker 1: Before I leave high school, now when you--did you take a leadership position in 4-H?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was the 4-H high school president, and the president of the [Pointe Coupee] Parish [Louisiana] 4-H, and I was president of my high school class.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And president of Future Farmers of America--New Farmers of America.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm glad I asked. (laughs)  Okay.
Speaker 2: It was kind of unusual to be class president without being valedictorian, and I wasn't.  I led the class because I was the president, but not the best grades (laughs), which was unusual, but at the end everybody was comfortable I was the class president.  They all voted me.
Speaker 1: Oh.  So you were pretty popular.
Speaker 2: Right, without being in sports.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and you weren't in sports, weren't the smartest, but you were a leader.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, how did--I mean, how did people perceive--  I guess they perceived you as a leader, I guess.
Speaker 2: Right, and probably a little ambitious too, you know, not afraid to put your hand up and say, you know, "I'll do it."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, the mentors in school encouraged it.
Speaker 1: When you look back on it, what qualities do you think that you had that really impressed people that they wanted to see you in charge of something?
Speaker 2: Well--.
Speaker 1: Because you had to be elected to these.
Speaker 2: All those are elected positions, yes.  I mean, you had to put your name out there.  It wasn't based on the amount of money you raised or your looks.  It was based on asking people to vote for you and being able to stand up and say, "This what I will do."   And what I would do, they call you into the gym and the class election time came around, and I still think today there might have been people who would have been better at class president, but it was that time well, maybe, it wasn't perceived to be cool, you understand, to be standing out there as the class president, you know.  But, for their absence of ambition, I think it served me well later in not being afraid to take charge or to say, "Okay, let's get this thing together.  Let's do something to make a difference."  And, of course, the 4-H Club and the New Farmers of America spend much of their curriculum in camps on leadership.
Speaker 1: Now, what significant things do you think you learned about leadership that you didn't know when you went to those camps?
Speaker 2: I didn't learn to articulate it until later on.  But I observed and what I was trying emulate at that time is, came out in words years later when I was a colonel, and it came to me that, the real art of leadership is not just getting people to do what they want to do.  The real challenge of leadership and the art of leadership is getting people to do what they don't want to do.  And sometimes you get it confused (laughs).  And a leader could have very temporary popular wave, because they talk about things people want, as opposed to what about people need to do.  You understand what I'm saying?  (laughs).   So you got to use that popular wave while you can for consensus.  But for the greater of the community, you got to get people to do what they don't want to do (laughs).
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know.
Speaker 2: Otherwise, if all you do with populations, then, you know, you're in a popularity contest, not a--  And then the other part, I had recently learned particularly that, again, the real art of leadership is getting people to do--to follow you willingly. Not because you have the authority of punishment or you have the authority of promote and demote.  It's how you get people to willingly follow you, which is critical.
Story_ID: 31993
Speaker 1: We didn't talk much about your grandfather, that I read that he was a significant figure growing up.  And, what did you learn from him?
Speaker 2: I think the biggest thing that--is that in the year I got to know him, he was up in age.  I mean, he was an elderly man then.  As long as you can get up in the morning and put one foot in front of the other, that's a blessing and you need to go do something.  And when he got to the point when he couldn't do his carpentry work no more, he would work his way out to the garden and work in the garden. The concept that work is a blessing.  I remember one morning when I was thirteen or so--it was a Saturday morning, I was going to milk those old cows, and the guy was outside.  And he pulled up in the old truck and the horn blew.  That's the way he would call me out.  And my dad [Lloyd Charles Honore] and my grandfather were in the kitchen.  They were kneeling down praying.  And I went through, maybe got a glass or something.  I was fiddling around the kitchen while they were in there.  And as I was walking out, I said, "Those damn cows," you know.  "I work every day."  And, "Hey, come here a minute."  And, "And what are you complaining about going to work for?"  And the two of them, they kind of participated in this conversation together.  They said, "I want to tell you something.  To work is a blessing.  I want you to remember that.  I want you to think about it.  What would happen if you couldn't get up and go to work?  You've been blessed with the physical--  What happen if there was nobody willing to hire you to go to work?"  Because they had all lived through the [Great] Depression.  "What about if somebody had you working and then couldn't pay you?"  And so, after that little dialogue in the kitchen that morning with the two of them, which caused me a couple minutes to be late getting out the house, that story stuck with me.  That story stuck with me.  And, again, these little lessons come back.  Years later I'm in the Army, and I'm a major and they send me overseas to go teach in Bangladesh, Pakistan and India.  And while we're in Pakistan, we're riding around in, and we use those embassy cars.  And I remember seeing a lady on the side of the road with a baby on her back cracking bricks with a hammer.  So I told the--we're in Bangladesh, the Bangladesh major (unclear), I said, "Why would y'all have a lady crack bricks with a hammer when you can a machine to do that?"  And he said, "Major, you just don't understand.  Yeah, we can get a machine to do that.  We know that, but the fact that that lady cracking bricks, she'll make enough money today to feed her and her baby."
Story_ID: 31994
Speaker 1: Tell us about Big Dan.  I think that's a horse, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a horse I had when I was in college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Where did you find that at--out?
Speaker 1: Something that I read.
Speaker 2: Yeah, luckily enough when I went to college, and again, when you're poor, I mean, it's the community that help you get there.  I mean, people giving you rides to town and help you get back, and it's,--you work things out inside the family, and it--a lot of people in the family helped me along the way, either driving me to school or come to pick me up or what have you.
Speaker 1: So did you commute between the--.
Speaker 2: No, I stayed on campus.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: But on the weekend, I would come home to work on the dairy farm.  So that meant somebody had to come pick me up or I had to catch a ride home.  But much of that was worked out through word of mouth, through my mother [Udell Marie St. Amant] or somebody else who'd ask somebody to pick me up.
Speaker 1: And then you say your uncle was on campus, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  And my uncle lived there (unclear).
Speaker 1: This is in Scotland?  What they call Scotlandville [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Scotlandville, yeah.  So as it worked out, one of my mother's cousins was married to a Honore of distant relationship to us, but still from that same clan, Honore, who was a successful contractor.  And he--he owned a successful business right outside the university campus; a drive-in, kind of like a Sonic, with a gas station, and then a group of apartments right behind it.  And my second year in school, you know, between my mom talking to her cousin, (unintelligible) said, "Oh, if you want to then, you can get a part-time job over at the drive-in."  And I said, "Okay.  That'll be better than coming back home on the weekend and working the dairy farm."  So I tried that a couple weekends, that worked out good, working there with my cousins on the--  Particularly, I can remember on football weekends, everybody come to town want to get their cash washed, and it'll be cars jacked up a quarter-mile out.  This California car wash, one of the first ones in Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  My cousin had gone out to California and saw these things.  Immediately bought one.  He was kind of a guy of an action, a self-made man.  Built a lot of the gas stations in Baton Rouge as we know them today, those corner Texaco Stations.  And he was doing well.  Part of that he invested in the black community.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Scotlandville.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Raymond.
Speaker 1: Raymond--?
Speaker 2: Honore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, he took me in there working under his tutelage.  And I learned a lot of the basics, again, about the business side, and leadership and the business side from him.   He was very direct, to the point.  And, of course, we're in an environment where at this drive-in they had, of course, a lot of young folks there working part-time as I was.  And he said, "You know, you'll hear people going to perceive you as a leader here, but you got to earn that.  Not just because we share the same last name, and the fact that people will look to you for leadership.  Now, I'm not paying you to be a leader, yet, but people going to look to you.  If you don't care, then they not going to care, because we share the same last name, even though we are distant relatives."  I said, "Okay."  And I remember when he and I were riding one day and he said, "Now, I'm concerned about that new manager we hired," I said--he said, he just shouted out, he said, "I think the guy is more interested in the prestige than he is in the job."  (whistles).  "Boy," I said, "That's pretty astute for a guy that didn't finish his high school to be a very successful businessman, but--."  And he had hired a new manager and this guy come out one of these fancy restaurants, but you can see that, that guy wasn't into the detail of making sure we had the fifty pound potatoes we needed on a Friday night, and enough buns, and he wasn't into that level of detail, which is, I mean, when you run a place with a set amount of storage, and there're events coming up, like big football games or high school football games, you got to be ready.  And you can't wait until the people standing outside the window.  So that plan, prepare, execute mentality was driven home to me.  At the same time, I was being coached by the Army in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corp] from a military perspective of what it takes to be successful.
Story_ID: 31995
Speaker 1: So that little lesson out there at that drive-in, from everything about, don't mess with the girls here, 'cause as soon as you start messing with the girls who work here, this is going to not work, if you understand that lesson.  So I said, "Okay.  Got that."  And that, I think the other piece he reinforced also was, up until that time, leadership was organizing people for meetings and organizing people for basically doing things they wanted to do, if you understand what I'm saying.  And they call it high school.  And they organize the prom.  We'll have a nice prom, and you know, sort of--the busybodies will get busy and the support cast say, "We want to do a school project to leave for the school so everybody would pull--."  What I learned from him was leadership was equally getting people to do what they didn't want to do, like clean up after your shift, being there on time, and being there.  You know what I'm saying?  It's hard to get people who getting paid sometime a little more than the minimum wage in tips to show up on a Friday night when everybody else going to the game.  But, so again, I learned a lot from him in that interaction.  I also learned that the idea is that, at the end of the day, the customer like--got to feel like they're in charge, even though the customer might be wrong.  You learn to deal with that, 'cause without that customer, you don't have business.  I learned that from him.  And in a way I also learned that you got to control your temper too, when people working for you, and you yelling and they yelling, and then they'll leave out the door screaming.  That's a bad event (laughs).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, those were some good lessons I learned from him.
Speaker 2: Did you ever see anybody fired from the job?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I have.  And it came to that point in time, even while I was in college, I had to fire people.
Speaker 2: How would you handle that?
Speaker 1: We had a little dining room next door.  I'd take them over, say, "Hey, (unclear), we can't use you no more because we expect you to show up, and then when we really need you you're not here.  A lot of time when you're here, we don't need you but we keep you because, you understand, it's the right thing to do."  So, the in-kind (unclear), yeah, I wanted to go to the game too, but that's one of the sacrifice we make to work our way through to school.  'Cause as soon as that game's over with, this place going to be full of people, and before the game, it'll be full of people.  Yeah.  I had to let people go and, again, I was kind of the assistant manager, and they always had this principal because I was off.  I had school to go to.  But, even that, it--all that, it had some certain underlying principles that you learn them on the job or somebody teach you.  And I got to learn those from him.
Story_ID: 31996
Speaker 1: Thus, we were sitting there one evening about seven o'clock on a Saturday night and Raymond pulled up.  It was early spring, early summer, and he said, "Hey, cuz, let's go take a ride."  I said, "Why?"  He said, "I met this cowboy, this soul brother cowboy named Cowboy, and he's got a horse up in Woodville [Louisiana].  I want to buy a horse for my son."  He said, "Don't worry about the place," he said.  "There is not much business here this time of year, so, just tell them we'll be back."  So we took off.  About an hour later, we find this little farm up in Woodville, Mississippi.  I mean, this was before cell phone and all of that.  We just take this piece of paper, show up at the guy's house.  We go out there, there's a light--there's a great, big, old horse standing in his stall.  And Raymond then says, "So what do you think about it, cuz?"  I said, "Well, good looking horse.  I mean, that's all I can tell."  So the guy put a chain on the horse.  We put him in the trailer.  Came back, he dropped me off.  He said, "Well--."  I said, "What I do with him now?"  He said, "Oh, you just turn him loose in the pasture," which he calls it.  He had a piece of Baton Rouge [Louisiana] that hadn't been fully developed yet where he had a nice home, beautiful home, and he had bought a piece of property that eventually ended up being worth millions of dollars.  But he was using it as a pasture for cattle, one of his little side projects.  So, he said, "Okay.  Come out here Monday.  I'm going to have the crew come in and we're going to build a stable for the horse."  I went out there Monday, and we sort of laid this thing out.  By Monday night that horse had a full stable (laughs).  I mean, he was that kind of an action guy.  And then, over time, his son--he was trying to encourage his son to be competitive in rodeo riding and stuff, just to inspire this kid to do stuff.  And, unfortunately, when he got out and took this old horse out to compete, he hadn't been trained, so he was, you know, he was a basic old stable horse to use on cattle or trail riding.  So now, he goes off and he buys expensive horses.  So I said, "Well, can I have old big Dan?"  He said, "Oh, yeah, you can have him, but you got to pay me back."  So I said, "Okay."  So I took Dan and I put him up on Southern University Campus [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] in the Ag Department for two years.  He stayed at the Ag Department while I was gone to college.  And I would go out and ride him every now and then and fool around as we did classes and stuff.  But I think I might have been the only student at Southern that ever had their own horse there out on a farm.
Story_ID: 31997
Speaker 1: But the rest of that story is, I remember that he [cousin Raymond Honore] closed the drive-in because Kentucky Fried Chicken came in and put a store right next to him and drove him out of business.  And that's when now, my early-on appreciation of what these franchises could do in a (unclear??), at the end of the week, that money left town.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: His money, he took, he built apartment buildings and he, you understand, helped kids to get through school, and gave to the university.  But that still stick in the back of my head, the impact of big franchises.  But from that, I still owed him maybe a couple hundred dollars, and he would drive by on Saturday evening when he and his wife would ride by (unclear), and say, "Hey, boy."  He would say it in a different way.  He say, "I want my money."  (laughs).  And it was more of a joke.  And when I finished college and I got married, he came to the wedding.  And my wife and was getting ready to go off on our honeymoon, I think I had forty dollars in my pocket, and he said, "Come here, boy."  And he took a hundred-fifty bucks out and he gave me and say, "Ya'll have a good honeymoon."
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's really fortunate that you came across this distance relative.  I mean, he was, you know, someone who became much closer, I guess.
Speaker 1: Over the years, yeah.  And, he's still one of my heroes.  He's a self-made man, business man, and he went through the whole cycle.  He went bankrupt, he lost his, his great piece of property.  Matter of fact, I passed by it yesterday.  Now, it's filled with million dollar homes.  I mean, that he was a great guy.
Speaker 2: So is he passed now?
Speaker 1: He's passed.  And his son lives here in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Great guy.
Story_ID: 31998
Speaker 1: Tell us about now, in school, like, who were some of your mentors, who were some of the professors in school or that you remember?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In the university level or in high school?
Speaker 1: At Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  At Southern.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Most of my contacts at Southern and people that really influenced me came from the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but some people on the agriculture side where I had my major, were certainly influential (laughs).  I was taking a course in horticulture from Dr. Booker T. Whatley.  And Whatley had gotten his Ph.D. out of Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama], was a major in the United States Army Reserve, had served in World War II, had been a part of a segregated Army, and had studied at Tuskegee, under the old school there at Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: Seems like he was destined to teach agriculture with a name like that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And he had been taught by the masters himself at Tuskegee, that original group of educators that came out of Tuskegee.  So--.
Speaker 1: Was he a student of George Washington Carver?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Definitely.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So--.
Speaker 1: Is it, W-H-A-T-L-E-Y?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, Dr. Whatley just happened to live in that apartment building that I told you my cousin had behind the drive-in.  And he would drive by there, and every now and then he would come by and get a lunch or something, and he'd see me in there working.  And he'd just cut his eyes at me.  So I started taking this course in horticulture.  The idea was, he would lay out a hundred plants, then you had to identify the plant by its common name and scientific name, and you had to spell it correctly (whistles).  That was a problem for me, spelling those Latin names, 'cause, the scientific name was normally Latin.  So we took our first quiz, and Dr. Whatley said--he saw me one day I was leaving the greenhouse, he said, "Hey, boy.  Come here."  He said--and he used to smoke them old Camel cigarettes--he said, "Let me tell you something.  You not going to pass this course, 'cause I see you out there working all the time.  The only way you going to pass this course you got to study, boy.  I don't think you studying enough."  I say "Okay, Dr. Whatley."  So I dropped the course right quick.  So (snaps fingers), next semester, took the course again.  So, close to the end of the course (snaps fingers), drop it again.  It's a gotta-have, 'cause I got to have this to graduate.  Boy, then that summer, right there in the 'Jaguar Newspaper,' Dr. Whatley gets assignment to go to Ghana to teach them how to breed sweet potatoes.  I say, "Glory, Hallelujah."  So he left, then I took it again that fall.  An undergraduate student took charge, a guy I took the course with the first time.  And then I passed the course with a C minus.  But he told me, he said, "You going to meet the standards for this course, and you not going to pass this course unless you study.  I'm going to see to that, you understand?"  I said, "Yes, sir."  And he held me to the fire, and that's the only course I took under him.  But many times you could be in the university environment and people would sometimes treat you nice because you had a good personality, and you were active as I was.  But the old-school guy like Dr. Whatley, you didn't get past him.  This was about performance.  This thing about, "Well, I went to a segregated school," I mean, there was no sad story you could tell Dr. Whatley.  You know what I'm saying? (laughs).  That wouldn't get any empathy from him.  You understand what I'm saying?  He just come from that school of "People, if you want something, you got to work for it, and yeah, you got to work harder than the next guy. Yeah, you may not be treated fairly, but those are not excuses for not being successful at what you do."
Story_ID: 31999
Speaker 1: Your excuse was just out of the--wasn't in the lexicon of that era of leaders, him [Dr. Booker T. Whatley] as well as the officers I ran into in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corp], that, there was just no excuse not to show up at drill and not have--to be starched and shined.  No excuse.  To them you had all week to get here.  So, I mean, that put a discipline in my life that I was missing, to be honest with you, 'cause sometime, as my mama's pet and sometimes as my high school pet, you know, I might have gotten, what you might say, not away with some things, but when I got to college, those two institutions there, Whatley in the school agriculture, and the ROTC folks; they drilled that in me, you had to meet the standard.
Speaker 2: Now, who were some of the ROTC teachers?
Speaker 1: We had Major Hearst (ph. splg.), Major Melvin, Major White, and our professor at that time was, I want to say Lieutenant Carl Pikes (ph. splg.), and Major Honore.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So then there's another relative?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He was a major general.  He retired.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But he was there my first year (laughs).  As I can remember, the first time we got inspected by him, and again, I was expecting, you know, a little smile (laughs), and some kind of kindness.  And I remember him saying something awful about how bad my jacket looked 'cause it hadn't been pressed right.  I mean, I was looking for a little (unclear?) kindness, and what I got was my you-know-what chewed for (laughs) my jacket instead (laughs).  Again, that's that, going from that little small community where, you know, you're a big fish in a small pond; they go into that big pond where, you know, there a lot of other people better than you.  That was a big learning experience in college.
Story_ID: 32000
Speaker 1: Any other teachers in college that come to mind?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think people that were influential was Dr. Harrison over in the agriculture department.  He was head of the Ag Department [Agriculture Department], was an impressive man and a leader, always encouraged us.  And we had Dr. Pope.  Dr. Pope taught poultry science, and Dr. Pope came from the old school, one of the first to--I want to say Dr. Pope came out of Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] then went to Purdue [University, Lafayette, Indiana] and Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] to study to get his Ph.D. in chicken and then poultry science. Again, he was--I can see him there now in the classroom smoking his pipe (laughs).  And you say--people say, "The professor smoked a pipe in class?"  "Yeah, I mean, the windows were open, but we didn't any air-conditioning anyhow, so."  He'd sit there and he would tell us stories.  Start talking about chickens and end up talking about leadership.  And at that time, the poultry department at Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] was there to try and build that knowledge in our people so we could get into the chicken business.  I mean, that's a pretty state--steady state of income, either from eggs or raising them for production; they go into the meat markets.  That--for whatever reason, that department didn't get the effect that they were trying to get from them.  And, but the old barn still sit there today on the university campus as a legacy to Dr. Pope, because I remember his house was right next to the chicken barn.  And he lived there on the campus.  But, an influential man in his own right.  And again, the subject was poultry science, but eventually, at some point in time, it ended up him teaching leadership.  A very unassuming guy.  A little short guy with his pipe and his glasses.  Again, someone who challenged you to be popular, not based on your personality, but on your performance.  You understand what I'm talking about?  As opposed to, you know, being good-looking and recognized by your peers; being good and recognized by your peers at what you do.  And he was another one of those people that helped shape--and I guess one of the big impacts for the college president, Dr. Felton G. Clark.
Speaker 1: Now, was he the president when you were--
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Man of impeccable dress, always dressed in a suit and tie.  And he was the second president of Southern.  His dad was the first president.  And Dr. Clark, even today he and his wife are buried there on the university campus.  But he was a very inspirational man.  And I think he recognized his job of knowing that there are a lot of kids in the audience when he spoke, like me, who were there literally by the skin of their economic teeth.  I mean, they got dropped off, and all your clothes in one suitcase. And what he remind us, even on our worst days we had it better than the generation, two or three generations before us.
Story_ID: 32001
Speaker 1: Can you describe the controversial, I guess, closing of the campus [of Southern University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] by Felton G. Clark [president of Southern University] in the '60s [1960s], and what was going in the Civil Rights Movement there in Baton Rouge-- in Scotlandville?
Speaker 2: Well, I started at Southern in the fall of '66 [1966].  (Unclear?) you contact (unclear?) the Civil Rights Voter Rights, all those acts were taking place, the influence of Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], and then the influence of people on the other end of the spectrum, like H. Rap Brown and others, and the Muslim groups that came to the South to take, as opposed to a passive approach, a peaceful approach of King to a more aggressive approach from H. Rap Brown and others, about revolution. (laughs) I mean, I've listen to that dude speak at a Southern gym and it was, it was a revelation to hear people talk about revolution in your own country.  I mean, that--but we listened and learned.  I think Dr. Clark's approach was, he closed the campus and some of the other stuff was, we didn't then take pause, we wanted to do a non-violent.  He was more of the Ghandi, you know, with patience as opposed to anything that incite destroying a building or something like that.  I mean, you know, he had--he knew what it took to put those buildings together and to build the infrastructure at the university.  And he had tremendous influence in the city as the president of Southern University.  I can remember we used to have our livestock shows.  This is segregated South, 'cause you had a livestock show at LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and you had one at Southern.  I went to a livestock show two years ago at Southern and bought some animals.  I was kind of embarrassed, 'cause I looked for the big companies, none of them were there.  Now where are they?  How can they not be here, buying these poor kids' animals?  I'll tell you what, when Felton Clark was alive, they were there.  Exxon, Coca-Cola, meat packing companies, they were there.  And not just some third-stringer from the company headquarters.  He had the principals there.  That was the power of Felton Clark to end segregation.  And my embarrassment a couple of years ago, not even a gifting officer from a major company there present to buy these kids' projects.  That's the difference in what Felton Clark had his influence in the community as to challenge, the present-day presidents of Southern University challenge.  They don't have the influence in the community that Clark had.  They could pick up the phone and say, "Hey, now we're going to be doing this next Friday evening," and they would show up.  Again, not second or third-tier sweep-(C?) sweep people; I'm talking about principals who owned or ran these companies.  We don't have that influence in that town today.  We don't.  And I think he created that influence, first, through his longevity there, and his unequivocal commitment to that university, that this wasn't a job; this was his way of life.
Story_ID: 32002
Speaker 1: I think he [Felton G. Clark, president of Southern University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] looked for a much more civil approach to resolving the integration of the community, that the fact that you had riot police on campus, 'cause people were sitting-in at the students' library or sitting-in downtown, was a disappointment to him.  I don't think he disagreed with the right to march.  I do think he saw the dysfunction of taking over a building, people couldn't go to class.  So, you taking the whole building, and you're doing social disobedience, but you have an impact on other people.  You understand what I'm saying?  I think that's the thing that disturbed him the most.  It's not that he didn't believe in the Movement but, you know, don't break all the windows 'cause I got to go find my replacement windows.  You understand what I'm saying?  More of a practical approach than one that say, "Well, hell, (unclear?) we'll just stay and do it."
Speaker 2: I know we've interviewed D'Army Bailey, and I think he was one of the leaders of the Student Movement, and I've heard other Southern alum discuss this, and it's almost--it's like a Shakespearian tragedy in some ways; the whole crises with students and Dr. Clark, and how that--the State steps in and then, you know, the subsequent passing of Dr. Clark.  What lessons in leadership did you--or did you-- I mean were you--I mean were you aware--.  Did you learn any lessons in leadership from watching this thing, this crisis, where it seems as though there's no easy way to resolve it, I mean, you know?
Speaker 1: I think, and again, I'm a little fish in this big pond, and news isn't what news is today as far you getting different angles to the story.  I mean, you got one angle to the story what the principle paper wrote, and there's a minority paper that comes out once a week that you may or may not get exposed to, and there's no independent radio station.  I mean, there are minority radio stations, but they're not independent, they're-- you know.  And there are people who, and again, I admire the heck out of Dr. Clark, so I'm of his, of his fan club, because he can come in this room and have the ability to connect with us, and to inspire me--inspire and motivate us that--and to remind us of that story, this is not about what you came from, you know.  This story will be about, not about where you end.  It will be the journey in between and what you did, and how you did it to make a difference.  And Southern was his life.  So it wasn't like president of some university and they change over every seventy--  This was his life.  He lived on campus.  His dad was buried, you know, two hundred meters from where he lived.  So this is not like Southern, you know, a temporary command position you get.  This was his life, so when you see that university being portrayed by a media that says, you know, "Them negroes came out of Southern, and then they went--they disturbed everybody downtown because they sat in at the Crest counter because they want to be treated equally.  And they had radical movements of people, Muslims with them from up North, and they got into a fight with the police."  Well, to Felton Clark, that was a--that was a-- that was a--  He thought there was a different way, you know, that we could march without, and not be engaged in any violence at all.  And in many cases, people were put in jail for the peaceful act of marching, but it was portrayed as an act of violence to put your hand up when somebody's trying to beat you.  And, I think many people became--may have become agitated with Dr. Clark over that.  But I think at the end of the day, his concern was for the reputation of the school.
Story_ID: 32003
Speaker 1: Do you kind of reflect on that time, from time to time, and about how that, you know, this crisis--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I mean, let's say we go from--  We had a ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corp] student got shot.  I mean, this was right across from the ROTC building.  I think I was on my first assignment when I read about this in the paper.  The students were doing a sit-in at the old Administration Building, and they said, "We got to break this sit-in up."  So the college police went there and the sheriff came in, and they said, "You know we got people shot over a sit-in on campus."  I was already in the Army, and that was--that was pretty disturbing.
Speaker 1: I think two students were shot, what, in 1970?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: On campus.
Speaker 2: That was most unfortunate.
Speaker 1: There was a mysterious--  They never found who shot them or never been an arrest.
Speaker 2: So, I mean, those things left an indelible mark on the university.  I remember being in my dorm and again, from a sit-in, the sheriff come in, you could see the scenario.  They got these old armored cars, and they had these gas masks on, and you go from a sit-in to damn near a riot where people shooting--with them shooting tear gas and running people down the street, dogs running after them.  And in many cases it was over a sit-in.  And they said, "Power to People."  And that was most disturbing.  I always remember that one, right there on the campus.  People running and--to get away from that tear gas, and closing my window and hunkering down in my--  Two hours later, you never knew it happened but other than a few sheriff cars around.
Speaker 1: When you look back on that, do you think they could have--the authorities could have handled it a different way?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I didn't (unclear), I think both sides got what they wanted or thought they got what they wanted, because people in our community say that the only way, if it takes me sacrificing myself for this movement [Civil Rights Movement] in that the police may, who think they're doing the right thing and coming in with overwhelming force to break up a sit-in, that at the end of the day, that truth will be on our side, that we were sitting in for basic inalienable rights promised to us by the Declaration of Independence, that history will be on our side.  On the other hand, the police in their own historical way of using force, say, "No, you cannot assemble, you do not have a permit to be here, and we're just going to beat the hell out of you until you leave or put you in jail."  And, you know, it's almost like we bred that in the police forces, 'cause they have a tendency to go back, right to that jungle rule, that soon as something happen, break out the batons, get the sticks out and start beating the hell out of people.  And I'm speaking that as a generality, 'cause I know not every police department think that way, but it seem to be a representation of many of them, because we have never come to grips with how our law enforcement deal with civil disobedience in this country.
Story_ID: 32004
Speaker 1: Now, what about ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corp] and Vietnam?  Now (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Quite a conundrum there.  Because being in the ROTC, my first year [at Southern University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], we had two thousand two hundred students, 'cause it was a requirement if you were in ROT--if you were an able-bodied male, you had to be a part of ROTC.  You remember them days?  The (unclear) at college.  Then about two years into it, they changed that as the war [Vietnam War] started to come down, and where ROTC was not mandatory for your first two years of college for you to get a deferment.  So, yeah, we had two thousand two hundred students.  We had to go meet at the football field.  And on Monday afternoon for an hour we would drill, then we would walk back from the football field through the campus, two thousand strong in formation, with drums, singing Army songs.
Speaker 1: Now that's dramatic.  This is dramatic.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  So, I can remember when I got to be a company commander, of being in the front of that formation my sophomore, junior year, and the students would assemble on the bridge, because we had a bridge we had to walk through, and some of them were Vietnam veterans; some of them were from up North, some of the agitators, as they used to be referred to; and they used to heckle us for being in the ROTC and being in the Army.  And that was--that was somewhat of a dilemma.  Again, do you--do you succumb to what's-- might be popular or do you succumb to what you beliefs are.  And on my worst day, I would not have had it as bad as those African Americans who served under General Washington, who fought for the freedom of our nation, 20 percent of them who were slaves, and fought throughout the Revolutionary War with a promise of freedom that was given to them on the Declaration of Independence.  That this berating by my fellow students is little in comparison with the sacrifice of those who served our nation before us, when they themselves were not free.  And if this [is] what it took, this what it took.  And those of us who stayed in and got commission, soon clearly understood that, that the fact that you're criticized by people in your community for this aspiration to serve in the Army as a commission officer, was clearly an opportunity to serve your nation as a leader.  Or to reflect on somebody yelling at you for wearing a uniform, knowing the history of the Tuskegee Airmen, or knowing the history of the Harlem Hellfighters, who went to World War I, and who were forced to wear French uniforms, 'cause the Congress of the United States did not want them to fight.  And General Black Jack Pershing put them in French uniforms, and they fought throughout World War I.  So, in comparison to what they did for this nation so I could one day be a commission officer, to be yelled and screamed at was minor--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --compared to what they did.
Story_ID: 32005
Speaker 1: There weren't that many voices in the black community that, you know, came out against the war [Vietnam War], but I know, in '67 [1967] or so, Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] came out against it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he did.
Speaker 1: And was, you know, criticized by the [President Lyndon B.] Johnson Administration, "How could he betray his country by speaking out against the Vietnam War?"  But there are a lot of people that thought that the war was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, going on too long.
Speaker 1: --yeah, in a way, you know--(unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I mean, back then that was the longest war we ever participated in, and they weren't going nowhere.
Speaker 1: Yeah, for right reasons, we weren't there for the right reasons and that sort of thing, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, did you have to--.  I mean, did you have any--what were--.  In those days, so you--.  How did you feel about it in those days?  Were you following that critique of it or did you--.
Speaker 2: No.  Certainly, I was aware of the critique and--
Speaker 1: Aside from the heckling aspect that people--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That kind of thing is one thing, but the critique of it, by, I mean, like, Dr. King.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No, I mean, again, it's one of the first lessons that, at the national and global issue, there are many ways to look at the appreciation of the problem we face.  The more global, the more international we get, it becomes more complex.  And there are no simple answers.  I mean, we went in to Vietnam with all the right reasons. Our fear of Communist exploitation, and what was then identified as a domino effect in Asia.  Well, you know, fifty thousand troops later, we still, you know, what's going on?  This is not changing.  And you got an endless flow of troops out of China who, at that time, was a kingmaker, and still is today, and who's a part of the National Security Council on what they will and will not support.  And, through a restraining, a lot of people who did not want this to escalate to a nuclear event between China and the U.S. and Russia, we needed to get out of Vietnam.  And I think those voices of discontent about staying there had an influence on the government, which is about the way a democracy is supposed to work.  The people speak and the government can get in the war, but it's the people that force them out.  We'll always find a reason to stay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And we're in two wars now, war one just ended and this--
Speaker 2: Right.  It's going to the people that get us out of Afghanistan, because there's always folks who, "Oh, just give us two more years," and many of them are folks that come from the same cut of cloth I come from.  "Give us two more years, get a few more billion dollars."  But there come a time that each one of these things has got to be over with.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think, in a positive way, Dr. King helped influence that movement that it was time to leave Vietnam.
Speaker 1: As a soldier--a soldier has to think a little bit differently about the war, right?  I mean (unclear)(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah, because your mission is to fight it.  I mean, your mission is to win it.  It's to fight and win, that's your mission.  And there's nothing short of fighting and winning.  And that's why we exist.  And, even though there may be discontent as there's always discontent with war.  And there was discontent among Americans over even fighting the Revolutionary War against the British.  There are people who are content say, "Yeah, well, King George the Third, you know, he's a nice guy, and the fact that we can't vote and we've got to pay tax; no big deal, you know.  We're doing all right."  But to the little guy, it's a big problem.  And so, there is--there's always both sides of the story.  In this particular case, I think with the impact television had on that war [Vietnam War], which we hadn't had on any war in history before or seen those guys coming off the battlefield every day and put on helicopters, I think that influenced American people significantly.  And then so many people served in Vietnam; 'cause you had the draft, and then they'd come in for eighteen months, your six months' training, go to Vietnam, come back in two years, they home.  So, we had a lot of people serve in Vietnam because of the draft.  And they would go for one tour and come back and go home.  So, we generated a lot of veterans from Vietnam as a result of that.
Story_ID: 32006
Speaker 1: Now, at some point at Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], you decided to make your career the Army, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  My career to decide to stay in the Army was actually made much later than that.  My objective was to go in the Army and stay until I was about a Major, then get out and come back and go to work in agriculture.  But when I went in the Army, I had an obligation to serve, I think, four years.  And again, what started off as an obligation, at the end of those four years ended up as a way of life.
Speaker 1: Now this is 1970 when you graduated from Southern?
Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971].  January '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So, what started out as an obligation ended up a way of life.  And-- But that was the requirement when I came in.
Speaker 1: Now, did you graduate with any honors from Southern, or did you--?
Speaker 2: No.  Distinguished Military Graduate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was not on the honor roll (laughs).  But, I was a DMG-- I was only one in my year, as I recall, to be designated Distinguished Military Graduate [DMG].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And those were selected by the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] instructors.  And basically what that meant, they give you the option to go right in the Army immediately.
