Story_ID: 301487
Speaker 1: We're rolling on tape one with The HistoryMakers.  Today I will be interviewing Mr. Chester Higgins [HistoryMaker Chester Higgins, Jr.].  My name is Shawn Wilson, I'm the interviewer.  Of course you've met me, you've also met Neculai Burghelea who is the videographer.  So, if I can have you just state your name for me and spell it out for the camera.
Speaker 2: Okay, Chester, Chester Higgins, Jr.  Chester is C-H-E-S-T-E-R, Higgins, H-I-G-G-I-N-S.
Story_ID: 301488
Speaker 1: Fairhope, Alabama. Today's date?
Speaker 2: Friday, August 26, 2005.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: Brooklyn, New York.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: Photographer, staff photographer, [The] New York Times.
Story_ID: 301489
Speaker 1: Okay and we'll start.  I told you about the preliminary questions and they are about some of your favorite things and the very first one is your favorite food.  Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well, I think as a child I've always had a real touch for blackberry pies.  In fact, my mother [Varidee Young Smith] would leave me sometimes over at my great uncle or his sister, my great aunt Suge [ph.], and if it was the summertime and my great Aunt Suge was making pies in her oven that, that I think used wood, we had an agreement that if I would go out and pick a couple of quarts of blackberries she would make a pie for me and I would you know rush out to get those blackberries and she would make the blackberry pie and we will sit, you know of course I couldn't eat it all, but we would enjoy ourselves and I guess that's my fondest memory of a food.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I don't know I guess the least favorite is winter.  So, I can do it by elimination here.  I guess you know spring and fall are definitely in terms of temperature wise are the favorites, but well I've learned to since living in the North, I've learned to appreciate winter as well as long as one respects the fact that you have to cover up in layers to, to protect yourself because winter, from a visual point of view, as well, winter offers a different kind of set of, of elements to work with, but I think we also, we all like to be sort of unfettered and appear to be unfettered is definitely is spring, summer to fall.
Speaker 1: So, what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I have two, one is red and one is blue, and one--
Speaker 1: You have a touch of both on today.
Speaker 2: Yeah I have a tough of both on today, so blue is, I think blue it is probably wins out as number one and red is number two.
Speaker 1: And what is and this may be, what's your favorite vacation destination? Maybe hard for you being all over (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Different parts of Africa.
Speaker 1: Different parts of Africa.
Speaker 2: Yeah I, see I tend to use my vaca- well most people take vacations to relax from their jobs.  I take what's called busman holidays because I go to work during my vacation on my own personal projects, so that I can come back really needing, most times I come back in need of a vacation to relax and I spend usually the year and, and my five weeks of vacation is what I get a year from the office unless I can accrue additional time.  And what I do during the year is I'm researching the place where I want to go visit based upon the project I'm working on, and then I go to that place and I stay there for at least a month and I submerge myself in that culture and those people and that place to work on my project, then come back.  For the last few years, all of my trips have either to countries along the Nile River, which is Egypt, Sudan, Ethiopia or the cost of my interest in ancient religion of this area looking also at people in Ghana and Senegal and, and Mali.  So, I've been doing that particular back and forth.  Of course, I've made trips.  There was a time I was working on my book 'Feeling the Spirit[: Searching the World for the People of Africa,' Chester Higgins, Jr.] and I made trips to look at the African immigrant communities in Paris [France] and London [England] and Frankfurt [Germany] and Portugal, but that's there again is because my vacations are driven by my interests in my projects that I'm working on.
Speaker 1: So, what would you say is your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, I know my favorite phrase is that you know every day above ground is a great day and secondly you know to my, to people who I think you know I mean we live in a world where we have to make a living, so my encouragement to people who want to be photographers or whatever they want to be I encourage them to be good at what they do and after they are good at what they do, I encourage them to make the money.
Story_ID: 301490
Speaker 1: And you also I've seen, I mean, not that this is your favorite, but it's one I want you to mention is the saying that Romare Bearden always said to you (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh about creativity (laughter).  Well, we, Romare was speaking to the fact there's always limitations and there's always going to be rejections in whatever you do, especially crea- in a creative venture and he was saying he used the phrase, you know, the greater the limitations, the more creative we have to become to overcome it, which is a way of seeing, you know, the glass half empty or half full.  It's always a challenge.  You have to look for the opportunity in everything because unless you, because if you defeat it by circumstances, you know wanting--it's easy for a lot of people to get, to get the feeling that somehow things are, that we are entitled to certain kinds of things just because we show up or because we think that we can do it.  That's fine, but you know that's how you, we, it's--one has to resist the temptation of being a legend in your own mind and realize that you live in the context of other people, and that a lot of other people feel that same way and that it is and for reasons sometimes that have nothing to do with you.  You are not the chosen one for a particular thing that you think that, that you put a lot of energy into.  That does not mean that something is wrong with you.  It means that given the fact that you can come up with the wherewithal to get to the starting line with one idea that didn't go through you have the capability to go and, and research and dig down in yourself again and come up with even a better idea to get you to another starting line and who knows that starting gate may be the one that's really meant for you.  So, his thing was essentially that you know to greater the, and he didn't coin that phrase.  It's a phrase he said came from a French painter named [Georges] Braque.  He says you know this is a phrase that, you know from time to time talking to Romare I used to go to Romare's house on Saturday mornings about fourteen or fifteen years he would hold essentially court with different artists.  He would get you appointed time, you'd go, and he'd give you, give you an hour, hour and a half and you'd come and you'd show your work and he'd ask you questions and you'll talk about what you think you're doing and then he would then have some more comments about that and then you'd sit back and you'd talk and then he would just talk about art and talk about artists and talk about artist work.  And then you will go away and somebody else would come in and they would go and somebody else would come in, and this was how Romare sort of held court.  It was quite instructive for me, and I learned an awful lot from that and one of those things, and one of them is that phrase that will always stick with me.
Story_ID: 301491
Speaker 1: So, we're gonna travel back in time and we're gonna talk about your mother's side of the family, your father's, stepfather's [Johnny Smith] side of the family.  And we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you state your mother's name and spell it out for me, give me her date of birth, place of birth.
Speaker 2: Well, my mother name is Varidee, V-A-R-I-D-E-E, Varidee Smith, Higgins Smith, and she was born December 3rd.  I forget what year now.  And she was born in a place in Alabama.  We have two coastal counties.  One of them is Mobile County [Alabama], and one is across the bay [Mobile Bay], which is Baldwin County [Alabama], and my mother is from Baldwin County in a town called Fairhope [Alabama].  And this place was, is very interesting.  I used to go obviously as a kid, spend, 'cause my mother was a school teacher, but we lived and she taught on the opposite side of the state on the southeast corner of the state even though her maternal home was from the southwest corner of the state.  So, for some vacations during the year if we had to make that long drive, but once in the summers I would go visit my mother, when she would go visit her sisters 'cause she had many sisters.  I think she was one of about seven sisters.  And my mother as a young child about three of four was orphaned because her parents [Hester Young and George Young] died.  You know the turn of the century there was this big flu, the influenza, I think it was killing a lot of people.  My mother became orphaned by that.  My father [Chester A. Higgins, Sr.] became orphaned by that.  So, that it was her sisters who really, her older sister, sister Esther [Estell Young], who sort of became the head of the family and all the girls were domestics in Fairhope because it was a, it was a favorite home for a lot of wealthy people to come and spend and enjoy the, the, the border and the coast.  But, my mother's sisters all saved money to make sure that the two girls who were really smart academically could go to college with the help of a scholarship, so that one sister went to become a nurse.  Another--
Speaker 1: What was that sister's name?
Speaker 2: Aunt Bea [ph.].  Aunt Beatrice went to become a nurse, and my mother went to, went to Alabama State [State Teachers College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] to become a teacher.  So, in the summers we would go back to visit her relatives and being it was coastal I always remember the, the dirt roads and the water, puddles of water and the smell of mangroves nearby and I remembered she had a brother, Uncle Walter [Young], who had a, had issues with the bottle, and but unfortunately for Uncle Walter one night he went to bed and was drunk and had a cigarette and, and his cabin burned down.  And that was the only brother that she had had.  Then, the rest of them were girls.  But, Fairhope was an interesting place.  I loved it, you know, until I got of age when I was interested in girls, then I found that Fairhope had this limitation and frustrations because every girl that I thought was cute that I liked turned out to have been a cousin (laughter).  So, at that point I was tired of it.  But, I had also an uncle there, Aunt Bonnie's [ph.] husband, Frank [ph.] his name, who was a, he had a couple of boys and he was a fisherman.  But, what he really did is he smoked fish.  He had this huge kettle out back with a chimney where he would take the fish and put in racks and, and actually smoke it with, slow, slow smoke with wood, and that was very interesting you know to see that side of, of a fisherman, how the fisherman was actually taking the fish and producing a finished good from it.
Story_ID: 301492
Speaker 1: What do you remember learning from your mom [Varidee Young Smith] about her early years?  Did she talk about growing up as an orphan, was it tough?  Did she talk about her sisters having to take care of her?  What was family life like for them?  Where did they grow, did they grow up in Fairhope [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: They grew up on Fairhope.  Lucky for them their family had a lot of land, so--
Speaker 1: How much land?
Speaker 2: Had about two hundred acres of land.  There had been a relative in the family who was quite industrious.  See my--
Speaker 1: Who was that, that was industrious?
Speaker 2: His name was Young.  I don't know I it was Sam Young [ph.], and there's a street named after him.  See, the relatives in my, on my mother's side goes back to my great, great, great-grandfather who was an enslaved man who came from the Carolinas.  Actually when the Union Army marched south if you know the history of how the Union Army was marching into the Carolinas, all the, the, the whites in the, in the coast in Carolinas was talking about, you know, how, what a defense they were gonna offer to the union.  But, as the union started marching out, actually the whites abandoned them, abandoned everything and, and fled.  So that my great, great he was George [ph.] joined--he and a lot of the black men joined the Union Army and to fight for the freedom.  Now, if you also follow, and there was a combination of in, infantry blacks and stevedore blacks fighting in the Civil War, and he was finally mustered out in this county and it wasn't, it was called I think Fort Meigs [sic.] at the time if I remember correctly that later became near the town of Fairhope, and he began to, so he settled there and then his children, from there other children.
Speaker 1: Well let's just go back.  So, he fought with the Union Army in the Civil War.
Speaker 2: Right.  In fact I have a thing here that you should--
Speaker 1: Can you just read this for me on camera?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause it's not that.  It's only a paragraph [from 'Feeling the Spirit: Searching the World for the People of Africa,' Chester Higgins, Jr.].  That will be good to have you do that.
Speaker 2: "An African man by the name of James Henry who was enslaved and spoke with a thick tongue of the Gullah fought in the Civil War and the Union Army and then settled in Fairhope, Alabama.  His daughter, Viney Henry Clay was seventeen at emancipation in 1863.  She became the mother of Hester Henry who in the 3rd of December 21 became the mother of Varidee Loretta Young.  My mother Varidee Loretta Higgins, Varidee Loretta Young Higgins Smith, a school teacher who gave birth to me on the 6th of November 96 [sic. 1946] died on the 3rd of March 1993.  A great tree has fallen.  Here I stand on this side of the grave left but only a memory.  Goodnight Madea."  So that was--and the my mother from this property that my mother within--
Speaker 1: How did he, so he fought, the war ended,--
Speaker 2: The Civil War ended.
Speaker 1: --so we know the outcome of the war.
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: He bought the two hundred acres or was it given--
Speaker 2: No, he bought the--
Speaker 1: --to him for having fought with the Union Army?
Speaker 2: Now that's a good question.  I know my mother says that this original acreage that we started it was part of forty acres that was given out, and from the forty acres the industriousness of the young people were able to acquire more over time.  And then what they would do is that they would then sell land to other relatives, and to, to this day I still have my mother's share of that property because it was divided between the girls, between the different sisters.  So--
Speaker 1: So you were just, you were, so your--back in the day they had the two hundred acres and then land went to whom you were going to say something?
Speaker 2: The land, the land went to the sisters.
Speaker 1: To the sisters.
Speaker 2: All of the surviving sisters.
Speaker 1: But when they were living on the land they, was it farming land?  What did they, what did they do?
Speaker 2: No, no, it was timberland.
Speaker 1: Timber.  Okay, so they would, they were forest, I mean they--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right and then occasionally people with timberland would then occasionally sell of timber and get the income from selling timber every so many years.
Speaker 1: Right, they will do, every so many years replant the trees.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So they did that.  So that's how your mom was able to, that's how they were able to support themselves the seven sisters.
Speaker 2: No, that was, you know, that wouldn't be enough to support your families.  That would be an additional income.  They had to all be--my mother's sisters either were domestics or had husband who were whatever job they did were able to support each individual daughter or sister and, and their children.
Story_ID: 301493
Speaker 1: So what stories can you remember your mom [Varidee Young Smith] saying just telling you sort of legends about your ancestors or your own history?  Were there any?
Speaker 2: Well, there's, there's a church there that was essentially built from the inside by one of my relatives who built, it's called Twin Beach [A.M.E Zion Church, Fairhope, Alabama].  And the reason it's called Twin Beach is that I found out that when the church actually started the congregation they would meet outdoors, and they, and where they met there was two trees, beach trees growing there, so the church became known as, I think it's an A.M.E [African Methodist Episcopal] church, Twin Beach and it's still there and it's near, near our property.  I don't know other stories that she may, it just hasn't come to me.  (Unclear) in every family there's always the wayward daughter and in our fam- in her family it was my Aunt Dorinda [Young], and I loved Dorinda.  She had such style, such pizzazz you know.  It never occurred to me that was the year I went down there, Aunt Dorinda was coming up in a car driven by a different man (laughter).  It was, I was never noticing the men anyway I always noticed Aunt Dorinda.  And she was always the hardest one to see.  I'll see her, we could be there the whole summer and Aunt Dorinda would never show up until maybe my mother came, but I would be seeing all the other sisters from time to time.  So, it was, I, I, enjoy, I didn't know what else to enjoy, but what I was enjoying whatever I thought, whatever was around me I enjoyed.  But that's about all I can, that I can really say about what she told me about that time.  Of course, she said it was very hard because you know they, she would have gone to school--she--it had to be in '46 [1946], I think in '45 [1945] she may have been a new college graduate of forty, of '44 [1944] in northern Alabama.  In Anniston [Alabama] she was up there teaching, her first job out of college [State Teachers College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama], and that's where she met my father, Chester Higgins [Chester A. Higgins, Sr.], because he was a, he had been drafted, he was in the [U.S.] Army for the Second World War [World War II, WWII] and I think the fort up there is Fort McClellan [Calhoun County, Alabama] in, in the northeast corner of Alabama.  And they met at a dance and I asked my mother because I never knew my father until I met my father at nineteen, and I asked my mother I said well what was it about this.  She said oh it must have been the uniform (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you, your mother and father were together, you were born.  Your mother taught--
Speaker 2: She taught.
Speaker 1: She taught--
Speaker 2: That relationship lasted I guess about a year.
Speaker 1: About a year and you were a kid.
Story_ID: 301494
Speaker 1: Then your mother [Varidee Young Smith] went back to, or your mother taught during the whole time?
Speaker 2: Well, when my mother--I guess after that year, you know, this is the South and now she was pregnant, she went back to her home in Fairhope [Alabama] and then she applied for different jobs and she applied to work in this very rural country place, New Brockton [Alabama], and she was hired, which was, you know at the time a young divorced woman with a child and I was about six months old, and she found lodging with a family, actually it was the family who was very much involved in wanting to have education for the black students in that county because--
Speaker 1: What was the family's name?
Speaker 2: The Smiths.
Speaker 1: The Smiths.
Speaker 2: My grandfather--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Warren Smith and his wife Faith [McGowan Smith].  Because as I have since learned, my grandfather, Warren Smith, made it possible for the first black school to be built and it happen by going before the board of education and, and pleading that we need to have these black kids educated, they can't just be left to be ignorant and have nothing to do with their mind.  So, the board said to him and he said look I have land and what we would do first-- actually before the land issue what he did was that he said that if the board will hire a principal or teacher or several teachers, they would find a place, they would make, make a building available and what they did is that they made the, at that time and it's still so, the Masonic Lodge was across the street from the A.M.E Zion Church there, so those two places became the meeting rooms for the children during the week and then at some point later on when my mother came into the picture the same man Warren Smith, my grandfather, went back to the board and, and because he had been constantly hopping on the county to put money into education of black children, so the county saw that they were really trying to make it work and they county says okay we are going to build a new school for a white in another part of the county, and the school they're gonna move out of the building and gonna move out of we can't use, you guys can have that building if you can take, if you can move it.  Well, they couldn't move it, but what they did is that my grandfather organized several men who had carpenter skills and they went to that building and they took it apart plank by plank, nail by nail and that they moved to land his land, and the rebuilt the school on his property.  And at that point is when my mother has come in just as that, all that was happening, so that she along with all these other teachers then had rooms to, to hold their class.  I remember that building because you know a lot of the floor boards were peeling.  You know some of the wood you had to, to wear shoes and then I remember also that one way of trying to, that Mr. [P.A.] Youngblood [Sr.], the principal, tried to make that floor work except from time to time they would take, go to the, to the auto place, auto shop and they would get used motor oil and they would take that used motor oil and they would take mops and then that's how they would then paint the floor with used motor oil (laughing).  It was, I mean it was great seeing people solve, you know, practical problems and it's--
Speaker 1: The greater the limitation, the more creative you have to (laughter).
Speaker 2: The more greater you have to become to make it work.  But, it was solving creative, solving practical problems and you know that's what you do you know if you're, if you're a southerner if you were trying to make things work.  You know if you, well any practical person, you know, you solve a practical problem.  You don't sit down and say well you know because I can't get paint we can't use the building.  No, you find another way to make it safe and work, so that you still can use the building because there are always ways to make things happen.
Story_ID: 301495
Speaker 1: So, the Smiths were your step-grandparents.  Let's talk about your stepfather.  What was his name?  Where was he born?
Speaker 2: His name was Johnny Frank Smith, J-O-H-N-N-Y, middle name Frank and Smith, and he was the one of three sons of Warren [Smith] and Faith [McGowan] Smith.  One son, my favorite uncle, was Uncle Edward [Smith] who died, I guess Uncle Edward must have died like in 1969 and then there's another son who left, living in New Jersey.  I didn't know him, I didn't know him at all, James [Smith], and then he also died.  And then there's my father, Johnny Frank who is now eighty-three, who is still, still living.  Johnny Frank went to war thinking War World II [WWII], everybody went to the war, and out of the war he had been raised--my grandfather made his living by running a small business.  He ran a dry cleaner.  He was a tailor.  He understood how to make clothes and how to take care of them and clean them.  He--
Speaker 1: Just tell me where was this taking place?  Where did--
Speaker 2: New Brockton [Alabama].
Speaker 1: New Brockton.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they left Fairhope [Alabama] and went to New Brockton?
Speaker 2: My mother [Varidee Young Smith] left Fairhope and went to New Brockton.
Speaker 1: You mother did and went to New Brockton--
Speaker 2: Right, where she met Warren Smith.
Speaker 1: --where she met okay so go ahead we're in New Brockton and your--
Speaker 2: And Warren Smith is one of the leading members of the black community who owns the business.  There were very few black-owned businesses.  There were always a barbershop was a black-owned business and morticians a black-owned business and here dry cleaners was a black-owned business, so that my, and my grandfather was also a minister.  So, and he owned land and he was essentially the patron for the school, providing property for the school, and he was also very much involved in getting black people to vote.  He would even pay the poll tax that Jim Crow laws had put in place to keep black people from voting, and he would go and drive them, find them and bring them to the, to the voting polls.  This, however, caused some problems with some terrorists, some whites in the community who essentially, well who burned his house down when he was away, when they were away one weekend.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that story.  What were you told about that story?
Speaker 2: Well, I was told that, you know, his house was burned down because he was active in politics.  They came back to nothing because the fire truck was not, either was a volunteer fire department and it was not hard to understand that because you know we lived in a period in, in, you know pre-civil rights period, you lived in a period where it was not, it was common for racists whites to terrorize black people.  Now, it still happens on different levels.  We have racists cops who terrorize black people, so the terrorists, the white terrorists is still among, in, in the midst of us, but that was how the terrorists had acted out at that point.
Story_ID: 301496
Speaker 1: Continuing to roll on tape two.
Speaker 2: I know very little about the history of my grandfather [Higgins' paternal step-grandfather, Warren Smith].  I know about my grandfather's experience of me, but from what I've heard from people have said that he, that they thought that he came from an area of Alabama near Geneva.  I know where this place is, it's on the way from my town of Pensacola [Florida], but I've never remembered seeing any close relatives come to New Brockton [Alabama].  He may have gone there I don't know.  But, my grandfather was, he really, being a minister it was really, you know I guess this man had always been a leader because being a minister he provided a home for this young woman [Higgins' mother, Varidee Young Smith], this teacher who had a child who was divorced in 1946, which you know a lot of people would have frowned upon in that day and time, and invited her to live in his house until she could find her own place and also adopted me, you know, in his heart and later (unclear) his, his son [Johnny Smith], one of his sons then married when he returned from the war [World War II, WWII], married my mother.  So, my grandfather I think I learned an awful lot from, was always a real big influence in my life because he, my grandfather was one of those kind of people who never knew a stranger and I think that I learned to pick that up.  But, also the culture in the South you know you had to always speak to people.  You had to always acknowledge people's space, so you can be walking down the road and somebody else was coming that way you'd have to say good morning, you know, or good afternoon.  You have to acknowledge people's space.  But, acknowledging people's space and talking to them is another step.  And my grandfather did more than just acknowledge people's space, and it became sort of like a habit.  You know that was a normal thing to do that you--how else are you gonna know something about somebody unless you talk to them and ask questions and some people are very shy.  They have to feel authorized to talk and ask questions beyond not having an agenda, but my grandfather, you know, never had an agenda other than just being human.  And I think that that's something that I picked up by being, 'cause I spent an awful lot of time with him at the job, at his job, at the, at the cleaners and even though my father was working for him when I went to the cleaners yes my father you know had the right to tell me to stop and don't do something, but I would spend most of my time with my grandfather, which (laughter) my father probably liked because I wasn't bothering him.
Story_ID: 301497
Speaker 1: My [paternal] grandfather's [Warren Smith] wife, Faith [McGowan Smith], had a large family.  She had I guess about seven sisters and three brothers, and several of those sisters lived in New Brockton [Alabama].  I can think of Aunt Shug [McGowan Lampley] lived there and who else was it.  Well maybe only two of those sisters lived in New Brockton and three of the brothers lived in New Brockton.  One brother was blind, Uncle Babe [McGowan].  He had been blinded by some accident as a young, as an adult.  Another brother, John [McGowan], had, had worked all his life on the railroad on those construction laying down tires, tires, railroad tires.  And another brother, March Fourth [McGowan], had done many things.  He has been a cook at a hotel, worked on the railroad.  He was, he was more of a construction guy.  He would do cement finishing.  He could, he built my mother's [Varidee Young Smith] house.  He was a great carpenter.  He could do masonry.  He was, you know, he did all kinds of things.  So that as a child sometimes my mother would have with the time lag between school or if she had to do, go to meetings and things, she sometimes would take me, during the daytime, would take me to, if it was a day issue, would take me over to Uncle Fourth's house.  I would stay with Uncle Fourth until she'd get back and pick me up.  If it was a night issue, she would take me to Aunt Shug's house because Aunt Shug also was the counties, this area of the county midwife and she had a husband named Uncle Noah [Lampley].  Uncle Noah pre-deceased her.
Speaker 2: What did Uncle Noah do?
Speaker 1: You know I don't know what Uncle Noah did because when I was a child you know these people are already sixty, sixty (laughter), but I don't know what Uncle Noah did.  But, that was Aunt Shug's husband.
Speaker 2: So then, Aunt Shug was a midwife?
Speaker 1: Aunt Shug was a midwife, but and I also remember earliest times as a child my, of going to work in the cotton field with all of these sisters, with my Aunt Shug and with Grandma Faith and some of their friends working in very--well as a child the cotton was very high for me (laughter), but you know it was kind of--and I would have my little sack.  You know I wasn't doing much, but you know I thought I was doing something and, and those were good times.  But, my Aunt Shug was a midwife and when I'd stay over at Aunt Shug's house I remember every day, every night the last time my Aunt Shug would do before she goes to bed is to go down on her knees in her bed and pray and I said you know, "Aunt Shug why are you doing this?"  She said, "Well I pray to the Lord that the angel would look over me and will protect me and give me life until tomorrow morning" and then the first thing she would do when she'd get out of her bed the next morning is pray again.  I said, "Well why do you do this?"  She said, "Well I pray to thank the Lord for letting the angel look over me so that I can wake up and now find a new day."  So, I sort of extend that to the Chester [HistoryMaker Chester Higgins, Jr.] version is everything above ground is a great day (laughter).
Story_ID: 301498
Speaker 1: When I picked up the camera, when I--what made me pick up the camera actually was years later, but the reason I picked up the camera is because I had never seen photographs, when I looked at Aunt Shug's [Higgins' paternal great aunt, Shug McGowan Lampley] wall as a child and the walls of black people in Alabama they usually had several things.  There was always a picture of Jesus Christ, but it was always a picture of Jesus Christ praying in the Garden of Gethsemane before he, before he was arrested with the light beam coming down the rock at night.  And then the other thing that would be on their wall if they had a picture they would have it there of a relative, but generally it wasn't that there may be a, there was, you know, the Booker T. Washington Insurance Company [Birmingham, Alabama] that A.G. Gaston in Birmingham [Alabama] owned and they would publish a calendar and this calendar may have drawings or scenes for black people and they may have that.  And the other thing they would have is these things that were scriptures from the Bible.  It was some blue background with, with glued shimmery stuff that would be the outline of the letters in a sentence, and it would be a simple biblical passage.  And I remembered people would come around and sell those things, so this would be what would be the things on you know people's walls.
Story_ID: 301499
Speaker 1: So, there was that hanging on the wall, the blue--the calendars with the blue--
Speaker 2: And it was Christ in Gethsemane [Garden of Gethsemane] and the biblical scripture.  So, when I, when I first became aware that the camera could be used to make very positive images of black people I immediately thought back and realized that I had never seen pictures on the walls anywhere of my great aunt Shug [Higgins' paternal great aunt, Shug McGowan Lampley] or my great uncle March Fourth [McGowan].  My mother [Varidee Young Smith] had pictures, but you know she was a professional and the way the professionals like her had their picture made is for each year when the school kids had their picture made they would make pictures of the teachers and the faculty, so that's how she got her picture.  And you know I always tell people you know your, your best photographs will always be of things that you know and for me what did I know about my great aunt Shug.  I knew that she prayed at night, and I knew she prayed in the morning.  I knew that she had a, that she had, that she would wear these aprons you know with one pocket.  And back then old people with aprons you know they would, the women, the way they would hold their money as they would take a handkerchief and they would you know fold their handkerchief on a diagonal and then they would take their paper money and they tied it up on one end and they'd take their coins and they'd tie it up on the opposite and they would stick it in their apron pocket.  So, these are the two things I knew about my Aunt Shug and when I went to make a picture of my Aunt Shug, I made other pictures, but I looked to make the two pictures that I knew that was her and so there's a picture of my Aunt Shug looking through outside the window at night as she's inside and she's at her bed and she's praying.  And then the other picture of my Aunt Shug is her at her front fence with her checkerboards dress and her apron looking at me.  You know I, I, to me my Aunt Shug was the sweetest woman that I knew as a, as a, as a pers- as a child as a person.  And then my Uncle Fourth, you know, I--my uncle Fourth was, was the guy who was always a doer of things.  I remember him, he was--in the summertime they would have like a little baseball team, different guys who played different bases and my Uncle Fourth was sort of like the manager of the team and he's the one who was responsible for bringing to the game the, the catcher's mitt and the covering and, and the bats and extra balls.  He had this big sack and just put them all in and walk over and, so I made a couple of pictures of my aunt and Uncle Fourth that was really him, one in his garden and, and another one at home as he got older.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: But, I picked up the camera because it was a love in my heart that I wanted to because what I felt in my heart about certain subjects that I wanted to photograph, and these were those two subjects.
Story_ID: 301500
Speaker 1: There was one other thing about my Uncle Fourth [March Forth McGowan] that you should know is my--
Speaker 2: How do you spell his name?
Speaker 1: Well, it's actually (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because you called him March Fourth.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but in the South it is F-O-U-R-T-H, like the letter four, the number four and this is how it happened, but in the South you know the southern accent changes, so it becomes fourth.
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: And, and everybody called him Fourth except the sisters called him Fourthee [ph.].  But my Uncle March Fourth is an interesting story because his father, I think his name was daddy Ines [sic. Jordan McGowan], and his wife every year mama would get pregnant and for six years it was always a girl.  And daddy Ines you know after the second time, you know, wanted a boy, so he, every time she got pregnant after the first time he would be thinking up, he said okay if it's a boy I'm gonna name it this.  Well, the baby came a girl he said well let me try another name maybe that will give me good luck.  I'm gonna name her this.  So, I think six names, yeah it wasn't until the sixth child that it was a boy, well actually the seventh child 'cause he was saving up.  The seventh child came out a boy, and daddy Ines was so happy that could you imagine what he called this kid.  He gave the kid all the names he had saved up.  So, that kid name became Gabriel Guster Preston Brown Elijah John McGowan; we call him John for short.  He was the oldest boy.  So, then the mother got pregnant again and what do you know it's another boy.  Well, daddy Ines doesn't have any more names (laughter).  He was quite happy with what he had.  He thought he would never see another boy, and he was just caught, totally unprepared.  So, after, so they didn't have a name.  So, the midwife says okay, but after a few weeks the midwife says look we have to have a name for this boy because we have to file the birth certificate.  So, they thought and they thought and they said okay, so they finally decided to name the boy after the day of the month he was born.  So, he was born the fourth of March.  His name became March Fourth McGowan.  So, then in the next year I think Mama Lucy [sic. Annis Smith McGowan] gets pregnant another time and what, what would happen is that there's another boy.  So, this time they called that boy Babe [McGowan] and that was the end of it.  So, that's my, that's how March Fourth, which I think is quite interesting as, as a metaphor because he was always that kind of person, a leader.  That became his name and everybody.  Nobody called--it was a formal if you ever hear someone say March and it was a long time before I realized that March is before Fourth, but that's how March Fourth came to be.
Story_ID: 301501
Speaker 1: What are some of your earliest memories of, although you shared some, but what, what others can you reflect upon that were about your as a little boy in, I guess in Fairmont [sic.] is where you--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --Fairhope [Alabama] is where you started to grow up.
Speaker 2: That's my mother's [Varidee Young Smith] home.
Speaker 1: As your mother grew up, so you grew up.
Speaker 2: But, I, I grew from six months up, on--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in, in New Brockton [Alabama].
Speaker 1: New Brockton.  So, what are your earliest memories of New Brockton, even the town itself what do you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember the horses and, and the wagons, you know because we, in New Brockton there was, it was a cotton gin and the horses were coming fully loaded with cotton, going to the cotton gin and you could hardly hear them creep by because they were weighted down so heavy on their way to the cotton gin and we lived on this dirt road.  But, after they had discharged their load and headed back out to the farm, coming back by they'd make all kinds of noise, just rattling all over the place.  And I remember and I think, I was, I was quite young.  I was you know maybe six or seven, but my [paternal] grandmother [Faith McGowan Smith] said something to me that probably should not have made sense to someone my age, but the metaphor she used allowed it to make sense, and the wagon was coming by noisy, noisy after a full day, gin day and she says you know an empty wagon makes a lot of noise and people can be the same way.  So, as a child I understood very quickly what she meant, so that you know I was, and you know you're sort of watching in life because the people who tend to be most talkative and loud about whatever their business is when you listen to it closely it's not much business at all.  But, I, that was a metaphor that was quite, that gave me a lot of insight as a child into human behavior and that you could find the equivalences of human behavior in natural occurrences and this was, was quite interesting.  So, that I think is my, one of my earliest memories.  Other, other memories would be me and my friends you know going, you know what we called dis- discovering, you know going up and down gullies and wet, little creeks, you know, looking for earth worms so we could go fishing (laughter).
Story_ID: 301502
Speaker 1: One thing I'm interested in is your experiences because you're from the South with cotton, I mean you saw it going into the cotton gin.  I'm sure a lot of people you knew went to the fields every day.  What do you remember about life in, I mean did you go often?  Was it something you--
Speaker 2: To the cotton?
Speaker 1: To the cotton fields--
Speaker 2: I didn't go to the, I went to the--
Speaker 1: --cause I, I mean I grew up in Mississippi, so I'm very familiar.  The bus came at five a.m., you got on the bus, they drove you out, you chopped the cotton.
Speaker 2: Yeah that's true.  I also remember June bugs because we had a fig tree (laughter), so you know you, you would catch June bugs, you tie them up and let them fly around.  I mean all the things you can do by yourself until it's time to go out with everybody else in the cotton field.  I went to the cotton field.  I didn't--my mother [Varidee Young Smith] was a little reluctant about my going to the cotton field because from her point of view I think she wanted me to stay around the house and help her, but my God my mother had thousands of things always for me to do, you know, and I was like oh this is taking, I'm getting work and I'm not getting, I'm working hard, but I'm not getting paid for this, plus I'm not with my friends.  You know it's kind of boring and you get, you know you get enough of parents you know your mother and so I decided to go work with my friends because with my friends I could at least be around my friends and my mother would let me keep my money.  I mean, all my other friends they were from poor families and they worked in the summer because they had to pay off the debts that had been incurred throughout the year to live.  I mean even though my friends were not living on a farm, a lot of my friends were living like a, like a sharecropper's life, which meant that they had large families.  But, if they had no, if nobody in that family had a year-around job, they were living on credit during the year for food, for clothing, for whatever, and at the end of the year they had to pay that back and the only way they could pay that back is that from their earnings from working the cotton or peanut fields or what have you.  And one of my favorite friends was a guy named Levi [Simmons], and Levi come, just have come from a family of fourteen kids, and so, and his mo- his mother's name was Ms. Polly, Polly Simmons.  So, I went out to work with them.  Ms. Polly Simmons was hard (laughter) she, you know I mean I'm generally more laid back, you know, take one you know and Ms. Polly Simmons very quickly put the law down.  No you cannot be out here talking.  These kids have gotta work.  You gotta work too, and you can't be holding them up, you know, and told her kids to leave me behind if I can't keep up (laughter), so I didn't have a choice.  I had to learn how to, I had to learn how to keep up.  Now, they could take two rows of cotton.  Now, I couldn't keep up with two rows of cotton (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Two rows of cotton.
Speaker 2: --I could take one--
Speaker 1: Not--
Speaker 2: --but gradually I learned.
Story_ID: 301503
Speaker 1: --What is chopping cotton, cotton exactly?  What do you do?
Speaker 2: Well chopping cotton is something else.  I lost my job (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now okay what did you--okay tell me what you did and then tell me how you lost your job.
Speaker 2: Well chopping cotton is the first thing you can do in the cotton season, and what that is essentially it's, it's, it's a misnomer, the word chopping cotton because you're really chopping weeds around the cotton plant, young cotton plant, so that it can, the weeds won't strangle the cotton plant.  So, I'm out with my friends chopping cotton (laughter), and they're going fast, pretty fast, so I'm trying to keep up and then lo and behold the, the man who owns the field is out walking, he's coming down my path with my friends and he comes up to me he says this is your boss?  Yeah, he says well you know, he says you're chopping down my cotton and you're leaving the weeds.  I, I wasn't quite sure.  I thought I was doing it right.  He says, he says give me your hoe I can't use you.  So, the joke became very quickly, you know everybody, I was (unclear) hey Chester [HistoryMaker Chester Higgins, Jr.] doesn't know how to chop cotton.  In fact, I was, I was doing just that.  I was chopping the cotton and not the weeds.  So, that's the first thing that happens after a plant comes up.  So, I, I lost my job doing that.  But, once the cotton comes up and the bows open and the cotton is, is open and the bows and that's the time you go and you pick the cotton and that I, I could do, you know one row at a time, not two rows to keep up with my friends who were doing two rolls.  I mean they had different motivations for, you know, for working.
Speaker 1: Survival for them.
Speaker 2: Survival.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It, it was, mine was--
Speaker 1: Pocket money.
Speaker 2: Pocket money to be out with my, being out with my friends, but you know I gradually, you know over years, not just one summer, but I guess you know it may have taken a couple, a few summers before I was, I could be good enough or proficient enough to reach those bows and as fast as they could to fill up my sack.  And then the other thing as I grew older, you know, the hierarchy is that on cotton I think at the time you made maybe two or three dollars per hundred pound, whereas if you did, if you stacked peanuts you would make six, twice as much, six dollars a day.  So, my friend, Levi [Simmons], who was much bigger and stronger and taller than me, he was able to, he may have been just a year older than me, but he was able then to move into, but I've always been short, so I had you know a handicap so to speak, 'cause you really need more height as well as weight because you have to pick up the, the vines of the peanuts and carry them over to a pole and be able to land it on top of the pole as the pole get higher, higher than you height.  So, I wasn't able to follow Levi for the first year or so with that.  But, the next year I was able to work, but I couldn't work, I still couldn't work doing the vines, but what I found that I could do is that someone has to put up the poles for the people to put the vines on top of it.  That means you gotta use a hoe digger, you gotta dig down, put up a pole, and you have to, you have to nail two slats to, perpendicular to each other above the ground so that the, the air can come underneath and the, the vines can dry out from underneath as well as around.  So, that was my first year of doing that and I think I did that for a few years until gradually that became mechanized that we, with a tractor.  You could then have a hoe digger on the back and you can then dig the holes and it just meant you can move that much faster in front of the people who were taking the vines and stacking them.
Story_ID: 301504
Speaker 1: So if we go back to your early days, do you remember starting the first grade or anything about school during that time?
Speaker 2: Well I don't remember the first grade, but I remember, my earliest memory of alphabet, learning the alphabet, which had to be around first grade time, was that I managed to learn the alph- I managed to, I found out that pecking on my mother's [Varidee Young Smith] typewriter helped me master the ABCs, and language.  That I could peck on her typewriter and that I could type out the words and type out the sentences and that was my earliest memory.  My other memories about you know grade school is a little jumbled because you see all, all of my teacher were my mother's friends and my mother in grade school I even had my mother one year.  I forget year what was, I think.
Speaker 1: Let me just get this straight make it clear.  These schools, the schools that you went to were the schools that your [paternal] grandfather [Warren Smith] had had built on this land, so you were practically home schooled almost because it was right there on your land?
Speaker 2: Well, it was on, on his land, but another part of town [New Brockton, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay, but this is the school that your grandfather had established?  Okay go ahead.
Speaker 2: So, all of these, you know, the school teachers all knew each other, and they were all friends with each other, so that, you know, I--I guess in a way it meant that, I mean I was always in school.  I mean whether it was in school or whether it was on social visits with my mother to some teacher's house.  And then you know being a teacher my mother was somewhat you know--education was very important to her and so much so that when after; she knew what my homework was gonna be, so that when I get home the first thing I had to do is do my homework. While my other friends, Levi [Simmons] and his friends are out running in the fields and having fun I had to be cooped up doing my homework and then, you know, if I'd made a mistake and then she would check my homework before I could go out to play with my friends and if I made a mistake I had to go back and re- and correct that, then she would check it again.  So, you know, you're try to do this as fast as possible, so that means you pay attention to your classes and what have you or sometimes you don't do it fast enough and then it's gotten dark and you can't go out and play with your friends.  So, that I think that the, the, my earliest memory about childhood and my mother, luckily in junior high school my mother moved to another school, another town, but you know that didn't change the, the dynamics at home, but in--so as a child in my grade school you know my mother was, was a force to be reckoned with, but in junior high, high school at least I felt there was a future that if I could just graduate out from under her, which it finally happened.
Speaker 1: So, when you were a child when you were in like first through let's say sixth grade just to keep, keep it in elementary school.  What do you remember being taught by these teachers?
Speaker 2: Well, we were taught the basic, you know, courses that, that's in the books, but what stuck out is that we also taught about our own history because February is Black History Month, so that the teachers what was not in the books is what our teachers taught us about from their own research about you know Phillis Wheatley, W.E.B. Du Bois, or Booker T. Washington, George Washington Carver, Frederick Douglass.  They taught us about the heroes of people who were black, you know, who looked like us, so that it made us realize that we had a place that, that we as a people have a presence in this country even though that presence is not recognized in the textbooks and that the passion in which they taught we had, you know we had, you know we had exams on this, even though this work was not in, in the textbooks.  We also at a very age, early age in this we had to learn the Negro National Anthem ['Lift Every Voice and Sing'].  So, we would stand up and sing, you know or recite, which means that, which I always found interesting that northerners don't know the Negro National Anthem.  When go to an event and they play the Negro National Anthem all the northerners stand up and they look stupid.  They don't know what the hell to say because hey you would think you know well, you know, you know this thing is published.  You know you can go and read it and learn it.
Story_ID: 301505
Speaker 1: Continuing on tape three (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So--so my mother [Varidee Young Smith]--one of the things we had to learn was the Negro National Anthem ['Lift Every Voice and Sing'].
Speaker 1: Well tell me, set it up for me again in your third book ['Some Time Ago: A Historical Portrait of Black Americans from 1850-1950,' Chester Higgins, Jr. and Orde Coombs] the reason that you decided to put this in?
Speaker 2: Well, when I came to the North and I went to occasions where the Negro National Anthem was played, I was surprised, everybody would stand up, but I was surprised that, you know around me I was the only person that was singing.  I mean I thought everybody was singing, you know, and I realized they weren't singing and I realized they didn't know the words and you know something as children we had to learn the words.  I think a lot of southerners this is something that they have to learn.  So, because of that I in realizing a lot of people didn't know the words I don't know maybe they don't know where to find the words.  So, my third book that dealt with the history of black people in America from 1850 to 1950 on the very first page before you get to the title page I printed the complete words for the three stanzas of 'Lift Every Voice and Sing.'  So, "Lift every voice and sing until (unclear) Lift ev'ry voice and sing, 'til earth and heaven ring, ring with the harmonies of liberty; let our rejoicing rise high as the list'ning skies, and let it resound as loud as the rolling sea, rolling sea.  Sing a song full of the faith that the p- that the past has taught us.  Sing a song full of the hope that the present has brought us; facing the rising sun of our new day begun, let us march on 'til victory is won," and then there's two or three other (unclear) (laughter).  You know we all had to learn the first one, the complete stanza, and some of us know the, the three and I find it's, you know, that when I was, I would like to see that when black people have these meetings whether it's NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or whatever meetings in hotel rooms you know it's sort of not to print the words of the Negro National Anthem.  In their bulletins, I think it's sort of torturous for the people who don't know, but also not to print it does not give them the opportunity people who don't know it the opportunity to study it and see it because I think most people just don't know where it is.  I'd like to think and I haven't done a goggle search, but I imagine it's there and then we have, my wife [Betsy Kissam] and I discovered the cemetery that we go, we like to go to, we like to go to cemeteries to look at the architecture of the, of the strong structures.  And there's this cemetery in Brooklyn, New York of all places, Green-Wood Cemetery where James Weldon Johnson who wrote 'Lift Every Voice and Sing' is buried.  And once a year they have what they call composers day and a large band come and they play the music of different composers so Leonard Bernstein, whoever, but then there was 'Lift Every Voice and Sing.'  We were so happy.  I was so happy.
Story_ID: 301506
Speaker 1: So when you were, we're still first to sixth grade, what was considered at home or at school a special event and how was it celebrated?  Like what was special events back then?  Like, what were holidays like--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --birthdays?  What was a special event?
Speaker 2: Well, you know a special event in terms of school was always graduation.  In terms of holidays, a special would be I guess Christmas when you would get gifts.  And then birthdays were always special.
Speaker 1: Is there anything traditional about any of what you stated that we need to know as far as like an African American tradition you can think of?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I can't say that African American tra- that there was a special African, like you know, did we celebrate the birthday of Frederick Douglass?   No.  Did we know about Frederick Douglass?  Yes.  Did we know about the uprising of Nat Turner?  Yes.  Did we celebrate a particular day for that?  No.  You know that's interesting because I think all of these things came much later that probably the first African American thing that I can think that we probably celebrated would have been the birth of, after he was assassinated, maybe the birth of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].  But, up until that time I don't thi- I don't think that there was anything that I can remember that was, that worked for us.
Speaker 1: We're gonna pause for a second for the phone.
Speaker 2: Well legal--
Speaker 1: Well, let's just--we're continuing and what we're gonna talk about what I was search for is something that was, some, a custom or tradition that may have existed in a black community that doesn't today, seeing that you grew up in a legally segregated society, so you're gonna talk to me about what legal segregation meant to you?
Speaker 2: Okay, I, I don't recall a custom that's uniquely to us that happen outside of context of religion and, you know, revival.
Story_ID: 301507
Speaker 1: But legal segregation essentially meant no mixing of the races, which meant that as a--it meant two things--one that in relationship to white men there was no questioning authority.  In relationship to white women, there was no physical proximity or any time being spent with people unless they were older, not question authority still, but one could, one could work as I had small jobs working in the, cleaning up the gardens of older white women or you know when people are cleaning out the house and carrying stuff, to be hired in the capacity to do something with an older white person or a woman is, is acceptable, probably not with, with a younger white women and your relationship to white men is that you know you would, they were either someone that if they were a business person, or if they're a farmer, or if they were you know a student.  It was always awkward to try to have any kind of relationship, a personal relationship.  But, you know that also had its, but it also had its wrinkles.  You know Jim Crow laws were meant to essentially to keep the oppressed obliged to the oppressor and so that's why voting was the oppressor, saw that voting to be a real threat to that power base, which in fact it was, as in questioning authority of a white person was a threat to their, to their authority and what they thought they knew.  But at the same time that does not mean people couldn't have real friendships and relationship.  Of course, the friendship doesn't mean that you come to their house, but it could mean that outside of that house in a working relationship or in a casual relationship over time, gradually over time, but usually are based around work that a personal relationship of trust or bond could happen so that it is, even though a southerner may hate you, may hate your race, a southern racist could hate your race, could at the same time have a real relationship with a particular black person.  And I say that's very interesting because in the North its opposite is actually to flip because the northern who consider themselves not to be racist could think that they like your race, but they can't stand having a real personal relationship with one of you.  So, it's an interesting kind of a dissonance that goes on.
Speaker 2: How, how did, as a kid how are you told these rules like did your mom [Varidee Young Smith] say okay you accept what white men say and you don't challenge it and you don't look at white women?  Like how as a kid were these rules given to you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well it's, it's come, well yeah it comes different ways.  It's always reinforced either by the, but they see it as a way of protecting you.  The women would tell you don't you go around looking at those white girls.  What a man would tell you, you know better to do this, you know to talk back to Mr. Charlie [ph.] or whatever.  But, people will tell you the skill that you need to stay alive.  And you may say well I'll talk to whoever I want.  Well, then they'll tell you well okay you wanna, you wanna be lynched?  You wanna, you know, be dead you go right ahead you know, but this is how it is and you either have to learn how to deal with that 'cause that's how they are or this is a consequence that's gonna happen to you.  So, this is common information that's shared among all the young people whenever the older people think that that young person needs to hear that.  For, and it's--so on one hand it may look like well the older person is an agent of the Jim Crow, but I never saw it like that.  I never, and even to hear it--
Speaker 2: How did you see it?
Speaker 1: Well, I saw it as one you know that person trying to restrict me, but at the same time because I saw it with other people I realized that yes it was restrictive.  You can't take that away and yes I could think you're being an Uncle Tom and telling me what I can't do, but also I know that you don't want to be either, you don't want to be grieving or you don't want to go to my funeral, so--
Speaker 2: So the--
Speaker 1: --these things, so in the context you sort of, you take that in.
Story_ID: 301508
Speaker 1: So the Emmett Till case then reinforces to you as who was a child at the time that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I remember my mother [Varidee Young Smith] using the Emmett Till case to reinforce upon me that you do not go around whistling at any white women.  Not, you know, so, and I think that became an instructive point probably for, for many families to remind their children because you know the, everybody is at risk.  The girls are at risk in one particular way.
Speaker 1: How are the girls at risk?
Speaker 2: Well, the girls are at risk for being raped, but not losing their life.
Speaker 1: But we're talking about the time in which you grew up--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and as you, and you're speaking to that time that girls were at risk--
Speaker 2: Speaking to that time, so--
Speaker 1: --for being raped?
Speaker 2: Right.  So, what happens is that means that when girls are out and about, out of school or running around they are always, their mothers try to keep a tight lease[EH1] on them so they are always not far from their mothers in, in public.  So, that, that presence, I mean, so you know, and you run the hope that some guy is not going to, if he's going to bother your daughter he's not gonna do it when the adult is around.  The boys were at risk, not for being raped, for being killed.  So there's a, there's different levels of risk and so therefore the parents in their protective ways try to impress upon each person, so they may impress upon the girls no you're not gonna wear that kind of dress outside this house.  You know you're gonna always be modest dressed.  You're not gonna wear anything that will provoke the sexual desire of these young white boys.  So, there may be an environment of the house parties and things like that where you can wear that kind of stuff, but you're not gonna wear it in this particular area.  So you, it's not that you don't ignore the need that, that teenager may have to do a certain thing, but you provide a safe environment and only in this environment can you do that.
Speaker 1: So, in the broader society you had racist to deal with--
Speaker 2: Always.
Speaker 1: --but once, but you were behind that line of segregation when you were in your own community, how was it different?  How was your community?
Speaker 2: Well, the community would not, not in the presence of white people always somehow you felt a certain weight lifted, a certain paranoia lifted that you could then be, you know, at ease with yourself and with other people and you can feel your complete sense of humanist because being around white people were really a dry to your humanity because your humanity, the fullness of your humanity they--who knows what part of it they would become threatened by.  So, you can only feel safe in being, showing your full humanity to each other and around each other.  Who could appreciate it, not be threatened, and we could all revel in it.
Speaker 1: So, you couldn't be smart and gregarious and outgoing in broader society?
Speaker 2: In front of, in broader society.
Speaker 1: But you could at home?
Speaker 2: You could at home, you could--
Speaker 1: Who were--
Speaker 2: --you could in your own colleges.  You could in your own business, and that's, and that's how in spite of all of the, the limitations, that's how people managed and that's how they made the best of it.
Story_ID: 301509
Speaker 1: Who were your community leaders?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess the community leaders, well that's different, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know you have spiritual community leaders who'd be your pastor--
Speaker 1: Okay and who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) --but you would have--
Speaker 1: Who was--
Speaker 2: --political--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --leaders who until my [paternal] grandfather [Warren Smith] he was, but as I grew older my political leader--
Speaker 1: I mean like when you were young, when you were like in this area when it was still legal segregation was the law who were your community leaders and what were their functions?  What were their roles?  What do you remember about them?
Speaker 2: Well, the community was my scout master and teacher, social studies teacher, Bernest Brooks, was the political leader.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Bernest, B-E-R-N-E-S-T.  He was the political leader because he was the one who would always challenging the status quo and always getting people to vote and register.
Speaker 1: What did he do?
Speaker 2: Well, he was a social studies teacher at the time.  At the present, he is one of the three commissioners of the county [Coffee County, Alabama] that I lived, lived, that I'm from.  He's, he's also a democratic, state democratic representative here to the last convention.  He's always been political, always been about trying to get the fair share that is due black people who live in the area and also to protect their lives, to make sure that the situation where they're terrorized is, is, is removed.  So, he had been one of the people who've had the guts, some of the leaders have been people who've had guts to take chances and to, and, and managed to stay alive in doing so.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about him from your kid's point of view or even if you reflect back on life as a kid in the community?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember a lot of things about him--
Speaker 1: Did you look up to him?
Speaker 2: Oh of course, of course I looked up to him and still do.  I mean he was like, for me he was like a second father, and I say that because as a teenager my mother [Varidee Young Smith] who would not let me go when the, when the, our team would go to other towns and play I think my mother was afraid what would happen at night, you know, if the cops stop us what was going on.  So, the only way I could get there Mr. Brooks would come to my mother and tell my mother he'll be responsible for me and I'd get a chance to get out of the house to go see a basketball games at other places.  But, Mr. Brooks also had us writing letters to the congressman, to the legislature, to the governors on behalf of a lot of different issues.  We, I got my first social security card because of you know Mr. Brooks had a letter writing, okay it's time for all you kids to get your social security card do you know how to do that?  Okay, we're gonna learn how to do that.  We're gonna learn--do you know who your representative are?  Okay, we're gonna get a book and tell us all, who our repre- state legislatures are, our national representatives and their addresses and we're gonna write them.  And then they get us kids to go out and help him with getting people to register to vote.  So, all of these, you know, little issues that he was always involved in he got us involved in and that is, I think that's made a difference in all of our lives.  I think all of us vote probably because of it, and I try to encourage every, my children [Nataki Higgins and Damani Higgins] to vote.  I took them to the polls with me when I voted as a young person.  But, you know he had always been--and then he was involved in student government with his, our advisor to student government, faculty advisor to the newsletter, always there with us, and as a scout master taking us out, you know, to camp and help kill the snakes and so (laughter).  He'd always, always been a very--he took a lot of time with a lot of us kids.  He had his own kids and his wife too and I think we're all better kids because of it.
Story_ID: 301510
Speaker 1: So, there was Mr. [Bernest] Brooks.  Were there other community leaders?
Speaker 2: Well, the other community leader would have been the high school principal, P.A. Youngblood [Sr.] because--
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: P.A.
Speaker 1: P.A.
Speaker 2: Initial P, initial A.
Speaker 1: Initial is P, A, and then Youngblood.
Speaker 2: Right and Youngblood.  And I think that's because you know people valued education and they knew that Mr. Yo- and they also valued, and they knew that Mr. Youngblood was in charge of educating their children, so there being the principal, so therefore Mr. Youngblood deserved respect for that job and they all thought he was doing a very good job at it and so he was a, he, he was a leader because of his, his work in education.
Speaker 1: And then you were also going to mention your [paternal] grandfather [Warren Smith].
Speaker 2: My grandfather, you know who died when I was thirteen, would also, but he will fit into the same, into the categories as the leaders of businessmen, the leader as the patron of education.  He was chairman of board of education group.  So, that he would straddle both of those, the religious and the school and the business, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And as a religious leader what was his role in the community [in New Brockton, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Well, I think his role was trying to help people, I mean first of all find some sense of confidence in their faith and at the same time he was instrumental in helping people build churches, rural communities build churches.  So, that gave them a place to meet.  It gave them a place to, to bond around.  So, I think that in that sense he was an institutional builder, that he help provide a way for people to least have a way to come together and discuss the issues and find some common ground and find a way to be embracive of each other.
Story_ID: 301511
Speaker 1: So when you were nine years old you received a calling to preach how did it happen?
Speaker 2: Well at the time I didn't think it was a call to preach.  How it happened was it was a supernatural event I say now, but back then what it was that I heard this, I was asleep and I heard this sound in my head and--
Speaker 1: What kind of sound?
Speaker 2: --that made me wake up.  It seemed like it was a static sound, you know, and it caused me to wake up and when I woke up it was, the, the room was dark 'cause the light was off I was asleep and I looked across the room from me and on a wall that's actually, say the bed being this way over on this wall to the left of me there is a huge incandescent kind of light that fills up the wall, I guess about you know a five foot diameter light.  But in the middle of that light there's a man standing and this man is, this black man is standing there and he's you know just sort of I guess what we would think now is kind of like a very yoga, you know kind of position of standing and just calm and he--as the thing opened his, his, his hands sort of I guess came up like this and then that was fine, I mean, because nothing about it made me--the air was charged, but nothing about it made me feel there was anything I had to fear.  It was more of a curiosity, my God what is this, you know, who is that, well it looks interesting, you know, never saw that before you know, huh, and the light and the man began to move and it began to move in my direction.  I'm here and it's there, it can move that way, but it started to move in my direction and the, you know the eyes opened and the hand is there and then in my, and I'm hearing, not hearing through the ear, but in my mind I'm hearing and just charged--
Speaker 1: The electricity- (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --electricity in the air, but it doesn't frighten me right away as it moves towards me, but then it utters.  In my mind, there's an utterance and I don't see the lip move, but I hear in my mind the voice saying that you know I want you and, and at that point I start to scream because I'm only nine years old and at that point I figure you know I don't know what this is, but something tells me maybe this is what happens when you die.  This is what you see and you know this is the grave coming for you.  I didn't know, but that's my only reference, you know at the time, so then I start to scream because I felt to myself I'm too young to die (laughter), I just got here, please, you know, so I guess I, I start screaming like somebody who is drowning.  You know maybe, maybe I can be saved, maybe it makes no difference at all, you know, but I'm gonna give it a shot (laughter).
Story_ID: 301512
Speaker 1: At this point my--my [paternal] grandfather [Warren Smith] and my [paternal] grandmother [Faith McGowan Smith] was living with us.  They were in transition from having, they have temporary house after the house burned down, but now he had found another house and he wasn't having it moved, and property that he owned (unclear) and all of a sudden you know and so there was four adults in the house, my grandfather, my grandmother, my father [Johnny Smith], and my mother [Varidee Young Smith], and all of a sudden people rushed into the room and I don't know who turned on the light because we had those light, you know back then the light hung from the ceiling, a single cord, and you had a pull chain, so somebody came in and who, whoever pulled the pull chain when that happened this other light disappeared into the wall what I had seen, but the man and the light disappeared and I was like you know screaming still and I saw these people, these adults hovering and my mother, my you know trying to tell me what's going on, what's wrong, but they don't know what I, that I had seen anything.  I guess my mother thought I had a nightmare or something, so she was trying to calm me and so I'm looking at them and for a moment I'm not quite sure if I died and I'm looking at you know the people who are trying to hold onto me, but I'm dead.  I don't know if, quite sure if where I'm at, you know if I'm here from somewhere else, if they're real, if I'm real, I'm not quite sure.  And it took a while before my, before I was convinced that I could, you know that, that I was feeling my mother and that I can say what this was that caused me to scream and when I finally got it all out, then my grandfather immediately said the child's had a call into the ministry.  I didn't know what that meant, all I knew I was trying to get over.  I mean you can imagine my head must be thoroughly tired by now just trying to get over this, this, this frightful experience I had.  But, the next day or I don't know my grandfather started talking to me and, and showing me passages in the Bible and says you know read this, read this and I, you know and I sort of, I, I found myself very much attracted to the scriptures because as a kid I wasn't really interested in church, I mean it was perfunctory.  You know you had to go to church or else you know, I mean your parents just didn't give you the choice.  You had to go to church on Sunday.  You had to go twice.  Well actually you had to go three times.  You had to go to Sunday school, at maybe 9:30.  You had to go eleven o'clock worship.  You had lunch off and then you had sometimes God forbid you had afternoon BYP [Baptist Young People's Union] or something like young people thing and then you had evening service.  So, you may be stuck in church the whole day.  You get off for, after one o'clock you know for a couple of hours.
Speaker 2: And sometimes you had to have your lunch in the base, or whatever you know they made the lunch for you.
Speaker 1: They made lunch, yes, yes that was, that was there too.
Speaker 2: That's very southern.
Speaker 1: That was part of your communion everybody bringing different pieces of food--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you learn how to avoid, miss somebody's--
Speaker 2: Avoid the potato salad (laughter).
Speaker 1: --the potato salad or you didn't like the way they cooked the chicken you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Something happened because you know I start, I, I found, I started to find pleasure, nine-year-old kid, started to find pleasure in the scripture and started so much so that I could read for, you know, hours, chapters, and books and what have you and all the different books and then my grandfather was just somebody to talk to about well you know, what was that about, what was this and I read this and I read that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's good I wanna just, I don't wanna stay on it long, but I am curious to know what you, what, what, what those conversations were with your grandfather after you'd spent hours reading the Bible.  What would the dialogue be?  You'd say this and he'd say, yeah what would it be?
Speaker 1: Well, he would talk to me about well what do you think it means.
Speaker 2: And what would you think something like that mean?
Speaker 1: Well, I don't know the particular passage, but you know given a passage you know I would say who you know it sound like this and this and this and he, he would you know that, I mean that was pedantic that was obvious, yes he could agree with me, but then he would being insight about other things and then in the way he would, so what he did is he ordered, he started ordering books for me that were ministers books that will essentially elucidate passages in the Bible and give different, not just one particular interpretation, but maybe two or three interpretations about a particular text so that I got a chance to see how it could be approached--approached in terms of understanding and how one could extrapolate in, in terms of what its meaning could be.
Story_ID: 301513
Speaker 1: We're on tape four.  We're gonna pick up with you receiving the books that your [paternal] grandfather [Warren Smith] ordered for you and then we'll proceed--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --with all the other things we talked about off-camera.
Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather would order these books for me from seminary school that I found, you know, absolutely fascinating because it helped, I guess it had the effect of you know how if you put water inside a microwave and you turn it on and the water just shhh, and it had that effect.  I remember my grandfather also taking me to Selma Seminary [ph.] and that was the seminary for black ministers in Alabama.  First time I'd ever been to Selma [Alabama] long before King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] went to Selma.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that seminary though because that's key, a black seminary in Alaba, in Alabama.
Speaker 2: A black seminary in Alabama.  It was in Selma.
Speaker 1: What was the name of it, do you know?
Speaker 2: The Selma Seminary.  And here you had essentially, you know, your resident ministers who would preach, but also most of the day was not, the preaching was in the evening.  Most of the day was about discussions about text, so that different people would have a discussion about different portions of the text and the discussion would be one that different ministers were--it's, it's an educated environment that people would have back and forth about the text.  One minister could see this.  One minister could say wow, you know and this also I believe.
Speaker 1: And you were a little kid being able to observe this?
Speaker 2: I was a little kid being able to observe this.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's incredible.
Speaker 2: But, I, I became a minister at ten.  I became licensed at ten after I gave my, what's called a trial sermon, and then my child sermon I was a little, a little scared because, I mean I wasn't scared that I couldn't do it, but I felt that somehow--my grandfather didn't come to my child sermon, but there was, there was a minister from the church and there was an older minister, I didn't know this man, who was a friend of my grandfather, but who was very respected by all other ministers and when I finished preaching this man jumped up and says you know here we have a, this guy is a child who has been called by the ministry who, who deserves this license, and I was given my license, signed by Reverend T.A. Henison, Henderson [Reverend T.A. Henderson], my minister at the time.  And, and I, I thought years later my grandfather didn't come because my grandfather probably did not want to seem or prejudice the situation.  And that you know it was either, it was me, you know it was on me.  If it was real, it was real.  And I was a minister and I preached at my church, Springfield Baptist Church [New Brockton, Alabama], and I would go and I would be a guest minister at other churches of other ministers who would invite me into their pulpit to preach, and I would also be invited to go in the summers to do revivals.  And this is the--and I changed as a person towards my friends.  All my friends who were learning how to be delinquents of different sorts, learning how to curse, learning how to be delinquents with girls or delinquents with dru- beer, what have you, discovered quickly that that's not what I was going to do and I had many tests from my friends (laughter) you know because they were my friends.  I grew up with them you know.  They didn't, they didn't know what to make of all this and they thought sure you know Chester [HistoryMaker Chester Higgins, Jr.] he still curses, or Chester you know he'd do this and do that.  And, and I told them you know I'd just know you know that's not me anymore, that's not what I do.  I said I'm still your friend, but you know and that's what you wanna do.  It's no judgment on my part.  You know that I will tell you that you shouldn't do it, but if that's what you wanna do you go ahead and do it, but don't expect me to do it.  So, that's how we made our peace with that.
Story_ID: 301514
Speaker 1: We're gonna jump forward and then jump back to the past, but just to, to, because we talked about it off-camera and I wanna get some of it.  I asked you, did you miss the ministry today and you replied?
Speaker 2: Well, before I answer whether I miss the ministry let me say that I was an active minister from nine to seventeen when I went to college [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], and when I went I went to college I decided not to tell--and you know so everybody calls me Reverend Higgins [HistoryMaker Chester Higgins, Jr.], and I, I'm yeah acting appropriately, but when I went to college subconsciously and I didn't know why at the time it took me years later in therapy to realize, but I didn't want to be Reverend Higgins anymore.  No, that does not mean that I wanted to become a delinquent.  It does not mean I wanted to change my behavior and treat people any different than I have and respectful as I have.  No, it didn't mean that at all.  I meant that I wanted to be a student.  And what it also meant and therapy helped me realize is that I didn't have a childhood.  I didn't have an adolescent hood.  I didn't have a normal teenage hood that most kids have.  I grew up in an environment where essentially because of my being a minister and because of my being so serious about being a minister, I was not looked upon by adults as a child or a teenager and I was not expected, nor did I feel that I had to be more of a teenagers.  I mean that doesn't--I did teenage things like, you know, enjoy school and enjoy sports, but there was, there was a difference here.  There was, there was a prescribed boundary of behavior that I gladly accepted or that grew up around me unconsciously and in college I wanted to see what it would be like not to have that because it changes your relationships of how everybody relates to you.  It forces a certain kind of relationship that's sanitized that you don't see the full person around you that you would not see if they didn't know that you were a minister.  It gave us certain kind of opening on people that I wouldn't necessarily have.  I tell some of my white friends I said well you know if you're interested in how this other white person is as a person and you don't think you know everything about them, but you think you know there's something there, don't ask another white person for it, ask the lowest black person who they have to work around because if there an asshole the lowest black person is gonna see it right away because they feel there's no consequence to their behavior.  So, by the same token, I didn't want people to come to me out of a role in college.  I wanted to be, I wanted to take away any of the classes and the levels so to look one to one and at the same time, I didn't know it, to free myself up from being fossilized in a role.
Story_ID: 301515
Speaker 1: Now, at the same time I had a class on world religion at Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and it was an elective, I decided to take it, and I was quite amazed to find out that Jesus Christ is not the only scripture, or only text that people use in the world to find their way to have a conversation with God and all of them are valid.  You know I, I try to tell people use this example in New York City [New York, New York] we have two, we have an island, Manhattan [New York], that's surrounded, one side is the Hudson [River], one side is the East River, and there's a bridge at the top and a tunnel at the bottom will help you cross.  Let's say if you wanna get to New Jersey you have to cross the George [Washington Bridge], go up, you can go up on either side.  You can go on the east side drive or you can go the west side drive to get to the George Washington Bridge to cross over to New Jersey.  Now to me heaven is sort of like, has to be something like the same place getting to God.  That if heaven is the bridge that we all want to get to, if we can get there by the east side highway or the west side highway, so be it.  It doesn't matter which highway you use as long as when you get there we can all agree that we're on the bridge, that we all finally made it to this place we think is heaven.  So, this particular course essentially helped give me tolerance for and realization that spirituality or religious thought is not monolithic, but that doesn't mean that it's less valid because other people come a particular, different particular way.  So, when you ask me the question did I move away from religion because I have become educated, yes, but not in the way that you think.  I, I, some people I think with that question sort of begs that some people do become educated and become atheist or they become contemptible of religion, that they don't need religion, that there's no need for a belief in a higher creative, creator or holy force.  No, that's not my problem.  My, my thing is that I've become more tolerant and more open and to the complexity, to the great complexity of, of what is divine and that we are all, you know, the other part of it too is that you know everything that exists in the universe is created by a divine force, whatever you want to call that divine force.
Speaker 2: And you refer to this as the spirit?
Speaker 1: In the spirit.
Speaker 2: In the spirit.
Speaker 1: The spirit.  I believe everything exist because of the spirit.  Now, the spirit creates people, but it's people who creates a religion.  They create a religion that says that I, the human, have a relationship with the divine spirit, so therefore I create my prototypes and I create a language in order to have this conversation, but and that's fine.
Story_ID: 301516
Speaker 1: My problem is that religion, by its very nature of inclusiveness, creates walls.  You're either (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Say that again to me.  Say that again 'cause that's--
Speaker 1: The nature of religion--
Speaker 2: The nature of religion.
Speaker 1: --religion is a Greek word that means to bind together.  The nature of religion is to bind you to have an inclusive relationship around the worshipers, around a set of people.  That's the nature of religion.  Whether you want to say it's good or bad is not the issue, just the nature of religion, which then it reinforces that there's a sense of brotherhood, sisterhood, shared experiences, shared consequences, shared reasons why things happen, and hopefully a shared, after death a shared good experience or a shared bad experience.  But, in the nature of being inclusive 'cause everything exists as a yin and yang it is also build walls and is exclusive, so one could say and one does say sometimes well if you don't believe it this way you're going to hell, perhaps.  None of us know this, but perhaps.  My problem with this is that if I believe and accept the spiritual force of divinity and know that the spiritual force created Earth just the way it created Mars or created humans just the way it created snakes and I want to be a part and I want to be embracive of the divine force, I don't want to be walled off from anything that is part of what the divine created.  So, if I limit myself only to be a part of this and not to be a part of that, then somehow I don't think I'm a good neighbor with what is a total expression of divinity and somehow I think that I'm playing the spirit and divinity a little short.  I'm being a little short-sided.  So, these are issues for me that I have, that has, that I'm working with and those issues are part of the reason why I look for it in many manifestation of spiritual behavior and expression among people of African descent to try to get a sense for the whole complete alphabet about, of the spiritual things that we consume in our expressions with it.
Story_ID: 301517
Speaker 1: Photography has been an extension of that and has helped I guess people see various aspects of African Americans as people, you know, I mean one thing that struck me about your work is when I was going through and I was doing, looking at, coming across the photographs of England not, you know before I even saw one I mean I was, it's funny because I was excited, but I'm thinking okay it was in England and I, and I'm, I, I promise I'm expecting to see like some white guys in trench coats.  So, you know, whatever, whatever the mind, I conjured up for England and I clicked on it and it looked like the West Indian Day Parade in Brooklyn [New York].  It was most amazing.  You know I thought this existed in England, so, so how is the camera give, being given a camera at a very young age helped to explore the various aspects of African American life and people and spirituality?  Who gave you that camera?  How did that come about?  You were I think nine years old, ten years old?
Speaker 2: For the camera?
Speaker 1: For the camera?
Speaker 2: No, the camera is much later.
Speaker 1: Much later.
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably twenty at Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].
Speaker 1: But who--at Tusk- okay then we should talk about Tuskegee, but let's--did anything happen at this point from nine to when you were a minister.  We kind of covered your school life, but were there any teachers or any other elements of your life that we need to cover before you get to Tuskegee?
Speaker 2: No, probably the only thing is, is kind of funny in my life is when I was about thirteen I remember doing on Sundays the time between the one o'clock and the after you eat in the evening service, my pastor, the Reverend [T.A.] Henderson, a very interesting man, he, he was from up near Tuskegee [Alabama], Fort Deposit [Alabama], tall man, and he had a habit of going to, having during this time taking a break to drive to one of the country stores and buy a quart of milk, sit and drink his quart of milk, and I would drink a soda and we would talk.  We were always talking about religion, talking about the Bible.  So, I'm sitting there and I says, "You know Reverend Henderson I think I'm gonna write my autobiography"; I'm thirteen.  I'm looking at the window, very serious, and he very serious turns to me and said, "Well Chester [HistoryMaker Chester Higgins, Jr.] that's a good idea," he said, "but usually people wait to they get a little older to do that," (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you ever take notes?  Did you ever write anything down?
Speaker 2: I don't think so, but you know, I mean as a, yeah I was always writing stuff.  Whether I was writing that, I don't know.  But, I thought that was--years back looking on that--
Speaker 1: Who wrote your sermons, the sermons?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: You did.
Speaker 2: I wrote my sermons, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what did--
Speaker 2: I wrote my sermons, but there were two ways to do this.  From the books I was reading of different sermons you know of passages.  You know you, you write a sermon (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Theologians had books, right.
Speaker 2: --based upon, based upon a passage that you want to talk about, and then you can look, there's--you can order sermons how somebody, but you know you read the sermon it's, you know you have to make it you.  And then you can find that you're after reading so many different sermons or, or so many different passages you can find that there's ways you wanna do things, but you know I've gone, I've gone to preach and I just open a Bible and wherever you know as, as, as a problem to yourself, open a Bible, don't know what page it is, let your finger find a verse, read it and say okay, or read two or three verses okay set it up.  This is what we're gonna talk about and then go off and try to talk about it.  I mean, you know, it can be formal.  It can be very, you know, rigid, or it can you like jazz, you know just totally impro- improvisational.  Because the underlying thing here is that if you're with the spirit and the spirit is with you, there's no need to be fearful of what you can or cannot do with the passage because you're coming from the same place.  You know it's like, like the, like zening you know.  The guy who shoots the arrow into the target. Once he and the target becomes the same, that's when he releases the arrow and the arrow is always gonna hit bull's-eye.  So for me the spirit, the scripture is the same.  Once I'm one with the spirit, one with the scripture, it doesn't matter where my finger falls or what page the, the Bible opens on to--you're in the same, you know, ball park, we're all family here you know just go from here.
Story_ID: 301518
Speaker 1: So, did you ever speak to anything else because I know the pulpits were places where people spoke about politics and, and discrimination?  Were you in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was too young for that.
Speaker 1: Too young for that okay.
Speaker 2: I was too young for that.  Older ministers who had the ability to use the metaphors to put those things together spoke to that, some did, some didn't.  Not all ministers were political.  In fact, you know, people, I think a lot of outsiders or white people especially, tend to confuse black people by thinking that black people are liberal.  But, church people are the most conservative people there are.  That doesn't mean that to white people we seem like we're liberal because we were going for civil rights and justice.  But that's the only thing that church people are liberal about.  Everything else, by its very nature, are very conservative, so that you, so it's, it's not surprising that most ministers are conservative.  Most ministers are conservative then that they will not speak about politics.  Not every minister embraced [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].  Too many ministers felt that Martin Luther King was causing them a very, putting them in a very dangerous spot, and they wanted to make sure that the Jim Crow powers that be realized that they were not advocating or making these metaphoric connections that Martin Luther King was making.
Story_ID: 301519
Speaker 1: By the same token today in our black American society, too many ministers do not speak to the pain and the reality of AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] or homosexuality.  I'm not saying that you know they have, for themselves they have to embrace it, but that's a judgment, but as a minister, as a, you know, it seems like to me that the first thing that a minister should, is always about, as I've learned from [paternal] grandfather [Warren Smith] and I can be tota- he and I both could be totally wrong here, is that you're trying to--the, the function of religion and spirituality and church is to help people find the strength to unload the pain and burden they've already had this past, since last Sunday in their life, to find the strength in God to, in spite of all that, to continue.  The next piece is that despite, after you continue you have the ups and downs of life give you to have the faith that if you do the right thing that there is a salvation waiting for you somewhere.  But, in between here and salvation, you know 'cause the moment you're born you begin to die, but between here and salvation, there's nothing but ups and downs.  I mean that's how the world is.  There, I mean the sun does not shine twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, 350 days a year, 352 days away.  Half of it has to be yes we can see everybody around us.  Half of it oh I'm not quite sure who is around me 'cause I can't see, but I still have to get through it, so that the, there, the ministers are afraid to talk about the elephant in the room that everybody feels is there and it's giving a lot of people a lot of pain.  It's giving the people who are suffering the AIDS a great deal of pain because now they know that that has, their death has a name to it.  It doesn't help the grieving parents of these children who they have, who these, who have to now deal with what we like to think is an unnatural act of your child predeceasing you.  So, these ministers, not all ministers thankfully are this conservative, but the conservative ministers are not finding I think a spiritual way, a religious way to embrace their congregation and to say let's find the light in the Bible.  Let's find the light in God.  Let's find the light in spirituality that allows us to embrace and acknowledge this thing with each other and embrace it so that we can deliver ourselves from it, embrace it so we can say hey if we need to put in the church a big, a bowl full of condoms every week so you take some for your friends or your nephews, not for yourself I know you don't want them for yourself, take them for your brothers, take them for, but take them.  If that is part of how we get to challenges, if this to say okay we want to set up something with the hospitals so that everybody gets tested, everybody knows who we are so we can start tracking and taking care of you because this is real.  This is our way of doing what is necessary to get closer to God.  So, but you don't have that with most ministers.  So, conservative, conservative is, is, is a function of religion, but it has to be challenged now because these are very challenging times.  What [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] did was very challenging.  Martin Luther King took religion and took the metaphors of daily, daily oppression and enlarged that, then you know people, certain people could hear that message, but that was a minority of church-going people at the time and church ministers who could do that.  Having lived through that I must tell you that it was a minority.  It is not, was not some majority that, that embraced it.
Story_ID: 301520
Speaker 1: Let me just get a fix on the years that you were in high school [Warren Smith High School, New Brockton, Alabama] and, and you were a minister.
Speaker 2: I finished high school '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964], so you were preaching when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was preaching and a big civil rights leader.  Did you look, like what bond did you feel with him you being a minister also?
Speaker 2: Well, the bond, I'm not quite sure if my bond was with him for a minister.  Of course, he was a very great orator as all ministers were to be, but I think, but my bond with him was more political because of my work with Mr. Brooks, Bernest Brooks.
Speaker 1: Talk to me about Mr. Bernest Brooks again.  He was--
Speaker 2: Bernest Brooks was my--
Speaker 1: --Brooks, oh he was the Boy Scouts.
Speaker 2: --my social studies teacher and boy-
Speaker 1: Boy Scout leader--
Speaker 2: --scout leader and the man.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so because of your work with him you understood what King was trying to do.
Speaker 2: I understood the meaning of what King--I understood the possibility, the political possibility of what King was about because I had been out there registering people to vote.
Speaker 1: And what was the political possibility that you thought could be in your mind's eye at that time?
Speaker 2: That he could change the laws, that the laws of the nation had to be changed, and the conservatives will tell me you cannot legislate a man's heart if you change the law, so the conservative position is well law is not gonna change a man's heart.  I don't care if it can't change his heart, but I wanna arrest his behavior and over time maybe his children or his grandchildren's heart will be changed.  So, you one had, the more political you were as a religious person, then you could identify with King.  The less political you were, you weren't gonna identify with him because you were on a track that oh I'm not getting justice here in life.  I'm only gonna get my justice when I die.  Well, who can argue with that if that's you know, but--
Speaker 1: What you believe, right.
Speaker 2: --you know who knows, but you know some people say heaven or hell is right here, it's what you make of it.  If by chance after I try to fight to get some heaven here that when I die there's another heaven so be it, but that doesn't mean I give up my opportunity to try to make this work better for me.  That is an individual decision and as one doesn't, doesn't mean that you have to be judgmental about the people who choose not to make that individual decision that way.
Story_ID: 301521
Speaker 1: So was high school difficult for you because you were a minister, a reverend, or preacher?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Warren Smith High School [New Brockton, Alabama] named after my [paternal] grandfather [Warren Smith].
Speaker 1: So, this was the same school, it was part of the same school that he developed?
Speaker 2: It was a new, new addition.
Speaker 1: A new addition.
Speaker 2: A modern addition.
Speaker 1: But, was it part of the same building that they had taken down and rebuilt?
Speaker 2: No, this was, this was a stone struc- cinder block structure--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --cinder block and brick structure.
Speaker 1: And he financed it?
Speaker 2: No, at that point the county financed the second, the new one.
Speaker 1: And they still named it after him?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, our tape--
Speaker 2: He was the pioneer for black education in that area.
Speaker 1: Can you give me a one minute summation of him being the pioneer for black education, at the end of this tape?
Speaker 2: He was, because of his efforts he was the pioneer.  He was the moving force in my community back in the '40s [1940s], the early '40s [1940s] to make sure that black people, black children become educated, and he made that happen.  He made that happen by on several levels by petitioning the white powers that be in the board of education to hire teachers and he--they only wanted to do so much.  They wouldn't put up any physical structure.  He made physical structures possible first by using the masonic hall in the church, Collins Chapel A.M.E Church [New Brockton, Alabama], and then he made land available to bring inner building, 'cause gradually his relationship with the board of education obviously became one where okay I'm not being helpful at all to being helpful on different levels and after he died and this new school was built, masonry school was built, it was named after him, Warren Smith High School, where I graduated from.
Story_ID: 301522
Speaker 1: Okay this is me when I was called Butch [HistoryMaker Chester Higgins, Jr.].  I must have been about four here with my little sweater on.
Speaker 2: What year?
Speaker 1: Probably '49 [1949], '50 [1950].
Speaker 2: This is nineteen--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is in 1964.  This is me with--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry there's something else I should have told you, we can just keep going, but if you can identify all of these people on (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Okay, okay, okay, okay.  This is my graduating class of boys.  We had in my town of six hundred people that graduating class for my year in 1964 were five girls and seven boys, that's twelve, and starting from the left that's Joe Louis [ph.], Harold Page [ph.], Bobby Caldwell [ph.], Louie Page [ph.], another Caldwell, and Ernest Knight [ph.], and that's me on the far right.  I'm the shortest one there.  So, that means that you can see that I never got a chance to play on the basketball team.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother, Varidee [Young] Higgins Smith, at one of the school pictures that were made where she worked, and this probably was around 1960.
Speaker 2: Sixty [1960]?
Speaker 1: Yeah 1960.
Speaker 2: This is a picture I made of my great uncle March Fourth McGowan in his eighties at this house.
Speaker 1: Can you just spell his name for them?
Speaker 2: March the, he's, he's named after the date of the month he was born, so the month of March, M-A-R-C-H and then Fourth, the letter, the number four, F-O-U-R-T-H, and the last name McGowan, M-C-G-O-W-A-N.
Speaker 1: I don't think you know the date on that but.
Speaker 2: Well yeah.  I don't know, okay this is in Chicago [Illinois].  I know very little about my biological father [Chester A. Higgins, Sr.] and this is a picture that he shared with me that was made of some of his brothers in Chicago in the back having a drink, and I think one of the brother's name is Vernon [ph.].  I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Which one?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know which one.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and my first mentor, P.H. Polk.  This was made here in New York [New York].  This is probably about 1980 when Mr. Polk came to down a couple of times and he had exhibitions of his work.  This was the, the seated elder.
Speaker 2: And did you give the date?
Speaker 1: Yeah around 1980.
Speaker 2: This is a picture made in 1970, no I'm sorry 1974 yeah, 1974.  This was on the occasion of my first exhibition at a gallery in the Village [Greenwich Village] on Charles Street called Acts of Art Gallery [New York, New York].  It doesn't exist anymore.  And here you have my mentor on the right, Romare Bearden with two of his friends.  Next to me on the left is Hale Woodruff, a painter, and the other painter next to Romare is Herbert Gentry, and all these guys came out for my, opening of my exhibition.
Speaker 1: This, this is me in Central Park in New York City in 1984.  I have a thing for hats, and this is, this is what I was wearing at the time.
Speaker 2: This is me around 1986 in, your breaking out the light--this is me in 1986 in New York I think I was having a conversation with a friend of mine.
Speaker 1: This is me in 1978.  I had because of my passion for Egyptology, I had developed a cube game that dealt with Egyptian principals and I call it Kulaka and gave it the symbol of the, the symbol of the, the spirit underneath the heaven and I was living on Roosevelt Island [New York, New York] at the time.
Speaker 2: This is me at a book signing in 1980 of my new book 'Some Time Ago: A Historical Portrait of African Americans from 1850-1950' ['Some Time Ago: A Historical Portrait of Black Americans From 1850-1950,' Chester Higgins, Jr. and Orde Coombs].  Here I'm signing a book for someone who had brought it.
Speaker 1: In, in 1975 I'm here in Jamaica making pictures for Rastafarian celebration called Nyabinghi, and it usually happens in the evenings and I'm walking around and these farmers called me over and this, they, for some reason they liked me and they, and the guy gave me a bag.  You see I have a paper bag I'm holding on to that he gave me and when I opened it up it was, it was all full of gunga (laughter).  So the Rastas, I, I was very popular with all the Rastas when I went back to the cant- to the, to the encampment.  And you see--well actually no I can't say this is '75 [1975], I'm sorry, because you see the T-shirt I'm wearing.  This has to be '78 [1978] or '79 [1979] because I had just invented this Kulaka in '78 [1978] and I had T-shirts made for me and here I'm wearing it.
Story_ID: 301523
Speaker 1: This is me in Suriname, South America, probably 1990 or '91 [1991].  I would, as my, my vacation months I'd go to a different place and live and make pictures.  And here I'm living in a village called Gunsay [ph.] on the Saramacca River in Suriname and then after, first few days after I get there before I make pictures I try, you know, get to know the people because I really want to establish a relationship where I'm a friend who happens to have a camera rather than a photographer trying to be their friend.  And what I was trying to also do is the people--before I went there a friend of mine, a Ghanaian friend of mine told me that these people were very much of the Akan culture, and I lived with the Akan people many times in Ghana.  So, I decided to make a portfolio of pictures I'd make of the Akan living in villages in Ghana to show these people, and they were quite surprised because they could see certain customs and rituals that the Akan people back in Ghana on the continent were doing that they also were doing, and so it just added to my being able to bond with them to make pictures.
Speaker 2: Making pictures, that's how Mr. Anderson [ph.] used to refer to it making pictures.
Speaker 1: Really.
Speaker 2: This is probably around 1986, three years after my divorce [from Renelda Higgins Walker].  This is my children and I having a moment in a friend's studio.  My daughter, Nataki [Higgins], and my son, Damani [Higgins] on the right.
Speaker 1: This must have been, oops.  This is probably around 1985.  This is my, my sister Delphine [ph.] on the left visiting.  She and my mother visiting me and my mother Varidee, V-A-R-I-D-E-E in the middle, Varidee [Young] Smith and her grandson and my son, Damani, D-A-M-A-N-I, Damani Higgins on the right.
Speaker 2: This is around 1984, I had just divorced and it was a very painful time for everybody and I was fighting to have, to be able to spend more time with my children.  It was, the mother really didn't want to have the kids spend much time with me and I was part of a, as a support group, I was part of a group of other divorced fathers that we would take our kids to have picnics and have political rallies and, and sometimes in our rallies we would have cards to try to publicize our plight to, to the public around us and here with my son and I with our cards.
Speaker 1: Here, this is in the late '80s [1980s] me with a picture on the left is the Amiri Baraka.  I first photographed him I think in '69 [1969] or '70 [1970] because, or in the early '70s [1970s] because he's in my book 'Drums of Life[: A Photograph Essay on the Black Man in America,' Chester Higgins, Jr.] that was published in '74 [1974].
Speaker 2: This is a picture in 1980 of me with my mentor, Cornell Capa who was the founding director of the, the founder and director of International Center [of] Photography in New York [New York], and on this occasion I came to give a lecture on the publication of my new book at the time, 'Some Time Ago': A Historical Portrait of Blacks in America from 1850-1950' ['Some Time Ago: A Historical Portrait of Black Americans From 1850-1950' Chester Higgins, Jr. and Orde Coombs], and here is Cornell at the (unclear) introducing me or I believe we were taking questions, I forget.
Speaker 1: Was that at the ICP?
Speaker 2: That is at the International Center of Photography, ICP.  It's the electra series.
Speaker 1: I've received many awards, and this is in the '80s [1980s] and some of those awards there were a picture made and here is a picture of me with the Eagle Scouts receiving an award from the Boy Scout association of New York.
Speaker 2: Here I am--oh this is also in the late '80s [1980s].  Here I'm with a group of photographers at the Schomburg Center [for Research in Black Culture], which is a research center on African, African American culture in Harlem [New York, New York], and there's a couple, a few photographers here on the left, Bill Moore [ph.], then that's me next to Bill Moore, Bud Williams, big smile next to me, and then the guy with the vest sweater is a South African photographer, Peter Magubane.
Speaker 1: Can you spell Peter Magubane?
Speaker 2: P-E-T-E-R, Peter, Magubane, M-A-G-U-B-A-N-E.  Then next to him is Sulaiman Ellison, and then in front of--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Late '80s [1980s] there's a picture of me at the Schomburg library in Harlem, which is a research library into the culture of African, African American people.  On the left is Bill Moore, next is me, then Bud Williams, a South African photographer, Peter, Peter Magubane, M-A-G-U-B-A-N-E, and then Sulaiman Ellison, Walter Dhla- Dhlarha, D-H-L-A-R-H-A [Walter Dhlarha] and then Peter Magubane's wife on the end of [A.] Lenora Taitt-Magubane.
Speaker 1: This is a picture--this picture must have been made in the late '40s [1940s] my great, this is my [paternal] grandfather, Reverend Warren Smith from New Brockton [Alabama].
Speaker 2: Who also had the school named after him.
Speaker 1: Who also had, I graduated from high school that was named after him, Warren Smith High School in New Brockton.
Speaker 2: This is during the time when Mayor Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] was mayor of New York and it's in a parade and this is Joe Bragg who was a radio announcer, a radio journalist.  Mayor Dinkins in the middle and me and one of my splendid hats on the right.
Speaker 1: This is a shot in the '90s [1990s] when Mayor Dinkins was at Gracie Mansion [New York, New York], and it was at the conclusion of the, the visit of Nelson Mandela to New York and here is Mayor Dinkins with his wife, Joyce [Dinkins], and I at Gracie Mansion.
Speaker 2: This is in 1993, one of many trips to Ethiopia and here I'm in the city of Aksum doing what I do making pictures.
Speaker 1: Okay, here I am, I think this is 2000 or 2001, this is me in Harlem with a group of photographers, Frank Stewart on the left, Bruce Talamon in the middle, and myself.  We're making a picture in honor of [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks' ninetieth birthday.  So, that was three years ago, 2002 or 2001.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry this is the last one you in Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] in '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay, this is, this is the young photographer at sixty, 1969 at Tuskegee in those glasses that I wore that I fell in love with this movie called 'The Battle of Algiers' and that's where I discovered these frames, and this was my outfit.  I tend not to wear, you know, the typical photographer kind of clothes I would prefer to wear.  As you can see here, a coat with just large pockets.
Speaker 2: All right thank you very much.  That concludes today.
Story_ID: 301524
Speaker 1: Continuing on tape six and today is September 2 [2005] and we are continuing our interview with The HistoryMakers.  I'm Shawn Wilson the interviewer, Neculai Burghelea, the videographer, and Mr. Chester Higgins [HistoryMaker Chester Higgins, Jr.], the Historymaker.
Story_ID: 301525
Speaker 1: We were talking, we're gonna just start talking about your first photography mentor, P.H. Polk (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Polk.  Polk was a very interesting dude.  I came to know Polk peripherally because he was the university [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] photographer.  He photographed for the administration, and he photographed student events, and I as an officer in the student newspaper, [The] Campus Digest.  In fact, my particular function was business manager, my major is business.  And we used ads to add to the budget that the administration gave us to run the paper, and we increased our local ads.  That made the difference between our editors being able to have extra four pages in the paper.  And our paper was made of up of national what we called national display ads, which could be a full page or a half page with a photograph, and our local ads were really business cards reproduced.  And I thought of the idea of trying to encourage local business people to spend more money by making the ads more attractive, not by blowing up the business card, but by having, making them look more like the national ads by having a display ad and a photograph in the ad, a photograph of their establishment or the owner what have you.  So, I came up with this idea and I asked, then that's when I reached out to Mr. Polk.  I was told he's the photographer, and I went to him, and I says look Mr. Polk what I need you to do is I have a few clients we're running ads and I'm trying to convince them that we should do this particular kind of ad and I wanna photograph either of their business or of the owner, so he went, he made these pictures.  But, when the time came for us to have those pictures to put in the paper to go to the printer, deadline, Mr. Polk had not delivered the pictures to us and we were in a real bind, we were in a crunch.  We had to go to press that day.  So, I went to Mr. Polk's house while the editor and everybody else went to the printer and I said, "Mr. Polk I need those pictures," and he said, "Well I haven't processed them yet."  Well, that was good news in a way because it meant at least the pictures were shot, but I said, "Okay well I'm not leaving here until I have those pictures 'cause I have to go directly to, to the press and take these pictures over."  So, he went up to his dark room and he started processing the film, and I waited in his downstairs office or study, which had a lot of display cases of all kinds of pictures he had made of Tuskegee middle class faculty members, doctors, teachers, students.  And he went upstairs to process the film and after a while he came down to me.  He said, "Okay I processed the film, come take a look and see which ones you wanna have, pick the negative which one you want to have printed."  So, I went up with him and it was the very first time in my life I had ever seen, as he showed these negatives to me, ever seen a negative in my life and we tried to make these, so we made these selections and then I was, I stayed there and he started printing.  It was quite incredible to see, you know, him make this exposure in this machine, as an enlargement, a beam of light goes and hits a piece of paper and then he takes the, took that paper and put it in a couple wet solutions and by magic, it seems, is this image, this eight by ten image starts to appear--to take form.
Story_ID: 301526
Speaker 1: So, as he began to finish the other prints, I then went back downstairs to wait for him [P.H. Polk] there because being in a dark room first of all I didn't, you know, you only had the red light on and that was okay, but the, the chemicals had a smell to them that, that did not really make you wanna stay around them.  And so I went back down for fresh air to the first floor and then later he came down and he would show me as he was drying the prints what they looked like, and I noticed as he went back up that he had to, there was a curtain that was actually covering the door to the stairwell, that we went upstairs, and I saw as he went up with the door, the curtain as it was folding back that there were some other pictures I had not seen.  I'd been looking at everything else because they were in plain view, and these pictures I pulled back the curtain and I looked and these pictures were pictures of what looks to be sharecroppers in the '20s [1920s] or '30s [1930s], a very proud people, full of humanity, not, and their humanity was not sacrificed at all in their condition.  So, when Mr. Polk finished up and came down, and I said, "Mr. Polk," I said, "Well tell me when did you--about these pictures?"  Yes, they were pictures that he had made and two they were pictures he had made around the '30s [1930s] and that three he made them as part of a personal project that he would go out to the countryside and he would see by chance see someone who he thought really made a great image and he asked them if he would let them make that picture or sometimes on market day when the farmers would and their families could come into town, into Tuskegee [Alabama], some people would pass his street, Washington Avenue, and he saw people that time he would chase them down, run up behind them, please come and let me make your picture.  So, I said, "Okay Mr. Polk I have to go, to go and discharge my responsibility with the paper right now, but after I finished that I'm gonna come back to you and talk to you more about the pictures."  So, I drove, I had to drive twenty, thirty miles to deliver these photographs and that afternoon I came back to him the very same day and we, I remember sitting out on the porch with him and I said, "Mr. Polk I says you know these pictures remind me of people in my own life who I've never seen a picture of, my great aunt Shug [Higgins' paternal great aunt, Shug McGowan Lampley] and my great uncle March Fourth McGowan."  And I says, "And I came from a town [New Brockton, Alabama] about one hundred miles south of Tuskegee, a little country of six hundred people, and I don't really have the money to hire you to go and make these pictures," 'cause I know we'd pay him, it came out of our budget [for The Campus Digest, Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], but it was more than I could afford, it came out of student newspaper budget, so I says, "You know would you teach me how to make pictures with your camera?"  So, he looks at me and he says, "Let me understand this."  He says, "You want me to teach you how to be a photographer with the one camera that I use to make a living with."  So, I thought he was questioning my sincerity that I wasn't serious.  I said, "Well yes sir Mr. Polk that's right."  He, he stops and he takes a long look at me, he takes full measure of me, and he doesn't say anything right away, and finally he says, "You know what" he said, "I'm gonna be a bigger a fool as you."  I didn't realize what this meant for over ten years, but he says, "If you're a fool enough to ask me, I'm gonna be a fool enough to help you."  I didn't realize that what I was asking, what I was asking him, you know.
Story_ID: 301527
Speaker 1: But, I guess there was something in me and of the--in the sense of mission or the sense of seriousness in what I felt I needed to accomplish that--I don't know what the reason was, but that's what he [P.H. Polk] said and he agreed.  So, we agreed then that I will come on a Saturday afternoon when he was taking his nap because he, well I found out that he worked late into the night.  He will take a, come take a nap, he would go to sleep early and he will wake up maybe, you know, eleven to twelve o' clock at night and he would work when it was cooler through the morning hours processing his film and printing.  So, we agreed that I would come over say maybe like three o'clock in the afternoon before he took his nap and that first time we used his camera and I looked at this camera and my God this camera was like, you know, a real puzzle.  I mean, you know, yes it's a simple little body, but you got a lens with all these numbers on it.  You got a thing that sort of turns around the body of the back of the lens with numbers on it.  I mean pressing a button is, is the simplest thing, but whether or not you press the button so that the light that hits the film is correct so it's not overexposed or underexposed, now that's the, that's the real mystery.  Now, before the days of, of light meters this was a real problem, and this camera, his camera, a Pentax, didn't have a light meter.  And, but Mr. Polk and people of his generation who and, and anybody who's spent time on photography knew what he knew and he had developed that skill that well on a certain cloudy condition if you're using a film speed it has a certain sensitivity like Plus-S [ph.] or [Kodak] Tri-X.  Then, it needs so much light.  In order to achieve that light, then you need a shutter speed of this, you need an F stop of that.  So, Mr. Polk could walk into any environment and he knew how to make that fraction work with him.  He could look and says okay my, let's make it a fraction.  My denominator, my speed needs to be 125 and my numerator, my F stop needs to be five, six.  Well, he tried to explain to me this formula before going out to make pictures of how, because I asked well how do I do this, not wanting to make a mistake, so he tried to explain it to me the, the formula, the, the outlines of the formula when I went out.  And then at the, he put a roll of film in and then I went out and I shot and I came to the end of the roll.  Now, since this is not my camera and I didn't want to mess up this camera when it came to the end of the roll, no I did not try to open the camera and take the film out or try to rewind it.  I didn't know how to do that.  Instead I took it back to him, and he rewound it, took it out, and he processed the film and I think out of a roll of maybe thirty-six I may have had one, maybe two exposures.  He was, his reaction, he was pretty, he was half pissed at me.  He was like say you know you're not, you're not paying attention or if you had got it, you know, you, you would have, you know you only got a couple of exposures.  So, I, you know, took that to try to, I took that criticism to try to get to talk to him more again about this formula.  You know well what is that I wasn't, that I got wrong, you know, how could I make this work better the next time.  So, the next time came a week later.  I borrowed it for the second time, and this time I got a couple of more frames, but after I left his house I sort of, something sort of made me feel you know he really didn't want, didn't feel comfortable with having his camera used by someone else because you know this is the only camera he has to make a living with.  So, I never asked him for his camera again, but what I would do is that I went, I kept visiting him weekly or sometimes twice a week because what I discovered is that upstairs he, not only did he have pictures downstairs, but upstairs he had, you know, pictures everywhere on boxes, on the floor, on tables.  He would also retouch his pictures, retouch his negatives.
Story_ID: 301528
Speaker 1: So, he [P.H. Polk] gave me an opportunity to go up and ask questions.  Well how did, who was this, and who was that, and how did you do this, and who was that, and how this connect to this, things that you know a lot of things that are completely boring, but for me I was curious for a couple of reasons, one is that I did want to know something about the subject matter, but two it gave me an opportunity for Mr. Polk to talk to me about the shooting process and dealing with people because almost every picture had a different story.  Not so much about yes it had a story of how it is, but, and what it's about, but it also had the background story about you know how that situation happen to be, who those people were in context with each other, and how that moment may have, after that moment what may have happened or before that moment what may have happened, and that gave me great insight into how to manage as a photographer how Polk used his people skills not only as an observer, but as an observer to make things work for him to get the picture, to understand the situation and understanding dynamics of the people involved how to resolve all these issues so that he still comes out with a good picture.  So, that I found absolutely fascinating and useful.  So, I continued going to see Mr. Polk I guess for the next, you know, four months or so until the summer came.  And because I was also involved in student government as well as student newspaper [The Campus Digest, Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] I was fortunate to become one of the national, a representative to the national student association meeting, a summer meeting that was going to be held in Kansas that year at the University of Kansas [sic. Kansas State University of Agriculture and Applied Science; Kansas State University] in a place called Manhattan, Kansas.  So, walking down the street one day in Manhattan, Kansas, during this week's plenary of being at the university, I noticed in the camera store there was a Praktica camera for, it's a German camera I think, and I think it was something like fifty or sixty dollars, which I had.  So, I walked in and I bought this Praktica camera, my very first camera, and I went that week and I started making pictures you know.  But, the reason I bought this camera was because it had a light meter and it was in my price range because my big problem was solving the equation of the light with the sensitivity of the film.  With the light meter, that problem would be solved, I'll have some clear technical help, and therefore I can concentrate on making the picture.  So, I that week, you know, everybody who knew me, or I knew at that convention became victims essentially because they became you know my subjects, and I think that probably because of that I spent less attention to the conference and more to my picture making.  So, then I came back in the fall with the Praktica, and I worked with that for a while and, but the Praktica had a problem that I didn't realize in cameras is that it had what's called the lens had a screw mount, and a screw mount is effective as long as it's tightened, but it has a tendency to become un-tightened and that means your focusing would get soft and you may not even know it.  So, with the Praktica I was able to make pictures and use in my business sense.  I too had to find a way to make money.  I couldn't compete with Mr. Polk.  I didn't want to compete with Mr. Polk and there was, so I decided that maybe my thing was to go after a market that you know he wouldn't be photographing anyway and that would be doing casual pictures of some of the professors who could pay me five or ten dollars for a print.  But in doing so, in doing so it allowed me to save money to buy a really good camera, a Nikon, actually a Nikkormat, which was a lighter version of the big Nikon at the time.  It was a new camera, I think for two hundred fifty dollars, but it also had, it had a meter and had a bayonet mount, so I wouldn't have the problem of loosening lens.  So, gradually one problem is solved after another after I buy this camera, and this is a camera that it's a very heavy duty camera.  It can withstand an awful lot of abuse.  And this is a camera that I start, I was able then to really perfect my skill as a photographer and then to go back home and start making the pictures that I wanted to make.
Speaker 2: So after Mr. Polk and you developed this relation, relationship with him and you are on your second camera now, about what year is it?
Speaker 1: Well, it started in sixty--I guess this would have been the winter of the '66 [1966], 1966 because the summer of '67 [1967] is when I bought the camera.
Story_ID: 301529
Speaker 1: Now what year is it that you decide to go, or when is it that you decide to go, that you were gonna go to New York [New York] and photocopy or get a list of all the photography?
Speaker 2: I think that--
Speaker 1: How does that come about?
Speaker 2: --happen, that happened in the summer of '69 [1969] because see the, the next summer I'm at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] doing an internship at Harvard Student Agencies [HSA].
Speaker 1: A photography internship?
Speaker 2: No, business because that's my (laughter), that's my original thing.
Speaker 1: I guess before I jump ahead it was in 1968 then that you made the photographs of the campus activity that when you covered the Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]--
Speaker 2: The, the fall of '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: The fall of '67 [1967].
Speaker 2: The fall of '67 [1967] year that I was doing, and I guess also the fall of '66 [1966], I mean, the fall of '67 [1967].  Yeah, it had to be because I bought the camera in the, in the summer of '67 [1967].  So, it's the fall semester of '67 [1967].  Halfway through in that, through that semester I bought the Nikon and yes the civil rights protest was still happening for different reasons.  And then in, then I came to meet, during that period I met a student from Harvard who was down, who was a business manager for a civil rights newspaper called The Southern Courier, and that was put together by a group of idealistic young white people who were either journalists or business people trying to make this paper work to cover the civil rights struggle and be based in Alabama, and they were called Southern Courier.  And I met a young student who had just graduated from Harvard who was, named Joel No [ph.], and Joel No was impressed with what, my business acumen and he went back to Harvard and he recommended that Dustin [M.] Burke who was chairman of the board of what's called Harvard Student Agencies that they give me an internship to come up and learn under them what they are doing for the summer because I, on my own, I had been doing many different things in terms of how do you generate income as a student and Harvard Student Agencies at the time was the only agency, student agency in the country where students could be entrepreneurs and that essentially the university had a budget that they will essentially become the venture capitalist for a student who's had good entrepreneur projects who could justify those projects and who could have a business plan to show that the college would be able to make their money back, and the student could also make their money.  But, it was done under the auspices of a faculty advisor, and this faculty advisor was a professor to Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], Dustin Burke, and now there's a building at Harvard called the Dustin Burke building [Burke McCoy Hall] which the Harvard Student Agencies ran out of.  At the time, he ran out of the, out of a basement office up on Mass Ave [Massachusetts Avenue] between Harvard Yard and MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  So, that was a great experience for me because it helped hone more of my business skills, and Harvard at that time had just, student agencies at that time were doing a very, a couple of exciting things.  They, they were the pioneers of this travel book, 'Let's go to Europe on a Five Dollar Stay' [sic. 'Let's Go Europe'], and in fact the year I was there Andy Tobias [Andrew Tobias] was the president of the, of HSA.  So, and in that summer that's when I got a chance to work with Andy, work with--I was a special assistant to Dustin Burke was my title, and living in a suite with four other guys from Harvard who were also part of HSA who had projects.
Story_ID: 301530
Speaker 1: So then I came back that fall to Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: --and then the following year is when I went armed more with a sense of mission because my, my photogra- my, I picked up the camera because of love and it was, and the Civil Rights Movement, and I think also my year at, my, my time at HSA [Harvard Student Agencies, Cambridge, Massachusetts] helped me, helped me understand how to make that leap from really taking an idea and actualizing it, 'cause we all have ideas.  The issue of how you're going to actualize things.  I remember one of my projects that I used, that I did at HSA that year was to do a research project on what was the real attitudes of the local black population towards different community leaders, which one was held in the most highest esteem.  And then we were able to find a backer, I think (unclear) went into, Dustin [M.] Burke and I and a couple of people went and had a talk with the vice president of (unclear) who was also on the board of HSA.  And we got this, we made a proposal, we got this contract, and then I had to hire other Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] students to one pull up a questionnaire, secondly pull up a means by which we could transfer this information off the questionnaire onto computer cards and analyze it, and then write a report.  And what I also learned about Dustin, because  of Dustin Burke that summer is that you know you, you learn that the best, that water finds its level, but the best thing is always to start at the top as opposed to the bottom, and you learn to talk, learn to talk to other people who are in the field that you wanna be in who you can go and ask them about their experiences, how did they solve this particular problem, how did they do that, you know, what did they learn from you know based on that first idea how that changed over time based upon realities on the ground.  So, therefore, Dustin would often have people come in and talk to us or we could go and we had an idea and he didn't have that expertise he says well you know I think somebody, somebody has that expertise, let's call them up and see if he can come to the office and meet with them.  So, it, it, it, I guess it generated a sense of understanding how to make things accessible and realizing that you know you could go to the top and the best way to find your water level is to start at the top because then it gets, you get, you get send down as opposed to trying to go up from the bottom.  So, this was a skill that I, that the Harvard experience taught me, and--
Speaker 2: Before you move away from that, what was the conclusion?  What was the conclusion of your findings about how the black community felt about the leaders in Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 1: Oh, there, there were very, there were different conclusions and, but what we did find out, which, which AT&T [Corporation; AT&T Inc.] was interested in is that there thing was that we want to make a contribution here.  We want to make a contribution to a local leader that one gives us obviously the most visibility, but two that is going to be that, that person in that group can have the ability to make the best use of.  So, with, with this questionnaire not to leaders, but to individual people we were able to ascertain who in the community, whose flag everybody respected more than whoever else, and we were able to tell (unclear) we were able to identify who that organization and that person was.  And that was the extent--
Speaker 2: Can you remember who they were?
Speaker 1: No, I don't.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But that was the, that, then we--and from our report that was the end of it, you know we collected our money and went on to do other things.
Speaker 2: It was a job, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: It was, it was a research job.
Story_ID: 301531
Speaker 1: But I was able to do that because I had been--my so--my minor is sociology and the year before that I was involved in a couple of things, at the same time we're into civil rights demonstrates were happening on campus, and I was doing my entrepreneurship, there was another professor at Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], Dr. Edgar [G.] Epps, who was head of what was called, his organization on campus called the Behavioral Science Research Institute.  And under Dr., working under Dr., with Dr. Epps for a year, I learned the science of questionnaires.  I learned how to prepare, how to tweak 'em, how to tweak 'em based upon what you want to find out, and how to, and sort down the information.  So, that experience helped me when I got to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] because everybody has to come up with their own ideas, and but having parti- but then everybody wants to know what skills and what you've done before based upon you know your resume.  So, it was a confluence of those, those things.  Well, you know I have this, this childhood friend of mine who was a much older guy, R.P. Flowers [ph.] how always says define success as preparation and opportunity.  He said opportunities can come along in life, but unless you have prepared yourself to take advantage of those opportunities, then the success won't happen, but if you constantly prepare yourself with different kinds of skills whenever opportunities come along that could, those skills are useful to, then that's success because you jump, you can jump through that window.  You can't jump in through that window without the skills is problematic, but if you've got these skills then you can do it.  So, that, I guess that, that year of '60s [1960s], fall of '67 [1967], '68 [1968] was a very intense year thinking back on because I had picked up the camera.  I had become deeply enmeshed in sociological skills with the Behavioral Science Institute with Dr. Edgar Epps.  Also, I had come under the influence of a couple of other very important mentors, obviously Michael Ryder who was my industrial relation teacher who was on exchange from, from Ann Arbor [Michigan], University of Michigan, who helped me understand my frustration about the way racism was happening in, in, doc, in, in depicting our demonstrations to [Governor] George Wallace who told me the story about you know the man and the lion having a fight.
Story_ID: 301532
Speaker 1: Okay continuing on tape seven.
Speaker 2: Well, the sum--the, the year of '67 [1967], '68 [1968] in retrospect was a very intense year for me because it was a year where I, actually I had the benefit of, of developing relationships with several important figures who became mentors.  Dr. Edgar [G.] Epps who was head of Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University] Behavioral Science Research Institute [Tuskegee, Alabama] gave me the opportunity and challenged me to do studies.  He taught me the, the whole science of questionnaires and how to make those come together.  My participating in, in student demonstrations in Montgomery [Alabama] where I didn't see myself as a photographer, so I didn't take my camera.  I sold myself as a body to go and be one of the many counted.  But, it was after my participation in this demonstration and--
Speaker 1: Which particular demonstration?
Speaker 2: It was one of many against [Governor] George Wallace.  I don't remember, I don't recall the exact one, but George Wallace was always issuing very racists proclamations about something.  And so we went, we went to campa- to march against this, and when I looked at the evening, at the evening media, television of the demonstration and I saw the newspaper the next day, we didn't look like American citizens petitioning our government.  We looked instead like potential thugs, arsonists, predatory criminals.
Speaker 1: And why was that?
Speaker 2: Well, it's because of the way that the photographers chose to shoot it and it's the way the press chose to slant it.  And from their point of view we had no rights that deserved to be respected and how dare we think that we do and, and I guess also to disqualify or to take any sympathy away from anybody who may think that they want to be sympathetic to us.  Look at them, you know, their, their level, their, their essentially you know criminals.  And it really hit me in the face that this was an image that came back and a situation that I witnessed, I was a part of and it wasn't, it didn't look like that to me.  It made me realize how different things could look to different people.
Story_ID: 301533
Speaker 1: --That evening I think I went to my industrial relations professor, Michael Ryder.  I may have seen him on campus that day or later the next day, and he may have invited me over to dinner with he and his wife, and I sat down and I was really enraged about did you see what this looked like, you know how could you, you know.  So, Mike Ryder says to me, he said, "Well have you ever heard the story about the lion and the man having a fight?"  I said, "No."  First I say to myself, you know Mike what the hell does this have to do with what I'm talking about, you know and almost like you know this crazy old white man, what is this, I mean he can relate, he can't understand what I'm saying.  But, because I've been reared in a culture, a rural culture where old people often spoke in riddles, I had been used to the fact that sometimes you know illumination only comes at the end of what you think is a senseless riddle from an older person.  So, I says, "Okay, no I haven't heard this."  So, he [Michael Ryder] begins to tell me this story, he says, "Once there was a man, a father, who read many stories to his son at night, but this son's favorite story was the fight between the lion and the man and this particular night he asked his father to read that particular story.  So, the father reads that story and the son this night after listening to that story says, 'Dad, he says, 'you know I don't understand why a lion doesn't win because look the man went into the lion's house and everybody should be able to defend their own home.  The lion has, it's tall and bigger than the man, the lion has powerful claws and a huge mouth.  Why doesn't the lion win?'  And the father says to the son, 'Son the lion will win when the lion writes his own story.  Obviously, the lion has won many times, but the lion didn't write the story, the man wrote the story and here it goes the one who's the most powerful, the one who's the victor is always gonna write the story, the survivor is always going to define the victim.'"  So, it made me realize that hm, maybe what's missing here are stories that I can write.  I have been, I think--the camera I began to see for the first time after that--
Speaker 2: As?
Speaker 1: As a, as a political tool.  Because before that, the camera to me was a love tool.  It was a way of expressing my love for things that made my heart smile, my great aunt [Shug McGowan Lampley], my great uncle [March Fourth McGowan], but now I saw all of a sudden that the camera could be a tool for trying to make this communication bridge.  For a moment I thought after this dinner that evening, for a moment I thought well you know I know the issue here is communication, should, should I write or should I make pictures.  Well, I finally decided that writing was much too slow and much more work actually and I also found that writing was limited based upon language, that first of all photography can be more instantaneous and because of, because it is a universal language, a vision, it can jump cross languages and still be effectively, more effectively than translating text.  So, and it's a lot easier depending on, you know, how insightful you are.
Speaker 2: And one thing I just want to throw in because on the same lines as Mr. Anderson [ph.], the old photographer that I knew from Mississippi said for him making pictures and he always referred to him as making pictures and you're the second person to say that.  He says making pictures is like writing a story.
Speaker 1: You are writing a story, and as a photographer you, you structure the story in a different way, but yes you are writing a story.  You're trying to write that story and that story has to be condensed finally into one image.  If you're lucky, maybe you have two or three chances to do it, but you have to think that I have only one image to really condense the whole meaning of this totality of what I'm trying to say and what's in front of me because you know if you have to stand next to your picture to tell somebody what it means, then it's an unsuccessful picture.  So, pictures are kind of like you know taking your child to first day of kindergarten and once it disappears the kid is on his own.  A good picture has, is the same way.  You know you want to prepare it so strong that once it goes it not only because it's on its own it's still gonna survive and people are still gonna be attracted to it and it's still going to find a home.
Story_ID: 301534
Speaker 1: So, once you become enlightened with the fact that you could use the camera as a political tool, what becomes your next move in your life to implement this new design?
Speaker 2: Well it, it took me time to, well I didn't know what the next move would be and how I was gonna implement it beyond the fact that I had to photograph, I had to make the pictures.  I knew that that's the strategy that would come later.  I wasn't clear on, but what I was clear on is that whatever that later strategy is if I don't have the pictures it's meaningless.  I'm in the middle of this now.  I have to make the pictures.  Once I have the pictures then I can, I can deal with the structure of where they go.  So, my emphasis became on documenting what was going on around me, and that took two forms.  I did it with a camera, documenting these students, the student's activity to address political injustice and I also did it with my training as a behavioral science research person because something else was happening.  The students in their, the students in their frustration of trying to deal with the local political situation were also beginning to question a lot of other things, and they were questioning Vietnam War.  They were questioning racism, and then they also began to start questioning local (unclear) in the school administration with the laws and the restrictions on them by the administration.  All of these things they, they began, like boiling water, stew, it was, it was stewing all year and these things came to a head in the spring when the students had delivered, had felt there were certain demands that the university should address.  And it came to be that, and this is also during the time when Columbia [University, New York, New York] was taken over by the students sitting into the president's office.  Well, Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] students became the first black college [HBCU] to do something similar, essentially having a list of demands that they presented in the spring meeting of the trustee board and essentially taking the trustee board in the building they were meeting in, and essentially taking them hostage.  But, something in me throughout this whole period because of my sociological working with [Dr. Edgar G.] Epps made me start holding on to every piece of information that was written for rallies and what have you and position papers by the students as well as by the administration and as the thing began to, it, it affected the state that there was articles in the newspapers about it I held onto those and then there were arrests and there were court cases and there were court positions and all these things and I had somehow the foresight to keep each day as things were happening, to record all these documents from all the different parties involved and at the end of it the administration after the hostage situation closed the school down.  All the children, all the students were sent home.  Everybody had to reapply, and the people who were the ring leaders or organizers of all this they were not allowed to come back.  And there were court battles back and forth to try to get them readmitted.  So, all of this finally came to and, and when it finally came to an end I published a book with--Behavioral Science Research Institute published a book, which was essentially a chronology of events of Tuskegee University and student unrest and it was typed, typed manuscript and we published I guess about six hundred copies and most of them sold to universities around the country because it was a case study essentially of what happens, how it happens, and resolutions--
Speaker 1: And you have, that was 1968?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And the title of that book was 'Student Unrest at Tuskegee Institute[: A Chronology,' Chester Higgins, Jr.].
Speaker 2: So, that was a very, you know, a full year for me.  A lot of things were happening--
Story_ID: 301535
Speaker 1: There was the also for me in my life a very impressive figure throughout my years at Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] when I first went there was the dean of students, [Dr.] Bert Phillips.  And I was really attracted to Bert Phillips because he was a very brilliant guy and he was the dean of students, which you know just a management position, but he was the kind of dean of students he, that he had a, he, he was a psychologist too.  So, he had a very different kind of approach to things, and he would also, he was also open to people coming to talk to him and coming to talk to him in his office.  He was somebody who worked all night, so he was kind of like a student.  We studied all night, he worked in day and worked all night as well.  And going into his office was quite an experience because he was the only person's office that I went into other than deans, including other deans, and you know his, his office, you know, was the first time I saw a three walled library of you know books.  I mean you could sit, you could spend hours, you know, looking at the books and then he would loan you books and it was just incredible his vast knowledge of stuff and his command of knowledge and also his energy about the work that he was doing 'cause he was very much involved in so many things because also I think the summer of '68 [1968] or '69 [1969] he was in charge, I think it may have been the summer of sixty, '68 [1968] he was in charge of an antipoverty program called TISEP [Tuskegee Institute Summer Education Program], but an incredible figure.  So that I was fortunate enough that year to have different mentors, you know, intellectually my mentor was Bert Phillips, Dean Phillips.  From a photography point of view, my mentor was P.H. Polk. From a resolution and, and mission point of view was Mike Ryder [Michael Ryder], and from a skill of, of questionnaires and research point of view it was Edgar [G.] Epps.  And, and in this whole thing is when I met Joel No [ph.] who would come down as his business manager from The Southern Courier who would come out from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Joel pointed me in the direction of Dustin [M.] Burke.  He caused that relationship to happen.  So, then the summer of '68 [1968] I'm with Dustin Burke taking all that in.  And then I go back to Tuskegee, and the next year '69 [1969] is when I come to New York [New York] with my first set of photographs.
Story_ID: 301536
Speaker 1: When you came to New York [New York] in '69 [1969] with your first set of photographs, how did you go about getting--opening doors for yourself so that people would actually look at your work?
Speaker 2: Well, you know what's interesting I, when I, what made me come--maybe I should answer it this way, when I went back to summer, the year of '68 [1968], '69 [1969] I just started, my pictures I had now collected a body of pictures and now it became clear to me what could I do with this body of work and the first thing I did I remember talking to the editor of Black World [Negro Digest; Black World] who came to give a talk, Hoyt [W.] Fuller, and I had a portfolio of images and I showed to Hoyt and Hoyt, and Hoyt's liking these images and he said well you know maybe we can do a spread in Black World, and I said great.  And that came to be my first spread of pictures published outside of Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  And I remember saying to Hoyt, Hoyt said, "Well Chester [HistoryMaker Chester Higgins, Jr.] what do you want to do?"  I said, "Well I want to make--."  I told Hoyt I says, "I really wanna you know document on black people."  Well Hoyt says to me, "Well Chester that's kind of big you know."  He said, "Why don't you start off at you know a piece."  He said, "What do you like most?"  I said, "I think I like women."  He said go do that. (Laughter) So, that's what, so then what's what really lead me to start then concentrating on one particular thing because then I was all over the map before that.  And Hoyt publishes this section of my, maybe it's six or ten pictures. I think it was about four pages.  First time photo spread in, in Black World.  It was a Johnson Publishing [Company, Chicago, Illinois] paper at the time, magazine at the time, intellectual paper.  So, but I started concentrating and focusing just on women at that point, photographing women around Tuskegee as well as women from my hometown [New Brockton, Alabama].  So, from home, my hometown, they were usually the older women.  Tuskegee is older women, but also the young co-eds, the young students, and trying to do, look at photographing them from a point of trying to show issues of identity and then when I, because you know with the afro, with the, and, and I'm constantly surrounded by women at Tuskegee who were very much involved in the civil rights and very conscious women, so they were not the women you know prettying up was really not their thing.  That was not how you saw their beauty.  That was not how you saw their meaning.  Their meaning came out of what was cerebrally going on in their head.  So, I wasn't--
Speaker 1: Where did their beauty come from?
Speaker 2: Well, their beauty came from within.  I mean, I mean they were beautiful, but you know like a lot photographers look at women beauty as the beginning and end, but no to, to women that I knew, to women that I grew up around beauty was always something that God gave you.  It's not something you gave yourself.  What was more important is what you gave yourself, so that these women had a higher, had a higher--they expected more from themselves and they expected more from the men or people who recognized it in themselves.  They, they expected to achieve cerebrals mentally and that's what they expected to be judged on and related to and so that was my environment of women.  And those were the women that was my lot, choice to pick from, so they'd produce a particular kind of image.  So, I was photo, making these photographs.  So, when I arrive in New York I decided to take with me a portfolio of these images with the hope that maybe I can use this as a basis of discussion or conversation with anybody in New York who could help me develop my skills better because Tuskegee did not have a photography school.  Of course [P.H.] Polk came there in the '40s [1940s] and it was a photography school, but no more.
Story_ID: 301537
Speaker 1: So, when I came to New York [New York] I figured, after my training at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] with HSA [Harvard Student Agencies] and Dustin [M.] Burke, what would Dus- what, what training did Dustin give us to do this kind of stuff, and Dustin's advice was always start at the top.  So, I went to the local newspaper stand, I picked up every magazine that had to do with photography.  I'd look at the masthead and I'd see who is the photography editor.  I sat down with the telephone I call all the photography editors and I said you know I realize, I knew, I, I, I let them know right away I was not asking them for a job.  I was ask them for advice, and so I said to them look you know my name is, I'm a photographer, I'm from Alabama, I'm at the school Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], we don't have a photography school.  I need to know how to get better, more, I know I need to, I want to be as competitive as the best photographers.  I can't learn that at Tuskegee, but I know you see the best photographers, would you please take a look at my work and tell me what it is that I'm missing, what it is that I need to grow so that I can become as good as the other photographers.  See, because to me the bottom line is that if I felt politically what I felt I had to get my pictures in a larger audience, not the audience at Tuskegee that agrees with me, not the audience in Black World [Negro Digest; Black World] that agrees with me, but I had to start competing with the same large white audience that's getting all the information about my people.  And they're getting information from whoever is in New York, the top magazines, the top newspapers, so unless I can get to be as competitive as the photographers they are using the message about whatever the situation is in Alabama or about me or my people doesn't go anywhere.  The only way I can help whoever I'm pointing my camera to is that I have to get good enough that other people in these magazines would pay attention to my pictures so it goes, so my pictures won't displace the others photographers, that's not what I'm after.  All I do, all I want is I want to be on the same stage.  I just want the access to the minds of the people who subscribe or who pick up their magazines and in order for me to get that access I have got to get to be good, and I got to be, get, and I have to be, get, get to be very good quickly.  So, I'm, I need training.  I need help.  So, I go to each of these picture editors and I show them what I do and different people have different response to it.  Mostly the response is well you know nice, but you know let me show you our magazine this week or let me show you these other pictures that didn't make the magazine, or let me show you these other pictures that we're working on.  That's how I was learning because they may say well you see how the photographer did this, because the contact sheet is more important than the prints because in the contact sheet you see the evolution of thought.  So, you look for one image to the next image to the next image and you see how a thought develops.  You see what content was available and how the photographer may have saw content in one place, was heading one direction, then changed and went back somewhere else because of the content that was available or the possible he thought they could work out.  That was learning.  That's what I needed.  I needed the conversation of, of visual linguistics and opportunity.
Story_ID: 301538
Speaker 1: How did you meet Arthur [Rothstein]?
Speaker 2: I go, have an appointment to meet a picture editor at Look magazine whose name is Sam Young.  I go into Sam Young's office, I'm showing him my work, three fourths through the conversation a baldhead man sticks his head, head through the door to give Sam an order to do something.  I didn't know, that could only be Sam's boss.  So, Sam and I are sitting there and I got my portfolio, and the guy looks at Sam and he sees my portfolio he looks at the pictures and he says to him, "Well who's this?"  I says, "Sam's photographer from Alabama."  So, I get up and meet, extend my hand, say, "My name's Chester Higgins [HistoryMaker Chester Higgins, Jr.]. I'm from Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]."  Give him my one sentence, my one paragraph spiel, so the guy says to Sam after, he says, "Sam when you're finish send him into my office."  He said, "Okay."  So, Sam hurries me up (laughter) to finish with me.  I go and I sit down with this man and I tell him that, and he said well let me see your pictures.  So, I laid them out on this table, he takes a look at them, and he thinks for a minute and he gets up and he takes, he reaches over he gets four sheets of blank typing paper and he takes it and he lays it out on this picture and he starts shifting them around.  Then he takes another one, he says, "You see this?"  I look at it I say, "Oh my God it's a new picture."  It's my picture, but it's an improved picture, it's a new picture, and it's much more powerful than the picture I have, but he looked like he took everything away from it.  You know he may have taken three quarters of what else was in the picture, but that was the picture.  And he kept doing that with each picture and what that was teaching me is several things.  He says, "Look you know you have a lot of extraneous stuff here.  That's not the picture.  You've got the picture, but because you've got all this other stuff, it then takes away from the real picture.  It compromises the picture."  So, I started learning, you know, how you then zoom in on stuff, realize what is really important, and then I began to learn issues of design, composition.  He would then point out to me how well the composition here could have been this or how you do that.  Composition, design, balance, light.  All these things that I never really knew by name he named for me, and he showed me how it worked, and I was so, and so we must have talked for an hour and a half.  It was amazing.  I was so blessed that he took that time with me to go over my portfolio pictures.  And at the end of that I says well Mr. Rothstein, his name was Arthur Rothstein, I says, "You know my head is bursting.  I think I understand what you're saying, I'm, but you know I wanna put a, put it to a test and I wanna go out and I wanna shoot now and I wanna come back and show you what I've shot to see if I understand what you're talking about."  So he said, "Sure."  So, he says you know, "Here take, take a few rolls of film with you."  So, he gave me rolls of film, which was like you know precious because as a student photographer I've never been able to afford to buy film.  You know I had to buy bulk film in the one hundred foot rolls and you roll your own film and you use the canisters over and over.  So, I went out and I shot this and I came back the next day and he had them processed and we just went through the contacts, no prints, to look at how I developed thought on what I think is a, a photo opportunity, a situation and criticizing that and looking to see where the good stuff is and how the opportunities are almost there or there or whatever.  But, now I'm getting into learning.  I'm, I'm, I knew from my experience the past year of dealing with mentors and good teachers, I knew immediately this man was a great teacher and I was willing to work as hard as I could with any--you know great teachers inspire you to work hard or for me.  Great teachers have always inspired me to work hard, and I was lucky that year before, I had great teachers, Dustin [M.] Burke, greatest teacher in business you can ever have, Edgar [G.] Epps, greatest teacher in sociology as you could ever have, Mike Ryder [Michael Ryder], greatest teacher in industrial relations you could ever have, [Dr.] Bert Phillips, greatest teacher about intellectual development that you could ever have, and P.H. Polk, at the time the greatest teacher in--for what we had to offer at Tuskegee that I could ever have.
Story_ID: 301539
Speaker 1: I realized how great a teacher this man [Arthur Rothstein] was from, you know, that very first few minutes and I wanted to work and study with him and I was in everything that I could do to go out and try to shoot.  I hoped that he would have the time to look and could give me criticism and give me direction.  So, I came back the next day and we went through this and I said oh my God I learned something else, let me go try this.  And that's how it developed sort of within a week.  I was at his office [at Look magazine] every day for the whole summer, and at, at some point in just getting you know learning basic stuff.  He gave me a list of just, you know, facial expressions or things to look for.  Just the vocabulary of photography and just learning all that and, and trying to take each one of those because he said to me you know when you make a picture as a good photographer you're making hundreds of decisions instantaneously.  You're making decisions about content, about light, about design, about time of day, about mood, about emotions, all of those things, but the only way you can do that is you have to learn how to make each decision separately first.  So, I had this list of maybe about a hundred different, imagine a hundred different possible things that a picture could have in it, and so my, during the summer my ritual of him was each day trying to produce an image that dealt with one specific visual element so that over time as you master all of those different visual elements, your mind sort of locks it in so that when you go make a picture now your mind instantaneously runs through that criteria so that over time within a few weeks I had mastered this whole list so that that became and then so what do I do.  I start shooting in Harlem [New York, New York] and in Brooklyn [New York] following black people wherever I can find them in New York [New York], adding to my broad collection of black people in America, but also specifically looking at black women.
Story_ID: 301540
Speaker 1: Continuing on tape eight, 1970.
Speaker 2: No '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 2: So in 1969, the summer of 1969 in New York [New York] having fallen under the influence, the lucky and blessed influence of Arthur Rothstein as my visual mentor and continuing my mission of documenting the life and times of back people in America I'm, I find myself with these new skills spending all the time shooting in Harlem [New York, New York] and Brooklyn [New York] where I find black people and at the same time trying to maintain the focus of looking at women as my first test so to speak of focus, photographing women in New York.  I'm also attracted to the same kind of woman in New York that I was attracted to in the South, that is a woman, a thinking woman, and I'm making the pictures of--so I'm able now to show pictures of urban black woman to juxtaposed of my images of rural black woman.  And I'm showing these pictures around to these editors I go to, but I also had the good fortune--I went to Ebony and I went up to talk to the photographer at Ebony, Moneta Sleet [Jr.].
Speaker 1: What's the name again?
Speaker 2: Moneta, Moneta Sleet, fantastic photographer, very, very generous photographer, very helpful, a lot of advice.  And he introduced me to one of, to some of the editors there.  One was an editor by the name of Peter Bailey [HistoryMaker A. Peter Bailey], and I guess Peter at the time was the most Afrocentric of all the editors and Peter looked at my work and really loved what I'd done, but there no way, what I'd hope would be maybe you know that Essence would be interested in my pictures, but, I mean Ebony would be interested in my pictures.  Essence wasn't created then but it didn't happen.  But, what happened during the summer as I'm working is that one day Peter comes to me and he says, "Chester [HistoryMaker Chester Higgins, Jr.] I met a young black editor, the first black editor to have ever been hired by a white publishing company named Orde, Orde Coombs, a Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] graduate," and he says, "I told Orde about your project and Orde wants to see your pictures."  So, he gave me his number, I called Orde up, we set an appointment, I came over and I showed Orde my pictures.  Orde loved my pictures.  He said, "This is just what I've been looking for."  Because Orde was two things.  He was West Indian, he was highly educated, and the women in his life were also the same kind of women that I'm photographing, women who--
Speaker 1: Thinking women.
Speaker 2: Thinking women.  So, Orde looks at the pictures that I made come from the South.  At that point, I was able to show him contacts of pictures that I've been making of the urban woman, and he, and he said okay we, we have, we have something here.  It needs a little tweaking, but we've got something here.  We've got to decide now that we need text, which I didn't like.  I mean, these are my pictures why do I have to have somebody write text for them, and we have some gaps to fill when you go back to Alabama, some different kind of shooting.  That I could deal with, but we needed text.  So, I said oh my God you know who do I know that could do this writing and what kind of text?  He said well he thinks it should be voices coming from the pictures of the women talking about the issues in their lives.
Story_ID: 301541
Speaker 1: So, the only writer I knew was a writer that I'd hired at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] who was a Harvard student, Harold McDougall.  I had hired Harold at Harvard to write the report on the research that I had done while at Harvard Student Agencies for New England Tell [New England Telephone and Telegraph Company] on who was influential in the black community.  At the time, Harvard, Harold had I think had finished Harvard and he was about to spend a year abroad.  Harvard gives these if you're summa cum laude, if you graduate with honors you can get these fellowships.  They give you a year to travel around the world.  And Harold had just, I think had, either just about to start on his trip with his first wife, Alice [ph.], or he had just come back.  I forget the sequence.  May have just, may have just come back and I had by chance didn't know Harold was, in fact I didn't know if he was in New York [New York] and by chance I ran into Harold one day and I says, while this was happening, I says, "Harold my God you know I've got this potential opportunity and I need a writer how would you like to do this?"  Actually I think maybe you know, yeah I guess it was his first wife.  So, Harold liked the idea.  We reached an agreement that was, that was a win, win for both of us, got a contract made, and Harold started interviewing women that I had photographed or introducing me to other women to photograph or finding, you know, sets of women.  So, he started, we started contacting women around the universities, and he would hold sessions with them in talking about the different issues in their lives, and out of these sessions came these quotes, and these quotes are what we use to marry to the photographs.  So, and I think Harold, this was the year that--Harold the next year was going back to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], so this was like perfect timing; everything came together.  So, I went back to school [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and finished my pictures and sent everything back to Orde [Coombs] and, but the, the good thing is that at the end of the summer '69 [1969] I had my first book contract, for photography book contract signed with McCall's [McCall Publishing; McCall Corporation, New York, New York], and the following year, the fall of '70 [1970] the book is published, 'Black Woman' [Chester Higgins, Jr. and Harold McDougall].
Speaker 2: And when that book came out in 1970 how did that establish you as a photographer or change the course or, or even set the direction in which you would follow?
Speaker 1: Well, it established me as a photographer immediately because I mean the book had reach, and it was a different kind of look at women, a first time look at black women this way and first time dealing with these issues.  So, it really set us apart.  It was a very popular book because of that and it was the respectful approach.  I, I sometimes received, you know received e-mail from women who say you know that they were in some white university and that they were really had no reflection, positive reflection of themselves.  They felt in an island and when either some friend sent them this book or some parent sent them this book it was, it was a life raft. It was a salvation for them.  And for people you know who were just day in and day out.  It was, it was an acknowledgement.  It was a reaffirmation in, in, in their value and their worth, so people were very much attracted to it--
Story_ID: 301542
Speaker 1: Well, having done the book about women it's almost inevitable or natural that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, looking again, taking another, looking at this whole big pie--black people in America, which expanded and became black people in the world, African people in the world, the next piece of this pie was men and so therefore I started to look at that project and that project, actually before then I thought about doing a project on children and, then Harold [McDougall] was willing to work with me on that as well, but somehow the children project I, didn't really jell and I think for a couple of reasons.  You know I think that your best pictures, I tell people your best pictures are always going to be of things that you know and for me my understanding of children was limited, much more limited than my understanding of anything else.  One because one I was the only child, so I didn't have that kind of understanding that children who have siblings would have of each other in different periods of the time.  Number two my child had just been born less than a year old, so I hadn't lived through enough to know all the different things to look for in stages of the child.  Yes, intellectually I could, I could probably think dah, dah, dah, but that wasn't enough.  I had to have an emotional understanding as well.  So, that project really did go anywhere.  But, men project I had a feeling about the men project, so I started, and I'd been photographing men for you know in the Civil Rights Movement, men, my great uncle, March Fourth [McGowan], his brothers, ministers--
Speaker 1: Almost parallel to the women you (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Always parallel to women--
Speaker 1: Thinking men sort of.
Speaker 2: --I'd been photographing.  So, now I focus on that.  I got a contract I think from Doubleday [Anchor Press; Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, New York, New York] to do that and there again the, the crisis for me and the challenge who's gonna write this book.  Well, why can't I write the book?  Well, you're not a writer, you're a photographer.  So, you know it's like (unclear) the score you can't get credit unless you have credit, so it was that same thing with the writing and it took me several books to overcome that.  So, this time I went and I, and I asked Orde [Coombs] who was the editor for 'Black Woman' [Chester Higgins, Jr. and Harold McDougall] who was a very good writer.  He'd been writing pieces for Esquire magazine and other freelance pieces.  I asked Orde if he'd like to join me to write the essays because you see essays before each chapter.  So, he agreed to do that and I supplied the photographs.  He, he supplied brilliant text and we had 'Drums of Life[: A Photographic Essay on the Black Man in America,' Chester Higgins, Jr. and Orde Coombs].
Story_ID: 301543
Speaker 1: I did another book with Orde [Coombs] after that ['Drums of Life: A Photographic Essay on the Black Man in America,' Chester Higgins, Jr. and Orde Coombs].  I think or did I, it was, oh it was 'Some Time Ago[: A Historical Portrait of Black Americans from 1850-1950,' Chester Higgins, Jr. and Orde Coombs] because I had also been curious, being in love with photography, the craft of photography, I was curious and also being in love, I'm, I'm a, I guess, I don't know if I'm a science fiction lover as much as I am a Star Trek lover, I'm a Star Trek lover, but I've been, you know captured by this idea of what if we could have a time machine and we can go back in different places because my whole thing is about using my photography to rehabilitate the image of people of color in the media.  So my thought is what if I can go back in time and I made the pictures from the beginning of photography in the 1860s, 1870, 1890s, 1900, 1920s, 1930s, well that's impossible, but there were other photographers there who did make pictures.  Now most of those photographers and those images could be racist, but those are not, but I have to sift through those images and find which of them are not and which photographers who may have, been survived only by one or two images that are the kind of images that I will produce.  So, I spent years with the help of a research grant and the help of a few good people like, historians like John Henrik Clarke, reaching out to different African historical associations, photographic historical associations, going to Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.], going to people's homes, looking in shoe boxes, looking at stuff underneath their beds or their family albums, looking for pictures of our people from beginning photography at 1850 up to 1950 and once finding those pictures, not taking those pictures from them, but copying them.  I came with a large format camera and a stand and lights that I just copied these pictures, and pulling together this library of visual imagery so that I could tell the history of our people before I started making pictures, but seeing through the eye of the pictures I would have made.  And this book I call 'Some Time Ago' and there again, 1980 I think, my third book, Doubleday [Anchor Press; Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, New York, New York] wants a writer.  I am at this point so pissed that why can't I control my own book.  So, I said okay look we'll see if Orde can write this again, but this time I am also writing a long introduction of how the process and how I did this project came to be.  So, by forcing the publisher to let me write five or six pages of my process introduction gave me the first time the credit that I needed to become a writer of my own books, so that when the next time I came up with a book there was no question who was gonna write the book.  I was gonna write my own book.
Speaker 2: Before we go any further because now we're up to 1980, in 1970 [sic. 1974] the book was 'Drums of Life', that was the book--
Speaker 1: On men.
Speaker 2: --on, on black men.
Speaker 1: Now, I decided to call, I decided not to call my books black anymore 'cause everybody was black, black, black, black, and my friend [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni after I, I did 'Black Woman' [Chester Higgins, Jr. and Harold McDougall] I was going to her and I was showing her what I was doing.  She said, "Chester [HistoryMaker Chester Higgins, Jr.] I hope you're not gonna call this black man," she said, "'cause I'm tired of black, black, black, be more creative."  So, I said okay that's a good point, so.
Story_ID: 301544
Speaker 1: When did you meet--okay Romare, Romare Bearden and he became instrumental to you and inviting you to his home?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did that come during the photographing of this men, the second?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So tell me about the meeting with him, your relationship with him?
Speaker 2: Well in, in 'Drums of Life[: A Photographic Essay on the Black Man in America,' Chester Higgins, Jr. and Orde Coombs], I also reached out for men who I respected for, whether they were artists, intellectuals, Amiri Baraka is in there.  I sought out Amiri, Amiri Baraka and I sought out Romi Bearden because I liked what he did with, with his images and paintings because Romi had somehow mastered this art of, of the first time I've ever seen of someone who was able to fractionalize time in a, by using his collage.  I mean, there's a French artist, [Georges] Seurat, who did pointillism, which is another way of fractionalizing time, but it's probably a pedantic way, it's kind of expected, but Romi used the overlay of time and the overlay or reality to somehow give you a, a new collective view and your mind somehow had to process all these different fragments to come up with this new overlay that is really not there, but is there, and I was really mesmerized by that and I wanted to meet him and photograph him for my book, so I called him up and I explained to him what I was doing and I asked if I could come over and photograph him.  He gave me a time to come, and I went to this address on Canal Street [New York, New York] where he was living at the time and he says your gonna buzz the button and he would open a window and drop the key down, so buzzed the button, he just have lived on the fourth floor, I forget now.  I back up, the window open, he said okay I'm dropping a key down.  I back up so the key don't hit me and it drops on the sidewalk, open the door, lock it, and I walk up these long stairs.  So, I get up, I get up to Romi's place and Romi--
Speaker 1: He lived on Canal Street you said?
Speaker 2: On Canal Street.  And Romi offers me tea and you know he had this flow through apartment, it went from one end to the next and I think his wife, Nanette [Rohan Bearden], I don't know if she was there, then I met her later, and he and his cat, Gippo after tea I start to look around for my picture and so I, and he was, he and this cat Gippo had a, were in love with each other, a great relationship. So, I photographed him with Gippo and I think the picture in my book I think is he holding Gippo in front of an easel with one of his paintings on it.
Story_ID: 301545
Speaker 1: When I photograph people you know I--part of one of the things I learned from my days working with Arthur Rothstein who introduced me to Cornell Capa who introduced me to Karsh of Ottawa [Yousuf Karsh] who was a very famous portrait photographer and Karsh made the impression upon me when he said that whenever he'd go photograph an author or an artist if it's an author especially, he tries to read their books before he goes to see them because he wants to be able to discuss with them what, what they've been producing.  He may have some questions.  He may, and all of that what it means is that one, being additionally prepared.  You're visually prepared, but you're also now prepared because you have some background and you know something that's about the reality this person is concerned about, so you can talk.  And one of the things--there's, there's several good reasons for this.  One is that, you know, one of the challenge of doing a portrait of anybody is being able to reach inside.  I mean what's outside is you know is kind of elementary we all see that, but how do you, so outside is a starting point.  How do you move from outside to inside is what's really sets people apart and part of that is learning how to find that bridge that opens up, certain part of the inside that it becomes revealing, and the way to do that is through discussion, through conversation, so that for me that conversation was about talking about different pieces that I had seen and well what were you, what, what is this about, oh my God I'm struck by it's so--why am I in love with this, why do I like this, you know, what, you know how is this, you know how does that work?  It shouldn't work, all these things.  And the thing you have to understand too is that I come from a world of representation where Romi [Romare Bearden] is in a world of abstract constructionism more conceptual.  So, here's there a bridge you know of what I'm prepared to understand because of my limitations of dealing with the lens as opposed to a painter's ability to move completely away from what I have to deal with to create their own.  As Romi say look you know, you know photography you have to put the light there to make it have a certain value.  A painter, I just use the paint brush and I put the light there.  The light didn't have to be there, but I can make it there, but in my medium I can't do that.  I have to make it work another way.  So, these kinds of discussions with Romi as people will call him, I found myself in almost like an Arthur Rothstein situation again because Romi, not only was he a great painter, but Romi was a brilliant thinker who understood not only social political issues in addition to the visual painting issue, brilliant mind in terms of being able to make analysis and understand things on a, with a level of just, you know, just pure wisdom.
Story_ID: 301546
Speaker 1: I call Romi [Romare Bearden] back after I had this photograph [of Bearden and his cat, Gippo], so I said, I have the photograph, can I come bring you your photograph.  So, that gave me a second session with him and then I realized I said well can I you know come talk to you about another thing.  He said yeah you come up, make an appointment 'cause what he would do on Saturday mornings essentially he would hold court on Saturday.  The different artist, and I was the only photographer, would make an appointment to come by and have an hour.  Romi was our therapist who didn't charge us.  But, then it go to the point I was, I was try, I was, at some point I was talking to Romi about well he could come up with ideas that were incredible to do and, but they are ideas that I could do visually and I think it was his way of trying to help me because sometimes you would go to him with a picture of what I'd done and he immediately would think well you know [Diego] Velazquez.  Have you ever seen the work by [Jacques-Louis] David or Velazquez you know about a Dutch painter.  I said, "What are you talking about?"  He said, "Well you know you seem like you, you are partial to that same kind of light."  I said, "What light is that?"  And he went and he would, he had this vast library again, whole long wall, maybe fifty feet of nothing but books all the way to the ceiling and a big ladder that he would go, roll back and forth to get them.  And he would look at a picture and immediately he would go and he would think and he would go and he'd bring a book out and he'd come and he'd put it here and he says now you see this, you see how he does the light in here.  You see how he does, the subject her, well see this is what it looks like you're trying to do.  This is the direction that you seem to be going in and look how this and this, and you will sit there and you would be amazed at hey--he would show me a representational painters, but he doesn't do representational so to speak, but he would show me these painters because he thought that I could learn from it and I did.  I mean Rembrandt light.  You know that, that, that triangle that comes off you know on the other side of the face because either way you light the face the, the Dutch window light.  So, you look at some of my pictures and you'll see this window light.  You'll see the soft light because I tend to like light that wraps around you, not, not harsh light.  So, Romi, being that Romi was always instructional being with him, you were always learning something so that this particular event or this particular experience with Romi luckily I was able to stretch out for about fifteen years until I became one of the regulars that I didn't just have my hour, I could do a comment maybe the last hour and also have the rest of the day when Romi would then go out to a gallery opening at Cinque Gallery [New York, New York] or somewhere else to see opening, see work, but Romi, and then Romi would send me to his friends to photograph--
Story_ID: 301547
Speaker 1: He'd [Romare Bearden] call up Ralph Ellison and he said sure I think you should photograph Ralph Ellison or you should photograph Al Murray [Albert Murray] or photograph different artists (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was Ralph Ellison like?--
Speaker 1: Well, so I went over the Ralph's house.  Ralph was--you know Ralph went to Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], so there was in and his book, 'Invisible Man' was something we had to read at Tuskegee and Ralph I get to Ralph's house and my God Ralph is talking cameras to me.  I didn't know it Ralph was, is a, you know one of those like a dentist, you know, who have all these cameras.  Ralph had these big cameras. He had this (laughter), you know he was into the craft of photography.  You know he was a writer.  I don't, I didn't see it as pictures, but I saw his equipment you know. He had the big lens, the big cameras, the latest stuff.  But, Ralph was also a very impeccable cool kind of guy unlike--
Speaker 2: By that you mean?
Speaker 1: Well, unlike Romi [Romare Bearden] who was an artist and you know being shabby looking was never a problem for him, but Ralph would never be caught dead out the house without looking impeccable.  He looked the GQ kind of guy.  You know he was--(laughter), you know the preppy kind of guy that was Ralph.  That's how Ralph looked.  That's how Ralph sort of moved you know in a very, not labored, but very methodical way.  You know there was nothing that was really left to chance with him.  He was, he knew you know the, you know that they were, men used to put that white handkerchief in there, I mean everything was, yeah you know and so I went and he said, "Well what do you want me to do," so we talked and essentially I did pictures of him at his, you know, desk writing table and looking in conversation with me trying to check images of something that was revealing.  But, Ralph was, he was not someone who was gonna smile.  He wasn't, you know he wasn't easy like that.  He was really more controlling of himself, and his wife, Fanny [Ellison], who could probably get some expressions out of him he wasn't you know, he wasn't gonna let me see that.  Ralph was going to be, Ralph had a certain image in his head about what he wanted to look like and that's, that's what I had to capture.  Now, it was and even when I didn't have the camera Ralph could be warm, but you know it was not--he could be warm in the sense that he was not off-putting, but he was never really embracive, embracing warm, you know, and you didn't get the feeling, I never got the feeling it was personal because that was you know that was him, plus my introduction to him was through Romi, so I was gonna be, I doubt if I would, if it was, you know if he was gonna be unpleasant to somebody it wasn't gonna be me.  The same thing when Romi you know wanted me to photograph Jimmy Baldwin [James Baldwin], you know--
Speaker 2: What happened with that?
Speaker 1: --'cause these are people that he knew.  Well, Jimmy Baldwin is totally opposite of (laughter) Ralph Ellison.  I mean Baldwin is a very gregarious kind of guy, you know, who just laughs.  You know he, he's, he has a spontaneous laughter, but usually his spontaneous laughter is because he's always taking in everything that he observes, you know, and he's doing a political analysis of what he observes.  So, you know, he sort of enjoys you know life is part, you know interesting, part folly, part you know tragic, all of those things and he could go in, in a moment you know Jimmy Baldwin's face can go from to you know, addressing almost the same thing 'cause he can just look at it from many different angles, and he's just like all around it, which is, you know, he's not, so he was not tied down.  His pants was not tied down the way Ralph's pants were tied down or Romi had another friend, Al Murray, who was kind of like you know in between the two of those guys because Al Murray also who was a black pilot from Tuskegee, [U.S.] Air Force  officer.  Al Murray could be deadly, deadly serious about a particular point that he was taking, a political or social point, but at the same time could fall back you know and say you know well that's some crazy shit you know (laughter), I mean you know he could, he could, he, he could, he could hang--it, it's interesting when I think back on it because here you had extremes and a middle.  You had Romi's friend, Jimmy, who was on one hand just extremely you know could be happy and, and as a, as a bird and, and Ralph who was like you know so deadly serious that, you know, levity was not an issue in his life.  To Al Murray who had the combination of both.
Story_ID: 301548
Speaker 1: So, what was it like for you and, and what year did [Arthur] Rothstein introduce you to Cornell Capa (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, now we're--my Romi [Romare Bearden] introduction had to have happened in '72 [1972], '73 [1973] because he's in my '74 [1974] book, but Rothstein introduction to Cornell came in probably '70 [1970] because the first summer I'm just one on one with Rothstein.  Now the second year Rothstein introduces me to Cornell Capa who introduces me then to a whole string of photographers, Ansel Adams, Karsh of Ottawa [Yousuf Karsh], Jerry Uelsmann--
Speaker 1: What was Ansel Adams like?
Speaker 2: --[W.] Eugene Smith.  What was Ansel Adams like?  I mean, I guess Ansel you know was a very down to earth guy first of all.  Looking at Ansel's face helped me for the first time realize you know that people sleep on their face, sleep on one side of their face because you know his nose was crooked to the face.  He was a very sociable guy, and I think that, well first of all you know he wasn't, this was not his element to make pictures in New York City [New York, New York], so you know he wouldn't have his camera, so we went out to dinner, I was invited by Cornell to join him and Ansel and some other people to dinner, that's how I got a chance to meet all these people and have any sort of relationship with them.
Speaker 1: We're going to stop here (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, he was just a down to earth guy, very good guy.
Story_ID: 301549
Speaker 1: Continuing on tape number ten, number nine and we were talking about the dinner you were having (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh with Cornell [Capa].  Cornell would invite me sometimes after he had--Cornell started, he was, Cornell was the founder of International Center of Photography [New York, New York], Cornell Capa.  His brother is a famous war photographer, Robert Capa, who made the incredible picture during the Spanish [Civil] War of a soldier falling back at the moment of impact of a bullet hitting him, hitting his skull.  Now, then he was later killed by a landmine in, in China.  His brother Cornell Capa was the early manager of a collective called Magnum [Photos], and he in his effort to really--when he came along museums didn't really take photography as a serious medium, and Cornell led the fight single handedly to change that in America.  And Cornell first started making exhibitions of photographers and putting up wherever, a corporation in their lobby would let him put it up, gradually museums and Jewish Museum [New York, New York], the Metropolitan Museum [of Art, New York, New York].  He did the first big show of [Henri] Cartier-Bresson, and he started a photographer symposium at New York University [New York, New York], I think they call it the extension education or something, where once a week a different photographer would come, show their work, talk about what they do.  This is in 1970.  And Cornell invited me to come to listen to these people.  And there again that was his way, another way of his teaching.  I mean he was like Arthur Rothstein too.  He could talk to you about stuff.  Cornell was also into packaging stuff.  How do you package these pictures?  How do you make a message here?
Story_ID: 301550
Speaker 1: --Let me ask you something about this time because now you have come out of a world that was predominantly black at Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], and your focus has been on, on creating a positive image for African Americans.  How do you, how do you blend into or how do you associate with a broader photography?  How did it, I guess how are, how are you accepted in, into this broader realm of photography with Ansel Adams and, and Cornell [Capa], people who are not doing sort of black photography?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm accepted as, as a serious photographer.  Everybody has their own mission.  I don't expect.  I didn't except Cornell to drop his mission and take mine.  I didn't expect Ansel to drop his mission and take mine.  Everybody has a voice.  Everybody has a mission, and we're all trying to perfect our skill so that whatever mission you're on you take those skills and apply it to your mission.  I wasn't, I didn't feel uncomfortable about being with them and learning in their world.  They had the knowledge.  I wanted to learn it.  I didn't feel insecure as a person of color that I couldn't learn from them or I was upset with them.  I mean I'm here to learn. You know you guy, you guys got your message, you got your skill.  I'm just trying to get the skill because I got the message I wanna do too, and this is my message and I'm upfront with them about my message what I think is good because I'm not saying to them tell me what my message should be.  I'm only saying to them help me perfect my skill.  I got my own message.  You know it's like, kind of like you know James Brown said you know don't give me nothing just open up the door I can get it myself.  I'm, I don't want you to give me a message, I just want you to tell me the skills I need to get through this door 'cause I got everything else.  And you know obviously everybody's got their own interest and you're fully loaded with that interest because everybody's interest takes up all your time to do.  Ansel's interest takes all of his time.  Cornell's interest takes up all of his time.  Everybody who's in this knows that whatever you wanna do you know you have to do it yourself, 'cause they got their own life already and all I'm asking, I'm trying to learn is a skill 'cause I, I'm gonna, I'm gonna become like them so absorbed in my mission that you know that's all I can do.  So, it was--I think people--I, I've learned a couple of things in life.  One is that I've never been able to spend much time with my peers because my peers are not the people I've ever been able to learn from because peers you know we're all trying to learn at the same thing about getting through life.  Secondly, I found that most of my peers two things, most of my peers have never been as focused and sincere about the moment that we live in as I do.  Most of my peer groups tend to not politically or professionally tend to lack the ability when they were younger.  Now they do, but when they were younger they tend to lack the ability to appreciate exactly what time it is because they're so consumed with hedonism.  They're so consumed with partying.  They're consumed with image of themselves, that everybody is busy being a legend in their own mind that they don't really, that they, you know you have to, they can't really see them, they can't really rise something larger than them because they're so consumed with themselves.  You know which is hey, that's you know most people are like that.  But, the people if you notice in life and one of the things I, I grew up reading a lot was biographies.  The people that you notice in life who really make a difference are people who early on understood their mission.  Not only they understood their mission, but they knew how to focus their energy and they knew how to weed out everything that took away from their energy.  So, that for someone like me that translated into my being in New York [New York] where you can do millions of, millions of options are open to you.  My being in New York and not being distracted from learning how to be a great photographer, my not, which means that my evenings were spent looking at photography books of other people and other pictures trying to get better even though there may be ten other parties, invitations around me.  It meant I didn't go to parties.  So, I went through a whole, my whole life and I still don't--
Story_ID: 301551
Speaker 1: And I remember once I did go to a party, and I was working on a book project Bert, Bert Andrews gave the party, and instead of dancing and getting about I was asking people, trying to interview people about my book.  Well you know, so how are you feeling about such and such (laughter).  So, Bert says give it up, you know give it, relax, and then at the same party Hugh Bell was there who's a very famous black photographer who had one, his pictures was in this exhibition called 'The Family of Man,' and he says, "Chester [HistoryMaker Chester Higgins, Jr.]," he says, "You know you're gonna burn yourself out," (laughter).  They were well-meaning, and they were probably both correct, but what, so what is my reaction to that I don't go to anymore parties period.  I mean it's not--I guess everybody has to make a decision about how to use your time period.  If there's twenty-four hours in a day, how much am I gonna get through.  The same thing with you know being a Casanova so to speak and there's a very interesting line in a, in a song that was written by this guy out of Chicago [Illinois], well it will come to me, Oscar Bell [sic. Carey Bell] talking about you know all the time that he shot in bed had he been on a mission how much more he would have accomplished, and the same thing is true.  So I mean you can find, you know, if you want you can spend every day, every hour in your bed or somebody else's bed if that's what you wanna do, just like you can find, you know, a bottle or a party if that's what you wanna do, but you have to, but collectively that doesn't add up to anything.  But, most people don't realize that because they don't really have a mission in their life and they get strung out on what they think everybody else is doing they should do.  I remember once when I was in early, when I was a young child and I did something that my mother [Varidee Young Smith] didn't want me to do, but my other friends were doing, I said to my mother well she said, she said, "Well and why would you do that?"  I said, "Well because they were doing that."  She said, "Oh okay, so if they are gonna run to the edge of a cliff and they're gonna fall off, you gonna do that too."  I had to think about that.  So, you have to think about that also in life.  You know what is it that you know--first if you're lucky enough to have understood your place in time and what does that require of you as a mission, then you know you ahead of the game, but most people unfortunately don't come upon that until they start thinking in their thirties.  When you turn thirty, then everybody says, because the mind is, is wired this way, when you become thirty everybody says oh my God life is running away from me I have nothing to show for it.  Well, that's gonna happen to you at thirty because that's how the mind is, is wired.  But, unfortunately when you've reached that point you've already wasted and you're too late.  The time to reach that point to realize that okay what am I, what is gonna be left behind should come you know in your teens.  Luckily for me it came, if I didn't already know it because of my religious background I was focused, it came to me when my great uncle Phil [ph.] says to me you know it's important that you make a statement in life and I'm nineteen, twenty, or very, or you could very well die undeclared.  So, I knew then and there somehow he had, he had turned on the clock.  Never had this clock turn on before, and I think most people go through life never having the clock turn on, but when he said that to me it turned on the clock, then I knew what time it was.  I knew I'm gonna die.  I knew that the rest of my life is between here and there and I knew that if there was something I really cared about that I only have that much more time to work on it, so then that means I'll have to organize there, there is here a sense of urgency and everything I do if I am serious about that has to recognize that sense of urgency and work on it before I die, because once I die, that is what will have declared my presence.
Story_ID: 301552
Speaker 1: What year did you join The New York Times?
Speaker 2: Nineteen-seventy five [1975],
Speaker 1: Was--
Speaker 2: March 31, yeah, March 31, 1975.
Speaker 1: Did that--I'm sure that marked a turning point for you because you're working for what's considered to be the paper of record for the land (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's a way of looking at it.  That's not how I look at it.
Speaker 1: How did you look at it?
Speaker 2: I looked at it as that it had finally, preparation, success is what?  Preparation--
Speaker 1: Preparation--
Speaker 2: --when preparation--
Speaker 1: --and opportunity meet.
Speaker 2: --and opportunity meet and all my life I'm concerned about what, rehabilitating the image of people of color, and all my life I'm concerned about being on the national stage so that my images are a part of the national diet that everybody consumed when they look at image of black people, and all of that comes out of where New York City [New York, New York].  Now, the top of New York City the newspaper, the top stage is since Life magazine and Look magazine are now out of business is The New York Times.  So, that means that finally my pictures are gonna be in The New York Times, which is all of that that you just said, but to me it's a part of the national visual diet that decision makers look to when they look to make decisions about the rest of society and when they consider the issue of people of color.  So, hopefully, my pictures you know bring influence and bring understanding that was not there before and also because of that helped change people thinking, those who are susceptible to that, who are consuming it and who are decision makers and also to influence younger white and black photographers to show them there is another way and there are other ways, a broader view, of how you see people of color so that when they go out to look for people of color they now have a larger reference bank about what's possible, what's there.
Story_ID: 301553
Speaker 1: What did [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks say to you when you met him about what you had set out to do?
Speaker 2: He says, "If you believe that and that's what you wanna do and we're both on the same team, make sure that you never give a picture editor a negative picture of black people because if you do, that's the one they're gonna use."  So, you know, we're talking about a roll of thirty-six frames.  He said, "If you go out on the job and you make thirty-five positive strong compelling images and then you sort of throw in one that's negative," he said, "then those other thirty-five images you just made have been all wasted efforts, so don't give the editor the opportunity.  If they want that picture, let them send somebody else to make that picture."
Speaker 1: Can you give me an example of what is a negative image versus what--
Speaker 2: Okay--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I have a very simple formula for what is a negative image.  A negative image is when you sacrifice the humanity of a person on the altars of their condition.  Defam- when you defame their character, defamation of character; that is a negative image.  So, if I say there is a poor person who is so poor they're looking through a garbage can to find food, now that, depends on how I look at that picture depends on what I come out of.  If I'm looking at that picture as someone who, who have a high premium on life being comfortable and that that's my aspiration for a life that's comfortable and anything like that is threatening to me I will therefore character assassinate that person right away to show how deplorable this person is, how disgusting they are.  I wish the universe didn't have them.  However, if I'm a person of compassion and I realize that that person is still somebody's child and that person, something must be wrong with that person for the person to be doing that in a stressful, there's a lot of stress going on in that person's life, but they're still a person, they're still somebody's child.  Just because they're going through the garbage is one strike against them and then if their black they got two strikes, boom, let's assassinate this person quickly with the camera, just character assassinate them.  So, that's what I call sacrificing one's humanity on the altars of one condition, so that you have a lot of white photographers who still now are outsiders when they go into the black community because what they look for is what I call sidewalk pictures.
Speaker 1: Sidewalk?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) They go to look for who's hanging out on the sidewalk.  They're looking for six pack Joe and his buddies who don't have a job, who don't have our values, who's, who never prepared themselves, who are the kids when they were younger in school were always cracking jokes and never paying attention to class, so that they never developed any skills.  So now their living you know at the bottom.  So, those photographers get attracted to, you know, to these people because they're there.  That's not the community.  That's what I call our lowest common denominator.
Story_ID: 301554
Speaker 1: Sometimes I go to high schools and I give talks to high school students, I show them my pictures and as I'm talking, usually everything works out, well sometimes I go to a school and then there's a little extra conversation happening in the back, extra noise, usually were some guys who think their cute or who think they're smart, whatever, and I stop and I say, "Oh excuse me I have a question for you students.  Have any of you students ever seen a homeless person?"  They all look around because you know a lot of kids who are homeless are in schools too.  (Unclear) they have to decide whether or not I'm talking against homeless people.  I'm not talking against homeless people. No, have anybody ever seen a homeless person?  So, they finally say yes.  I said, "Well do you know how they make homeless people?"  The people look even more like what, what is this guy talking about.  They probably think about me the way I thought about Mike Meyer [sic. Michael Ryder] try to tell me the story about the lion and the man fighting.  I said, "But do you know how they make homeless people?"  I said, "Well people who don't pay attention to class, don't do their homework, don't think that they should get an education would tend to wind up not having skills, but that may not mean anything to you, but let me put it to you this way, I want all of you to look at each other right now.  I want you to look at each face, now twenty years from now you're gonna pass one of these people again and they're gonna be homeless, and the person who you're gonna be homeless is the person who's talking the most and don't pay attention.  So, I want all of you to look at each other because twenty years from now you're gonna see that person again and I want you to know now how that person got from here to there, that it started here."  At that point, everybody's quiet and I go back to my lecture.
Story_ID: 301555
Speaker 1: What year did you reach out and see your mission as being more than just an American one and that it--the African?
Speaker 2: Well, I reached out during the, I guess during the same period of '68 [1968] and '69 [1969] because you know the Black Power movement, which was a very strong movement, in academia with the black studies came to grips with a very basic issue that we African Americans have and--
Speaker 1: Which is?
Speaker 2: Well, we are people who are alienated from ourselves and that manifests itself in so many different ways.  Probably the easiest way of understanding it is our self-hate because we're alienated we can now say you know that an abusive word is a kind word.  We take abuse and we can't get rid of the abuse and we somehow feel the abuse really belongs to us, so we have to pretty it up by trying to find another way to say it.  You know it's like excuse me, you know, and then the other part is that well because we're so alienated we can't relate to our ancestors and the place that we come from.  You know one thing I really admire about Jewish people is that in spite of the fact that they suffered more in the Holocaust then we did in slavery, I mean annihilation, yes we were annihilated too, but differently.  We didn't, the, the ships that came over ten percent of the people didn't make it to here.  The largest cemetery in the world is the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean of the Middle Passage and yes we were tortured and you know none of these things should happen to anybody, I'm not trying to equate, but I'm trying to say in spite of that they didn't stop loving themselves and where they came from, which protects you, any people, which protects you from the constant onslaught of your enemy and your oppressors.  Now the reverse, we, we have got, we, we've done the reverse.  Because we feel alienated, because we don't feel that we have a cohesive sense of identification that is, that manifests itself in a Torah or a nation we, because we don't have a particular, the way we came over our memories have been severed, it's not unusual for people to say you know I didn't come from Africa (unclear) Africa.  So, these alienations, these things have to be addressed.  These things have to be healed.  People have to be healed past self-hate.  They have to be healed past alienation and knowledge of where they come from and they have the embrace that because that's the only way that we will become a powerful force when we can learn to embrace the continental brothers and sisters and their issues and we marry those issues together the way American Jewish community married them with Israel, only then can we become, can we become taken seriously because we take ourselves seriously.
Story_ID: 301556
Speaker 1: In 1994 'Feeling the Spirit[: Searching the World for the People of Africa,' Chester Higgins, Jr.] was your--was it fourth or fifth book?
Speaker 2: Fourth book.
Speaker 1: Fourth book.
Speaker 2: And this book 'Feeling the Spirit' there again shows you how I work.  For decades, I would go back and forth to Africa.  I (unclear) I guess other than my job I was never in America.  I was always in Africa or in the Caribbean or South America or Europe looking for people of African descent, living among them, photographing them.
Speaker 1: And I just want to ask you here, what do we all, and I'm talking about people, people of African descent people, what is it throughout the world that we have in common outside of our skin or being dark?  Is there something?
Speaker 2: There is something.  We--number one there is--we have the most intense relationship that anybody has with religion and the creator and as you learn more about African history and the history of religion you realize, you find out that it was us who invented religion.  The ancient African religion, that became the Egyptian religion, if it had not existed, the Bible never would have come into forth.  If you take Africa out of the Bible, the Bible implodes upon itself.  Everything that says, that gives the Bible foundation happened where, in Egypt.  Where is Egypt?  Africa.  Where did Moses learn his stuff, from who?  From an African.  Where did the whole concept of life after death, resurrection come from?  It came from African people.  The Egyptians why do you think that they made mummies because they, they invented the concept of resurrection.  They wanted to you know keep going to another life.  Where did the concept of soul, the word soul comes from, the word spirit comes from.  It comes out of Egypt.  It comes out of Africa.  All of these theological expressions about the creation, about how the creator works, and about heaven and about the morality of relationship to humans and each other comes out of Egypt.  The Ten Commandments comes straight out of Egyptian text.  It's called the 'Book of Coming Forth' ['Book of Coming Forth by Day'; 'Book of the Dead'].  It's called the period of when the soul is judged after death, before it goes to heaven, before it goes to--in the ancient Egyptian the name would be, the name of the top God, the Christ is Asar.  Greeks call him Osiris.  But it is written.  It is drawn out.  It's in the pages of these of papyrus that are left behind.  It's chiseled in the walls.  I can show you in Egypt where it's chiseled in a wall in 2800 B.C., that's what almost five thousand years ago.  The, the text that the Ten Commandments come out of, it's all there.
Story_ID: 301557
Speaker 1: African people all over have the most intense relationship with the spirit.  It's not unusual--you know you go to--even look at America.  You go to a white church or go to a black church, what's the difference.  There's intensity on the relationship with the spirit and the creator that other people just don't have.  That's foremost, but that's the common denominator and on top of that is a sense of culture and the sense of culture is also about an understanding of the spirit that we live in, spiritual world that we live.  If you look at the West African sculpture of the Benin or people from the Cameroon or the Ashanti you see there's an understanding that we are not alone and that we are with a powerful force, that we are surrounded, that we live inside the cocoon of a very powerful force.  And that's a force that we give some sort of alphabet to and we reach that alphabet by what we call ancestors.  The Bible--what is Moses other than an ancestor?  What is Jesus Christ other than an ancestor?  What is Mary other than an ancestor?  So, we deal with these ancestors by saying well the ancestors represent a particular reality, a particular experience in the human being that we find is so unique and so worthy of remembering and trying to be like.  That formula comes out of Africa, but we don't know that.  You know unfortunately more white people know about the true nature of black people then we know about ourselves.  I mean, yeah we know the distracting stuff.  We know the stuff that's meant to assassinate our character, but we don't know the real stuff.  I mean why do you know that the, in all the museums across the country that the most important collections are the most expensive collections that all these people put their money into is not Europe, but it's Egyptian.  Why do you think that?  And we don't even know.  How many people do you know go and spend time in the Egyptian collection at museums or study, and we don't do it because there's been something very clever done here to us and it's called semantics.
Speaker 2: We're close, we're on sixty seconds break for this tape and I want you to complete this thought about semantics in sixty seconds.
Speaker 1: Our Bible that is the foundation of the Judeo-Christian Bible is called something that we refuse to open up because they called it the 'Book of the Dead' ['Book of Coming Forth by Day'].  Who wants to read the 'Book of the Dead', and that's not the real name.  The name is called, the 'Book of Coming Forth [by Day],' but because they found aspects and pieces of this Bible buried with dead people and they didn't know the name of it they called it the 'Book of the Dead.'  And just that one linguistics has separated us from our true spirituality.
Story_ID: 301558
Speaker 1: Rolling on tape ten.
Speaker 2: And then another thing I must say about people, they say well Egypt, Egypt was a bad place, well I have to say, you know, it depends on the timeline.  Egypt was a country that existed for ten thousand years.  It once ruled the world the way America now rules the world, but people have to realize that George Bush [President George Walker Bush] is one president who may be totally different than Abe Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] who may be have been totally different from Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton].  See you talk about, you know must because the Bible says a pharaoh would not free the Hebrew slaves doesn't mean that all pharaohs, but you know let's talk about that pharaoh briefly.  Let me ask you how much toleration do you think Bush would give if you or I and a delegation went up to Bush and says if you don't let us go we are going to sabotage the whole country next week.  You think Bush will let us then leave?  Or after we get home do you think we won't be arrested and then charged and have to go to court?  But, according to the Bible, Moses left.  He could go home, he could come back again and this time he says well I have a weapon that's stronger than your weapon, throw the rod down.  Okay, magician throw a rod down.  Now, I'm gonna eat up your rods and you're gonna walk out.  You think Bush is gonna let you walk out.  And then you say well I'm gonna bring plagues on you, I'm gonna cause your son, your son who is gonna, your number one son to die, and at that point you think I'm gonna, President Bush is gonna say well y'all get out of here.  Do you really?  So, you know you have to, you have to also look at stuff in context because without context you know you get, you get all strung out, oh my gosh you know the Egyptians are this, the Egyptians are that.  Which one, okay then how do you then square your thought of that Egyptian with how you got Mo- how, how Moses got the one God.  He got it because of Akhenaten.  Akhenaten was the only Egyptian king who decided to abolish the whole cosmology of hundreds of Gods that represented individual aspects of reality and come up with the one. Moses uses the one of Akhenaten, an African, so does that mean, so then all Egyptians are what now.  There was somebody who on one end saying Moses you can't do this, but then Moses then adopts the religion of Akhenaten and says it's gonna be like this, so you know when you don't understand the history you always at the mercy of someone else who is leading you in their particular conclusions and usually those people don't know either, so you have to understand to protect yourself.  You know, I mean what is it the action that if you don't control your own mind, somebody else will, and it, it's just completely true.
Story_ID: 301559
Speaker 1: So, we're gonna talk about one last book of yours and that was in November 2000 you published 'Elder Grace[: The Nobility of Aging,' Chester Higgins, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well 'Elder Grace' you know is sort of--
Speaker 1: 'The Nobility of Aging.'
Speaker 2: 'Nobility of Aging' completed a circle for me because if you remember I picked up the camera out of a love of photographing people who were much older than me that I loved because I always found fondness with older people.  I could sit, I could learn from them.  They never were challenged by my energy like my peers were and they have experience, they could teach me wisdom.  So, I'm revisiting what started me off in photography because when I grew up, I grew up in a community where you now older people were respected, and the people that older people respected were cherished.  But, now we live in a society and I guess when I first came to New York [New York], I love New York except the one thing I found very hard to take about New York is how we treat elder people and it's an urban thing.  We treat older people in our society like they shouldn't be there.  We don't want to see them. We have no time for them, and God forbid if we ever become like them.  So, therefore, we in America have a very negative attitude about aging.  When we consider aging, we consider aging what I call age denial.  What can I do to keep the wrinkles from coming?  What can I do to keep from being flabby or what can I do, you know, whatever to keep me looking and acting young and so we see aging as pathological.  It's kind of like you know one minister said you know everybody wants to go to heaven, we just don't wanna die to get here.  But, with aging in this country because of the advances of medicine, we have the ability to extend our years, but we just don't want to get old to do it.  So, I wanted to try to show a different image of aging to show that aging as I remember as a child, that aging can be a very unique and a very enduring, endearing state of life.  How do I do that?  All I have is a camera, but I think the camera as a tool can be a powerful weapon to help reach people in ways that words can't reach them.  So, I gave myself a problem.  I said well I'm gonna look for four things.  I'm gonna look for people with white hair.  I'm gonna look for people who are over seventy.  I'm gonna look for people who have a countenance of dignity, and I'm gonna look for people whose eyes are connected to their mind, no senility, and I'm gonna approach them and say look you know I don't like the way aging is seen in our society I think you're a perfect example of what aging should look like, I'm an artist, I'd like to make a portrait of you, it won't cost you anything, it will take maybe a half hour to an hour of your time and I'm out of your life.  Over a period of five years, I must have made five hundred portraits.  It wasn't easy in the beginning.  In the beginning, it was very, very difficult because first I couldn't find enough people with white hair because in our society if you have white hair and you're still working there's a tendency for younger people to discount you and think that you're stupid and that you're don't know what you're doing.  So, a lot of people, especially women, would keep dying their hair.  Secondly, and because of that, you, I saw fewer faces.  I would go into churches on Sunday mornings.  I wouldn't stay 'cause I would spend ten minutes here, ten minutes there just to canvas the crowd to see who had white hair and then I'll take another closer look to see well are they about the right age or if they have that countenance and after I have answered those questions would I approach them, tell them what I was doing, give them my card and ask if I could make their picture and send them a picture afterwards; and that's what I've done.  After a while I began to get more and more people and then I began to get not only black people, white people, Asian people and I made a portfolio.  Actually I did this, I started this project first, I tried to get a publisher, excuse me, I tried to get a publisher back in maybe early '80s [1980s], and I think about maybe ten publishers turned it down and the reason they turned it down is because, you know, there's a fear that aging can become like a cold contagious.
Story_ID: 301560
Speaker 1: One day, my wife [Betsy Kissam]--my wife now, my girlfriend then--was looking at this proposal I had done back in the '80s [1980s] and I had called it Shedding Shadows.  She looked at it again and she thought maybe you know I should resubmit it, and I talked to my agent about it and I did some more pictures and I said okay we'll try to go with this and I pulled together this portfolio because I'd like to think, well I think I found, there's a lot of interesting things about the face and as the face ages you know the, the line between gender begin to blur.  Some women begin to look more like their father.  Some women begin, some men begin to take on the characteristics of their mother, well you know why not.  I mean what are we.  If I'm a man, I'm half my mother.  If you're a woman, you're half your father, I mean it's natural.  And then I noticed that there also lines begin to blur between ethnicities at certain ages in certain faces, so like 'Feeling the Spirit[: Searching the World for the People of Africa,' Chester Higgins, Jr.] was a comparison of things, you know, subtly because in 'Feel the Spirit' one page you can see an image of a person who may be in South Carolina and the next page is in, you know Ghana, some part of Africa, some part of Europe, so that I was trying to blur there the lines of nationality and geography in place so that you'd see it was a whole one big family thing happening here.  So, that was my interest with the aging to do this book where you saw all of these different genders and different race, ethnic groups mixed together.  Well, that book we could not sell.  Nobody wanted that book.  I'm sure part of it was, you know, still aging is contagious, we don't want to catch it.  And finally a publisher said to me, they said, "Look we love these pictures, but we only think that your pictures of black people are gonna sell."  Why, because black people seem to be the only people who care about older folks, their older people.  Nobody else seems to care about their older people.  Now, that could be a generalization, but they also said nobody, you know, we know being white that we're not interested in a picture of old people.  We don't be remind, we don't want to be reminded of getting old, we trying to stay young.  So, my agent says to me, "Well it's up to you.  How strongly do you feel about this whole moulage here?"  And I had to finally say look you know I'm gonna, hopefully I can do that other moulage book another day, but an image, a positive image on aging has to get out.  Now if this, if my people have to lead the charge, then so be it.  That's how we would get it out.  So, in doing 'Elder Grace[: The Nobility of Aging,' Chester Higgins, Jr.] I'm looked also into a time issue because I use my vacations to abroad, so I'm finding, I'm having to really do most of my pictures here in New York [New York].  I went and made a couple of visits out to the Midwest, down south, but most of the work was done here.  I had to find out, I had to locate people.  I had to go to, I spent a lot of time in churches, spent a lot of time in senior centers, a lot of time just going in neighborhoods where people, older people lived at certain times of day when older people come out in the afternoon and they do their errands.
Story_ID: 301561
Speaker 1: At the end of it, we have a book ['Elder Grace: The Nobility of Aging,' Chester Higgins, Jr.], and then we find a museum to do a first class exhibition at the, at the New York Historical Society [New York, New York], which is a great museum up on Central Park West near the [American] Museum of Natural History [New York, New York] and what do I do, all of these people who are in this book are living, everybody except one or two in New York [New York], so we make sure that everybody who's in this book comes to the opening and they walk into the exhibition room, which is about maybe whew 200 long by 160 feet and they turn around and I don't know what they're expecting to see.  They were probably, you know, maybe so most of us first time ever into a museum or an exhibition, photography exhibition.  They may have expected to see pictures that were you know sixteen, twenties or something.  Instead, we had blown these pictures up to four feet and five feet tall.  So, here you had portraits of these people that were bigger, several times bigger in life size that you could see the pores in their face.  So everybody went and stood next to their pictures, and we have about a thousand people who came to the opening and all of a sudden the book store sold out of all the books and what you had is that the young people and the people who came to the opening were cueing up in front of each picture waiting for the subject in each of those pictures to sign their book, to autograph their book.  I thought it was incredible that these people had become stars, that this night hopefully had added years to their life all because they were the people that they were and by chance I happen to see them and they allowed me to make their picture and this happened for them and this message to everybody else they became the, the icons, the lighthouses for everybody else to see that hey fundamentally my belief is that aging gracefully can become a work of art, here look at these people.
Story_ID: 301562
Speaker 1: So, when you look back over your career and the mission you've taken on to be declared or to, you know, to leave something behind, what is it you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well, that I was in love with myself and I tried to discover all the many dimensions of myself, myself being not just singular or plural because I am of a people of color, so I've tried to fall in love with me and my people and discover us in all of our manifestation and to embrace that.
Speaker 1: Why do you feel, or do you feel that history is important, if so why is it important?
Speaker 2: Well, I feel it's impor- if it's important enough to hide from you, it's important enough to discover.
Story_ID: 301563
Speaker 1: Do you have any hopes for the black community as it exists today?  What are your hopes (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of course I do.  Well, my hope is that one we would, we'll outgrow being victims because victims can't help themselves.  A victim is someone who goes to a hospital you need help for somebody else.  That we outgrow this whole mentality of victimology and that we forgive ourselves, forgive ourselves and our ancestors for being enslaved and that we arm ourselves with education and with skills to make money, to make, to become something more than consumers, and that with the combination, and that we embrace the totality of our living, the good and the bad, just like the Bible has embraced the good and the bad of people, they exist.  That doesn't mean because there's bad in our life that good is not possible, but when you're so focused on the bad, good can never, can never surface.  We have to get beyond that and embrace a possibility that requires hard work, that requires focusing, and requires applying and having the confidence and the brilliance that comes from that hard work and that focusing.
Story_ID: 301564
Speaker 1: So, as you look back over what you've done to this point, what stands out as something you are most proud of and one of the things you're extremely proud of?
Speaker 2: My next project.
Speaker 1: Which is?
Speaker 2: Which, I don't know.  It was like Romi Bearden [Romare Bearden] said to me, you know he says you know when people ask you what is the best picture you ever made, if you have an answer for that then you might as well stop working.  So, my best picture is always my next.  My whatever signature or something has gotta be my next.  If I've done it already, why should I keep living, why should I keep working.
Speaker 1: Do you have something in mind for your next project?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have several things in mind that I'm doing.
Speaker 1: Anything you can share with us?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, I have, I have a problem with sharing things that are in progress.
Speaker 1: I know I read you, you said that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But tell me, tell me.
Speaker 2: Well, my problem, I have several problems, one is that you know I--things could change. You know you work on things--you know we have cer- you can follow a certain, you can say you have a certain belief and you're going a certain direction, but you know sometimes you may discover things once you've done it, it gives you, you have to make a right-hand turn or become something else and that's because it's a work in process, it's percolating.  You think that oh you'd like for it to be this, but that may not be the way, it may turn and be some--I'd like to think it's gonna, when it turns it's gonna be something better, but research and development so to speak is something I don't talk about.  You know hey it will come out one day; everybody will know it.
Speaker 1: And we'll know what you're working on.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 301565
Speaker 1: So the very last question.  Why did you agree to share your oral history with us?
Speaker 2: Well, I hope that there's something in my life that help inspires someone else depending on where they're at in their life.  There maybe, if there's something in my life that helps you make it work for you fine and that's the only reason.  It's there again the love for myself, the love for my people because that's how we learn.  I've learned because a lot of people spent time with me and they share with me their experiences and from their experiences it's like another way of reading biographies.  I used to read political biographies all the time or commercial biographies.  Having someone talk to you is another level of that biography and I know that out of all, each biography you come away with something that resonate with you that you can use in your life.  So, if there's something out of this that resonates with the viewer that they can use in their life to help them push ahead, to help them go forward, then that's what it's all about.
