Story_ID: 191672
Speaker 1: Good morning Dr. Hare, we're going to get started.  My name is Loretta Henry and I'm going to be interviewing you and Scott [Stearns] is our videographer.  Could you please tell me--could you state and spell your name, including your middle name?
Speaker 2: All right, my name is Nathan Hare, I have no middle name.  The teachers always wanted one but my mother never gave it to me.  So I remain Nathan Hare, actually Nathaniel Hare, but I short--they call me Nathan as a nickname and when I got older I changed it to Nathan--rather, grew up and changed it to Nathan rather than Nathaniel.  The spelling is N-A-T-H-A-N, H-A-R-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you, could you tell us your birth date and where you were born?
Speaker 2: My birth date is April 9th, 1933.  I'm proud to say that coincidently it's the same day as Paul Robeson was born, and then I was born in Slick, Oklahoma, well three miles from Slick, Oklahoma, which is now called a ghost town in, in Oklahoma.  I'm, su--I'm not sure the people that live there would want to call it a ghost town but (laughter) it's a sma--very small place.
Speaker 1: I see, could you please tell us today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is April the 5th, nineteen--I mean 2004 (laughter).
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: It'd be located at 1801 Bush Street [San Francisco, California], which is the si--site of the--where a, a great woman named Mary Ellen Pleasant once lived.  You can see her monument outside, dedicated by the San Francisco Afro American Historical Society [later, San Francisco African American Historical and Cultural Society, San Francisco, California].
Speaker 1: Okay, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In San Francisco, of course.
Speaker 1: And this is also where your offices are?
Speaker 2: My office is here down the hall.
Story_ID: 191673
Speaker 1: We're going to start with five very simple warm up questions kind of People magazine-ish questions.  Just, so just kind of bear with me there (unclear), could you please tell us what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: Oh, I like all food.  I didn't like greens when I was growing as a kid, but I got to college and you come to like everything and so I like greens now as well.  I think my favorite food maybe ice cream.  But it's a close call.
Speaker 1: Okay, what's your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is--I like them all for different reason, but I would say maybe spring, but, summer is good if you don't have to work (laughter) maybe in a place where it's not too hot.  I like winter for the coziness, the comfort of being in a warm place especially if you can hear the radio going (laughter).  And I like, what's the other one left, autumn, it's a good time of harvesting, that was the time when we laid by the crops and we even learned poems about it in school when we were kids, "When the frost is on the punkin and the fodder's in the shock," by James Russell Lowell [sic, James Whitcomb Riley], I mean, I could go on and on with that but (laughter) that's--they're all good--I liked them in their place.
Speaker 1: Good, what's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is--for some reason I hit up on it as, as a child to be light blue.  I, don't--I, I, I like to look at anything that's, that's pretty, but, but I, I, like, I--kinda particular--light blue is my color.
Speaker 1: Okay, what's your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Favorite vacation destination?  I have none.  I, I like going places, especially outside the country.  I haven't been that many places outside the country.  I've been to Paris [France] and London [England] and Algiers [Algeria] and Canada is about it.  But I was to go to Lagos, Nigeria but the meeting got called off, as I got to New York [New York] at the airport, but I could have gone on but I had, I made the decision to come back [to San Francisco, California], momentary decision to come back and, and so I think I have the record for commercial flight to New York City and back.  I left home and went back, went to New York came back in thirteen hours all turn around.  I was back here in thirteen hours had to spend four or five days asking--answering the questions of my co-workers, "How was Africa?" (laughter).  So I should have gone on just for that reason if nothing else.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: A favorite what?
Speaker 1: Phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so; I say a lot of things like, "Some people get hit by a falling tree."  (Laughter) If I think about my bad luck or somebody else's bad luck.  But then recently four people--not one, but four people got hit by a falling tree--literally, and killed. And so I, I don't--I still say it but with a little bit of (laughter) chagrin now.  And, and so I have a lot of sayings I like, but they don't come readily to mind so I guess that's it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.
Story_ID: 191674
Speaker 1: We're going to talk a little bit about your family--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --your family background.  Could you please tell me about your mother, what was her name?
Speaker 2: My mother was named Tishia Lee Davis.  She grew up on a farm near Rosebud, Texas and she was a--I guess her father [Robert Davis] was her--his, his slave master's son and so that was a bit--they had the same name in fact as the slave master and so that was there.  On my father's [Seddie Hare] side--so he [Robert Davis] was a slave, born a slave.  And of course on my father's side his mother [Betty Hare] was born a slave and she was sold from her family at the age of seven and even though she lived to be 104 she never did hear tell of her family again.  So I'm the grandson of two slaves on both sides of my family.
Speaker 1: Okay, when was your mother born, do you, do you have any idea? (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother was born on February the fir--24th, 1901 and that's the day after W. E. [B.] Du Bois was born and I remember that, that-- the twentieth--and Malcolm [X] was killed on the 21st and she was born on the 23rd [sic, 24th], Du Bois was born on the 24th [sic, 23rd] and I think there's something I missed in there, the 22nd was [President] George Washington, the great slave master who was the father of this country, as they say, and I did visit [President] Thomas Jefferson's mansion once and saw the tunnel through which he went to the slave cabins and did all the things that are now becoming famous (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did your--how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother, she was thought to be a ver-rather attractive, not a beauty-beauty, but she was thought to be attractive.  One of the most attractive women around there and she was a no-nonsense person, she always wore a (unclear) a straight razor in her brassier, at night she slept with a, with a .38 [firearm] under her head and, of course we had--it's different climate, we had a rifle in one corner a shotgun in another standing there when I went to get the cows or any other reason to go to the woods.  I carried a rifle just in case I might see a rabbit or something 'cause we would eat the rabbit, if we shot the rabbit and so we, we used the guns in (unclear) saddle and wagons, so it's not quite like it is now in the public mind, but she was tough and she shot at people, I saw her shot at--shoot at one and--at least.  And she cut up--I saw her cut up the guy (laughter) and, and she was tough and she--I, I was ten years old she, she told me to stay back and three white men were dragging a net through our fishing--our pond and getting all the fish out and she, she went and took a shotgun and ran them off and once--even when I was nine we were driving down the, the alley in Bristow [Oklahoma], a town ten miles away and this white guy in a truck was crowding us and we were in the wagon and he, course you were were supposed to say white--I mean mister to all the white guys (unclear) then and so when they got up close to us they said, you know then they said, "Run over us Mr. Son of a Bitch." (Laughter) So she was, she was like that, super bad, super bad.
Speaker 1: Did she share any stories with you about her growing up while her dad's in slavery? (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes she'd talk about it all the time and that was quite, I think an inspiration--an influence because it, it did fill in for the fact that my father and she had broken up and my father had gone--he disappeared when I was about nine years old he did reappear when I was about thirteen and but--then that never worked out again.  But she, always talked about her father, she admired her father so who was almost the perfect person in terms of his being affluent or able to deal with, with life in the rural Texas near Rosebud, he also was very kind to his wife [Ida Davis] and she was a very dark African woman and he always talked about how beautiful she was, what a beautiful black woman she is and to them and that was good so we don't have that, that color thing as as much as it might would have been in the, in the family.  We have some differences in the colors that we, we have in our family, but it was never allowed--I never saw my mother so upset as when my younger sister was about three and she'd picked up, I guess, that meaning of black being negative so she called my niece, who was about four, "You old black thing," my mother almost had a fit (laughter) heebie jeebies and so that niece--I mean that sister has, has never had any such feelings in all of her, her husbands and boyfriends have been rather dark for some reason (laughter).  So, I guess she scared the, the light--the white out of--white--light--the prejudice out of her (laughter).
Story_ID: 191675
Speaker 1: Could you please tell us about your father, what was his name and where was he born?
Speaker 2: My father was, my parent father, was named Seddie, and he--Seddie Hare and he had been born in Tennessee and he came there he had, he had--he was kind of a jack of all trades and master of none and he, he did work hard but, but didn't get much fruit from it and he was a, was a mild nice guy and so he, he took to preaching first he came home from school one day at six years old and the whole deacon board had been met--picked up making bootleg whisky you see we were like--just after the [Great] Depression and they had a surplus of cotton so we worked all the--we had to start chopping at, at, at four and five and picking and helping out the peop--grown-ups and so we worked all, all summer and then the government sent the, the ,the triple A, agriculture administration [United States Agricultural Adjustment Administration], sent out a guy saying that we got a surplus of cotton and they got to pile it all up but so many--so much acres and so the guy--person had the little--the few acres wound up with nothing so the mens in the community switched to making bootleg whisky, you see Oklahoma was a dry state, it was not--liquor was not legalized until maybe 1960, somethin' like that after I had grown up and left there so I came home from school and the whole deacon board had been picked up for making bootleg whiskey, including my father.  He stayed in jail about two months and he wrote to us to work hard and to pray and obey our mother [Tishia Lee Davis] and we did that and so he--that's the kind of person he was.  I--it's a little more complicated than that, but I guess (laughter) that's enough.
Speaker 1: So, what do you know--did he talk about his growing up?
Speaker 2: He did talk about it some, we had a, a lot of ta--chats because, I mean that is to say--the grown-ups would talk a lot about their past and tell the same stories over and over--their favorite stories because at night we would sit out--in the summer time we had to sit outside where it was cool in the yard and there'd be a smoke fire to run--to scare the mosquitoes away and then we would look up at the stars and talk about how--about tha--listen to them talk about whatever they want to talk about and sort of like, "Yeah Ma" slow and then not saying anything for about ten minutes and then somebody would say, "Remember that old time--that ole--that time when we went down to the creek and saw that, that fish jumpin' out," you know, they tell that same old story again and again.  He talked about his mother [Betty Hare], and she had been a slave and all that, but he didn't talk about it as much as my mother did--for reasons you might speculate upon.
Story_ID: 191676
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestry?
Speaker 2: I can only trace it back to, to slavery, to what I've said, I don't know where to go, I don't think that Alex Haley did either for that matter (laughter) but you can go back to Africa but you can't know, know--you don't know where to go in Africa and of course, most of us, as you, I can see has some other--ancestors sneak in there and so you got to trace it in many directions.  Of course, we identify with the African part and so technically we can just got to Africa but where we go in Africa becomes the problem so we sort of globally identify with Africa, that's what I do, I never have been much of a sentimentalist  in that sense and never thought it would be very fruitful and even if I did find where I came from, I didn't come from--I came from Slick [Oklahoma] (laughter) and, and so, once upon a time they came from there and that's very interesting indeed and, and we should  honor that but I never stopped to look it up or anything like that.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.  So, you--can you--what can you tell us about your grandparent--
Speaker 2: About my what?
Speaker 1: About your grandparents besides their being enslaved?
Speaker 2: I can only--I can't tell very much--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --but when I was teaching a course, again, the same course as racism, [HM] Angela Davis had written a book called, 'Women, Class and Race' [sic, Women, Race, & Class,' by Angela Davis] and, and one of the students, white students, she just talked about how black women were locked--as she said, quoted her as saying that a black women were, were locked in that role as women during slavery and I said, "No they're locked out of their roles as women during slavery."  And, and, so they didn't like that very much but we toss, tossed it around and so I called my mother [Tishia Lee Davis] who was in her eighties and asked her, "What did Grandma Nancy"--Grandma Nancy was like my--her father's [Robert Davis] father--mother, "what did Grandma Nancy say about what the women were concerned about in slavery and black women concerned about," and she said, she went on to talk about how her Grandma Nancy coul--talked about her mistress throwing a knife an, an cutting her at one time and her master said, "I didn't pay no $700 for, for Nancy for you to be messin' up her face."  An, and so that is all, about all I heard and she told moving stories about how Grandma Nancy had lost her first set of children.  They were sold away from her and she would--had to--they put away and she, she crossed a river and all that and, and other women.  In fact, on both sides of her family she said her, grandmothers had, had lost their first set of children.
Speaker 1: Do you have any idea where they were, were they in Texas?
Speaker 2: I think they in Texas, but I know grandmothers were in Tennessee.  My, my father's [Seddie Hare] grandmother was in Tennessee and my mother's people were in Texas.
Story_ID: 191677
Speaker 1: What's your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory of growing up is of being in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] with my aunts.  They had the practice in Slick [Oklahoma] of giving the, the child--the baby at nine months to some relative or friend to wean them.  And so I was given to my aunt, who wanted to keep me and she was more affluent.  She had a ten room house which was quite big then.  A Packard, that was a big car then, (laughter) and she was doing very well and, and so, she had one son and maybe five or six years older.  And she wanted to keep me there and so I remember being there and being much--getting much attention from the, the grown-ups.  I remember being frightened by a guy who was, I guess he was coming behind the chair--the table and playing with me but I, took it to be a serious matter (laughter).  And, and sometimes getting, getting sick in the stomach when I--if I'm drinking beer.  They would teach me to drink beer and, and my mother [Tishia Lee Davis]--fine--my grandmother [Ida Davis] finally--my mother's mother finally told her to take me back because they were teaching me to curse and to drink beer.  And so the, the, the thing I remember when I got home, the most memorable thing when I got home (laughter) was walking in the, the--my mother sent me to get a stick of wood for the, for the stove, it's out in the yard about say twenty feet away and I came back and I, got this stick or two and old dog named Sank [ph.] was in my way and I, I stumbled over the dog and I said, "Get out of the way Sank, goddamnit!" and said, you know--and so she's always tell that story, but I remember it very clearly because I was horrified when she started whippin' me and complaining,  I didn't know why, I didn't know what I'd done wrong, I remember that.  And I, I also remember my, my tri--my toys having to share my toys with my brothers and sisters I had plenty of toys and they did not and I had to share them, I brought them from Oklahoma City from my affluent aunt and when my bicycle--I had a bicyc--tricycle rather, had--I, I'd ridden it all the way home, I, I remember going up and down the, the--seems to me in the Greyhound bus, I could fool around in the isle with my tricycle and, and some-- there were several white women making a lot over me there and I remember that ride back and with my grandmother and then I, I remember getting home --being home and one night my father [Seddie Hare] came home in the wagon and ran over my tricycle in the dark and he did not replace it, he never replaced it and so I began at about five years old to imagine getting away from that place, that is to say I would, I would be different not, not so much physically as I would get away sociologically.  I was going to be wealthy, I would have twenty-five acres, I thought that was big, it's not big down there, (laughter) I thought I'd have a, a big white house 'cause all the houses were not painted, when a house was painted, it was painted white in that community and our hou--our house as most black houses were not painted and they were--just had a beat lookin', look to them and had a tin roof.  And so I was going to have, not only two horses, but two big fat horses, our horses were usually razorbacks they were like, like poor and under fed (laughter) and so we called them razorbacks I was going to have two big fat horses, twenty-five acres and going to be a, affluent and all that.  And I tried to interest my little brother [Carl Hare], who was three years younger [sic, two years younger]; in that sort of talk he wasn't very interested.  But I made--draw my little plot and square in the, in the ground and I always was going to do that.  Later on I, I had a course from Allison Davis, who was the first black person to teach full-time at a white university, which happened to be the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  I took a course called the psychology of social mobility from him and he had that theory in one of his books by chance, psycho--'The Children of Bondage,' ['Children of Bondage: The Personality Development of Negro Youth in the Urban South,' by Allison Davis].  No--' Children of Bondage,' and where this fear, of loss of status, when you go from one--a higher status down to a lower status they could motivate the child to want to get out of that and to, and to get ahead, that sort of thing.
Story_ID: 191678
Speaker 1: Could you tell us about your brothers and sisters, your siblings?
Speaker 2: I have--I had about five, about six of them.  On my father's [Seddie Hare] side I had, I had a sister named Ivory [ph.], and she was, she was friendly to the family and we, we we'd would visit, especially with her children, she had a son the same age as I was.  He was two months older than I was even though I was his uncle (laughter) and so we, we were friends and they're all dead now.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And then I had a brother who was half brother but from my mother's [Tishia Lee Davis] first marriage. And he was named Orgie Lee [Lewis] and he's dead.  He died of a heart attack, in his early fifties in Kansas City [Missouri].  He went to the eleventh grade.  And I had a sister named Ida Mae [Lewis], we called her Lovie, she's dead also.  She had gone to the eleventh grade too.  She got pregnant by the teacher and the basketball coach and it was quite a problem.  And then, we had my, my sister, her name Mildred [Tiang], who still lives in Chicago [Illinois] and she began my--after she--she dropped out of high school when she came to live with me when I was going to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] she got back in school eventually, bit by bit.  It took her sixteen years but she got her master's degree and--'cause I found out she was getting in, in the Wilson Junior College [later, Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] without having a high school diploma and if you were twenty-two years old or more and so I told her about that and she got in there and got through that and went on to become a medical sales rep. [representative], married a physician and she's still married to the physician now.  I had a, a brother [Carl Hare] who just died about two years ago, he was the one who was two years younger than I was he became a bus driver, he'd been a super basketball player he, could have been a pro, but it, it's the wrong time and the wrong place.  And then I have a sister [Arnetta Roudez] now who lives outside of Chicago in Hammond [Indiana], who became a teacher--is a teacher now and she is the last one of the brothers and sisters.
Story_ID: 191679
Speaker 1: Tell us what your family life was like?
Speaker 2: Well I don't know what you mean by family life, you mean with the people--with the family (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In the family, the holidays that you shared, any special events or daily life?
Speaker 2: Well we always got together around holidays, we'd do something called making ice cream, you know, you, you put the custard inside of a thing--a steel pot inside a wooden bucket, it had--put ice all around it and then you put extra ice--dry salts, some, something like that to keep it from melting so fast, then you churn it forever (laughter) and then eventually it did turn solid, oh, it was great to eat.  Especially down there, we didn't have many sweets, and many treats on the farm and they made cake and whatever and we did that quite--at the drop of a hat, we did it for Juneteenth [June 19th], July the 4th any, any, any reason we also had the practice of taking the preacher, that is to say the preacher would come from somewhere else, customarily, and so each family would take turns in taking the preacher to their house to dinner after church between then and going back for the evening service and so that was a big thing 'cause you had plenty of chicken and everything, had to cook, cook a lot so the preacher would--would be some left when the preacher had finished and we always sat back and waited so the, the, the guest finished and we were very polite at the table and we were supposed to, say, "Pass this please," and supposed to thank people and be quiet.  We'd, we'd bless the table and said our verses and our--my verse was usually short (laughter) and like, "Jesus Wept" or something like that (laughter), an "God is Love" and that's, that's all we knew, we said it as fast as we could, we did that sort of thing and, and a great joy when I was a child was when some relatives would come out from Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] they'd drive out in these fancy cars, unannounced and, and, they'd get out and say, "Oh, yep," my mother'd [Tishia Lee Davis] start comin' out, say, "yep, don't start nothing," they'd be kidding each other, "don't start nothin' and won't be nothin' goin', don't start no rootin' and tootin' and there won't be no kinda shootin'" (laughter).  So they, they were glad to see each other but they were kidding like they were going to do something, you know mess with you, so then--and one day two uncles my mother hadn't seen since they were little kids 'cause they were--there was a great difference in their ages and they came out unannounced and she didn't quite know who they were, were at first but she finally figured it out and that was--almost had a heart attack, but, but later after that they came--kept in close contact and late--toward the end of her life she even worked for one of them and lived--went to live in Kansas City [Missouri] with her sister and brothers.  They were very, very close her sisters and brothers, were very close and she loved her mother [Ida Davis] very much and her fath--respected her father [Robert Davis], admired her father and loved her mother, she only--the only regret she had--said negative about him was--she always had a negative thought about the fact that she didn't get a chance to go to high school and her brother who was just two years younger did go.  Her father said that she was a good hard worker and she would be able to take care of herself, I think he didn't want her to go off for moral reasons, you know they feared the girl would get into sexual things or something and by going--you had to go to boarding school and so she stayed around and helped the teacher for two years after she graduated from the eighth grade and she got the equivalent of the tenth grade but never got past the eighth grade, in fact my father, she still above my father, my father had gone to seventh grade and so that was the kind of life we had, everybody was pretty close and we had a reunion or two, with the whole extended family, on her side of the family, but they haven't had one in, in, in quite some years now since the '80s [1980s] in fact, maybe in '90 [1990] was the last one.
Story_ID: 191680
Speaker 1: You grew up on a farm [in Slick, Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: I grew up on a farm, yes.
Speaker 1: What was it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that's where I became a farmer at the age of nine.
Speaker 1: I see, what was your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was the oldest male then.
Speaker 1: Could you describe the farm, what kind of chores did you do?
Speaker 2: Well, you got up before dark and you, you, you did everything, you milked the cows, you, you slopped the hogs, fed the hogs you did--you cut the wood for cooking or whatever and you got ready to catch the bus at about seven fifteen or whatever and then you went to, to school and you came back and you, you fed the hogs you, you, you found the cows, you milked the cows, you cut the wood for, for the night for heat and then you came in and you might--and in times when we had the battery for the radio then we would listen to the radio and then we would go to sleep and get--we had only lamps--lamplights so it was hard to see, but we studied by lamplight and when I was a senior we got really bright electric lights, rural electrification they called it--and so that was quite something, but, but all the time we didn't have that kind of lighting, but we, we studied, in fact I stopped reading books for a while because I wanted to be a boxer, I picked up that idea when I was in San Diego [California] and I thought I was ruining my eyes by reading too much.  And I had been reading--they had always discouraged me in San Diego, they had wanted to stop me from reading too much, the, the relatives and the neighbors and all the old folks did that.  I had to fight them very hard to try to read, because my goal was to read a book a day and at the time, I'm, I'm getting ahead of my story, I'm still back in Slick on the farm and there, it was quite different.
Speaker 1: Was it a large farm, about how many acres was it?
Speaker 2: Well, we had maybe--we rented at first, we were, we were, we were sharecroppers at first and tended the farm.  A sharecropper pays a certain amount and the, the sharecropper shares whatever, whatever he produces, say a third of it or fourth whatever's the agreement ahead of time and we did it both ways at different times and when my mother [Tishia Lee Davis]--when, when the war broke out, World War II [WWII], my mother migrated--we migrated to San Diego where she worked in the [U.S.] Navy yard [Naval Base San Diego, San Diego, California] and she saved money there very well and she got some from her, another source and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: -- bought a farm (laughter).
Speaker 1: Thank you, could you tell us something about the town you grew up in, Slick [Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: Slick?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well, well Slick, I looked in the census manual it, it was listed as having 301 persons in 1950 and 151 persons in 1960, however, we did not relate to that town alone, it had its own town limits and the sign said, "This is Slick, Oklahoma", but we, we related from miles around a radius of twenty-five miles at least ten in each direction and people would come from these schools, they may have a little elementary school out where they lived but when it came to high school they all would come by bus to Slick High School, Toussaint L'Ouverture High School [Slick, Oklahoma] named after Toussaint L'Ouverture, the great Haitian general.  And that was not so much itself, but we lived out there, all around on the farm and there was a good time, we had a lot of pecans--you'd be eager to go and just--you know--pecan tree, while you're looking for the cows and just eat pecans 'til you got filled up and we would do things like go swimming and, we--when we went to pick wild berries we would go into the pond because we didn't learn to swim until we went into San Diego.  And I learned to swim--I knew how to swim years before mother would allow me to go swimming because I learned to swim while she was away working and she didn't believe I could swim when I was fifteen years old she was betting me I said, I can swim she was betting me I couldn't so I showed her how to swim so she always let me go swimming after that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I've been swimming since I was twelve.
Story_ID: 191681
Speaker 1: Could you please tell us sights and sounds and smells that you remember?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --from childhood?
Speaker 2: Well I, I remember opossum, they call 'em opossum, they call it possums and they could smell them from miles around, at least a mile and they--when they had let out their scent.  And one, one time my, my brother got urinated on by one and he, he had, had a hard time getting the scent off him, his clothes and everything--it's, it's what, it's for days.  So I remember that smell, we had quite a exposure to feces because we didn't have indoor toilets and, and so and people would, not bother to go bathroom they very smelly toilets you know the--they outhouses and they were just so smelly and so people would just do their thing--where--find some place and--wherever they could find some, some tree leaves or something and, and they would do that and that--so you might step in something every now and then, and so we smelled that.  Otherwise we smelled the, the normal, rural farm nature.  The one--when you got up in the morning you smelled the dawn and you could see--hear the roosters crowing and, and they wake you up and then you get up and it was quite a good feeling to get out, to get the wood everything, come back, it was my job to light the fire and start everything like that as the oldest boy--male and so that was good, smelled good.  The morning, but I don't remember too much, I didn't go around smelling things really, tell the truth (laughter).
Story_ID: 191682
Speaker 1: What was your elementary school [at L'Ouverture Elementary School, Slick, Oklahoma] like?
Speaker 2: Well my elementary school was quite intriguing, I had a teacher name Miss Ruff [ph.] in kindergarten and we s'pose to start school at five, they called it primer then, not kindergarten and my mother [Tishia Lee Davis] was tryin' to get us out early and, and, stuff so she got me in--most people would start--they needed them at school to fill the quota and to justify keepin' the school and so I would--I went at four and a few months and I remember going to the school that morning--school bus, an older guy saying, "You think you a man don't you?" (Laughter) but anyway I got to school and, I did--I already could draw, do one and Z's, one and Z's I put them all on the board, the older kids in second grade were quite impressed and I--so that's the first day in school.  And I learned something about my own ancestry that I probably (laughter) won't go into that, that morning from one of the older guys.  But, but, nevertheless, he, he--it was good to, to be in school.  Now I can read the whole--pretty soon, pretty soon I could read the whole book, Miss Ruff, in the first grade, said that we would be able to go to second grade if we finished--when we finished that book she got me each day to do two pages like the other kids and one day she was making costumes for the eighth grade play and two eighth grade girls were taking our reading lessons presiding over them while she made the costumes and so when, when I got to to my two pages I, I went on to show them I could read more and they said, "Miss Ruff, how much do--they supposed to read because you know they has to have two pages?" and she didn't even look up she said, "Two pages--as much as they can." And so I read through the whole book, well, my sister was in the next grade level and she didn't want to put me in the same grade as my sister so she gave me free run of the cabinet, they had a cabinet of books and they had some, some black books--some colored books in there that had been put out in a sundown town, the sundown town said--they have a sign up saying, "Nigger, read and run, if you can't read, run anyway."  And I used that when I was--started teaching at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] students hang around at the end of the semester to get their grades, put a sign up saying, "Students, read and run if you can't read run anyway."  But the chairman told me to take it down (laughter).  But in any case, I read through these black books, like I said, "Tick tock says the clock it is day Johnny Mae out of bed sleepy head up, up and away."  And I saw books by Booker T. Washington he--his house, house caught a-fire and he grabbed--he ran in and grabbed the Bible and saved the Bible and some clothes on a stick and a red bandana on a stick and went out into the world to become a great man as they said, so, I mean all that stuff, is, it's fascinating, to, to be exposed to that books where black kids were in there--I mean we would sing about black people though in morning devotionals James Weldon Johnson, remember a poem that he'd written he had been also the president of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I identified with Nat Turner because my name was Nathaniel my father--the, the  uncle that I had been named for was named Nathaniel and so Nat was short for that they called him Nat and so I knew Nat was a contraction of Nathaniel and Nathan so I, I, I, identified with Nat Turner and also because he was tough (laughter) and we, we'd, we sang all the time, or  by John Brown, we saw John Brown's vitalizer, something in the grave, I forgot all that, but we sang about John Brown.  We looked up to all that and I though it was fascinating, every morning, for morning devotion and so that's the way it was in Slick [Oklahoma].  I went to--by, by for--fourth grade I had thought of psychologically dropped out of it because my mother got burned and--had to go to the hospital for about couple of months and meanwhile my sister came--my older sister came back from Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] to care for us and we didn't really mind her too much and so we had to change--all--most of the teachers kept being transferred--substituted for that year for some reason in the fourth grade and so I did not have any interest anymore and, and through the fifth and sixth and seventh, eighth grade and so on, so I missed fractions as an example, when I got to--we went to San Diego [California] and--when I was eleven in the seventh grade and that compounded the problem because I was the only black in my class invariably and, and the white teachers would not even look at me let alone recognize me if I call--raised my hand up some other person was saying that the other day, I'd say, this, this is about me how the teachers would not call on her, but, but they would not call on me and so I just opted out.  Well one day the social science teacher, she was white, of course, and she took a class down the street a couple of blocks to the library to ta--to get a library cards and she told us to take out three books and I was going to take out--I took out three novels, she said, "What are you, what are you," only time she ever looked at me, she said, "What are you taking?" and it, it she was curious about what I was taking I only had three novels she said, "Well, these are novels, well okay."  She let me have 'em and so I took them out.  I, I decided I wanted to be a novelist, but the grownups always all told me that I would starve to death if I became a writer so I switched to boxing.
Story_ID: 191683
Speaker 1: What kind of a student would you--are--you were--you enjoyed school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I, I liked it okay.  I thought I was smarter than anybody else, you know pound for pound age for age (laughter) or whatever.  I, I found out there are a lot of other people left Slick [Oklahoma], in fact I was just through there early on, about two years ago and one of the persons who came with me and my wife [HM Julia Hare] down to--in the car was--as a person signifies, and so she says, "Was Nathan smart when he was in Slick?" without a moment's hesitation the guy says, "Nathan's the smartest person that ever came through Slick," (laughter).  So, so I was always a good student at--when I--at-when I did get back to the--my grade--my class, classes I came back from San Diego [California] and it's a long story, but I, I finally got back into my classes and shocked my, my--I still made D's mind you, but I, I, by first semester--but--therefore I was not salutator--valedictorian, but salutatorian at the end of the, my graduation, but they didn't have the--the the teachers didn't have the valedictorian  because it would be to anachronistic to have somebody else get it and so I came to the fore when my tea--my English teacher gave a standardized test to see who was going to rec--represent the school and the state [of Oklahoma]--they had all the black high school students would come to the university , black university and take these test to see--the--to--and they get first prize, second prize and she gave these test to see who could represent her class and she sent away and got them from Kansas and I, I doubled her A students (laughter) she gave it again, she gave it again, it happened, it kept happening so she, she, said "How come you hadn't been doing your lesson?"  I said, "Well, you wouldn't let us choose our own books."  And, this that and the other so anyway I did--went out there and won first prize in the whole state and, and that's why I had to go to college because I never had any intentions of going to college and I was going to be a boxer and one night when I got--graduated because I won about six of those things I had to get up on the stage six times when I was graduated and so when I was visiting my girlfriend, we had taken a short cut through the woods (laughter) and so when I--we came out of the woods there was a light shining in our faces, you know, the car lights, my principal was the person in the car and he had his son in the car, illegitimate son by a previous marriage he wanted to get him educated and everything and he wanted me to go to college with him so it would help him with his lessons keeping him kinda anchored and so he took me back home to where my mother [Tishia Lee Davis] was and my mother had a--he had been there already and my mother had my clothes in a foot locker and they, and they persuaded me to go out to Langston [Oklahoma] and they said I could get a job typing because I had won the typing championship too in that same contest, statewide and so I went, I went out there and they didn't have any full-time typing jobs they told me.  They didn't want me to type too much in those days anyway, and so I wound up being a dishwasher for twenty-five days--twenty-five hours a week my first two years and so I quit.
Story_ID: 191684
Speaker 1: Could you tell us about, in Slick [Oklahoma], what--was it an all-black town or was it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --mixed or what was the relationship between the, the races there?
Speaker 2: Slick was a town, predominantly white town as was the area surrounding it 'cause Slick was not just a town it was surrounding area of all the people related psychologically, sociologically to each other, and so I was in that and they were--we were set apart, we knew each other, everybody knew each other, at least you didn't know them personally, you knew who they were and you spoke to everybody even if you passing them from behind as strangers, white and black strangers would, would speak, unlike here in the, in the, in the city.  And so, we--was very much separated it was like a terror 'cause they might lynch you at any moment at the drop of the hat, we, we knew people that had been lynched and we knew, heard of it and Oklahoma had a high lynching rate because of the combined both the West and South and, and so, we had that there.  We couldn't ride in the front of the bus, we couldn't sit and eat in a restaurant and all that, and we had separate schools and, and separate buses and when we were walking to school if our bus was broken down, which usually was the case on a rainy day, then the white bus would pass by and they--they would try to--the driver tried deliberately to run in the water skid water on us kids as we pass by and the white kids would, would lean out and say--call us niggers and we'd call them peckerwoods and things like that, yell at them and stuff, and back and forth and it would keep on going.  And, and so that was the kind of way it, it was. If we pass one we'd, we'd usually get in some kind of fight, it was almost like a, a kid play too-fun thing too because you got a great joy out of doing battle with them a little bit (laughter).  But, but so it was, it was like that and when I was ten years old, my mother [Tishia Lee Davis]--well there was a bus getting ready to go between Slick and Bristow [Oklahoma], it went for maybe a year or two and my mother said, "Well this is going to--it's going to be segregated we're not going to be able to ride up front and that's not right," and, but, but--by chance she sent us to--with a bucket of cream you could skim it off the milk over time and then sold the cream in the town ten miles away and we'd get things to buy stuff with, money, and we'd take ten cents apiece to go to what they called nigger heaven, which was the balcony of the movie theater that they allowed black people in.  They had two theaters and one they allowed black people in, sit upstairs, sometimes we'd throw paper down on the white peoples head (laughter) but anyway-who did it, or where.  But any case we went to nigger heaven and so--but I sat on--at, at the front seat when I got on the bus 'cause mother said it was going to be wrong, but a driver pleaded me for thirty minutes, I'd say, to, to move and I wouldn't move, my little brother [Carl Hare] was scared he was leaning over my shoulder because he was scared.  The ruckus was going on, he kept pleading but I rode.  He would not--I would not leave and he would not bother me, and then mother come 'round with a shotgun and so therefore we ro- I did this, you're talking about '43 [1943], this is thirteen years before Montgomery [Bus Boycott] and so I always had the policy after that to not go past rear of center.  I would stand in the front rather than go to the back to sit and I did it all over and I tell, you know, anecdotes about it (laughter), but certainly--I was in Oklahoma not Georgia, maybe Georgia I wouldn't be here to tell the story but that's the way it was down there then.
Story_ID: 191685
Speaker 1: Did your family attend church?
Speaker 2: Well yes, my family--everybody attended church [at Landmark Baptist Church, Slick, Oklahoma] pretty much.  Maybe a man might not--some man might not, but he'd be thought to--he'd be called a sinner man everybody knew him as a sinner man.  But everybody attended church and, and that was a central focus for the community.  They had what they called entertainments, church entertainments where they would put things, and the big thing was the institutes where they would have people come from miles around to the institute where they--all the women would bring food and you could--it and they would beg you to, to eat some of that good food (laughter) you'd try to eat as much as you could of everybody's but, but so--my father [Seddie Hare], as I said too, became a jack leg--mother [Tishia Lee Davis] called him a jack legged preacher when, when I was about six right after he got out of jail for making bootleg whisky, started bootlegging religion I guess and so he was a preacher and, and he never really had a church but he did sit up there with them and preach and he was a greatest--they thought he could pray better than anybody else.  And--but--so we had religion.  I myself didn't take much to it, but I, when I was about eleven, my friend, my best friend was a son of a preacher and came out time to take the preacher and so he'd get twenty-five cents a Sunday for each member and so if he got me converted to join the church it meant his father gonna to get twenty-five more cents which was a lot of money then and so he kept on, on me all day long to join the church and he came to our place and went back that night, he, we had, had the large sacrament going away, "Eat the Lord's body through the bread and the wine through the"--and so I was there, and he said, "Go on, take it you, gotta join." and so I said, "I don't know what to say." and so he said, "Tell them that you've been born again and you want to be saved, you were born again and pray for you that you may grow strong."  So I walked up there and the preacher didn't know what was going on 'cause it was out of place during the Lord's supper for me to come up there and I knew I was a good kid my mother sitting there watching--looking at me rollin' her eyes and so I couldn't sit back down 'cause I saw my mother had seen me stand up and so I went up there and so he said, he [sic, I] finally whispered to him, "I want to be strong," and so on and so on and so (laughter) he told me to sit down for a minute and so then he kept on with the Lords' supper, I'd missed the wine, you know, (laughter) a little sip of it.  I was really going to get that guy for that, but anyway I found I had joined at the wrong time of the year because he--you supposed--it was summer time they didn't have much money and my mother didn't want to be buying me a suit you had to get a new type of suit to get baptized in and so they did baptize me took out--I was the only person baptized and took out--grabbed you by the nose and they said, "Baptize you in the name of the son, father and some kind of ghost," and dunk me under.  That guy almost drowned me (laughter) but in any case, I was then a Christian and, and I tried to--I've tried to be what the Christians hold as an ideal but I don't I don't belong to the faith--or any other faith at this point.
Story_ID: 191686
Speaker 1: 'Kay, when you were in high school [at L'Ouverture High School, Slick, Oklahoma] were there any teachers who influenced you or any events that influenced you? (Simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh yes, in high school of course Miss Vochae [ph.], Mrs Vochae was the English teacher and she influenced me because I became her favorite student.  And that's how she influenced me, she influenced everybody 'cause she was tough.  Everybody respected her she was a little woman she wore about five--size four shoes or something, but she, she, she--everybody, obeyed her, the toughest of guys and whereas the older, the big strong looking man, course they wouldn't, they wouldn't obey them at all and so she did influence me I guess I, I learned something about the literature and, but more so was also with Mr. Garrett [ph.] the principal who took me to college [at Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma] for (unclear) and sort of insisted on that and he did that to everybody he could and he was quite an influence to everybody around there and, and you talk about role models now I said, "We don't need role model, if you don't have role models you kinda in the dark, what you need is role makers.  Somebody who--to make roles and, and leave us a role maker, you don't--instead of--trying to get the kids to be like somebody else put this thing for them to do in their lives, in their world, but success activities out in the black community and pay them, whatever, award them give them honors for all the things."  In fact, I've said that once in, in Sacramento [California] and then NAACP [the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] picked it up as ACT-SO [Afro-Academic, Cultural, Technological and Scientific Olympics] back in about '75 [1975] and so I said '75 [1975] maybe by '80[1980] they had done that.  But any case, that's what we need to do more of, not the middle class like they were doing it but I mean the low income people need to put activities, success activities like reading and doing good things in their world and that will motivate them.
Story_ID: 191687
Speaker 1: You moved to San Diego [California] for a short time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Could you just--briefly tell us why the family moved to San Diego?
Speaker 2: Well during around about 1945 we were in the middle of the war [World War Two, WWII] and mother [Tishia Lee Davis] had been getting a check from my--her oldest daughter's [Ida Mae Lewis] pregnancy--mother's daughter had off to work and left her child with her and so she was getting a check and she'd saved all that money meanwhile she got the chance to, to go to San Diego with another family--another couple who was going out there so--it--they--allowed us to go out there with them and, and we put chicken in a buck--bucket and, and they put pepper--black pepper or something on it to keep--preserve it 'cause we ate great and we ate chicken until as long as it lasted driving all the way out to San Diego the car would break down sometimes but he would--he was a mechanic origin and so we, we'd get on our way eventually.  So we got out there and she worked in the--she went there to work, in the [U.S.] Navy yard [Naval Base San Diego] and she worked there and saved her money again, and--but she had a, a man who she was in love with in Oklahoma, he was out in California too.  That's another thing not in that town , but nearby and--but when he went back to live in Slick [Oklahoma], she said--she went back too but she got laid off a month and she took that opportunity to go back to Slick even though she told us that she was going to come back to San Diego we knew she wasn't going to come back to San Diego and so we went back to Slick, but in San Diego we lived in project housing, it--it's gone now which was out--which was built just for, for migrants with the white migrants over there and the blacks, mo--most of the people on our two blocks were black, but, but they all lived there by chance it was, it was a, a near the boundary so, so that high--as a junior high school children--as a seventh and eighth grade student, ninth grade student, I had to go with the single family people, the white school where they had only 'bout twenty blacks out of about 2,000 whites.  And so we went over there all the time and I was the only one on my block going over to that school because all of the other kids were in the elementary school or either they were up, up in high school and not in my junior high school.  And my last year two other guys did join me at that school but--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I see--
Speaker 2: --but, it was fun, that was a great two years of my life.  I thought growing up I always longed to go back there when I grew up, to, to San Diego to that place where I had been and so it was great.
Story_ID: 191688
Speaker 1: Could you tell us about your boxing--on its--you told us you're a boxer?
Speaker 2: Well, boxing was more of a dream in that I, when I was about twelve years old I was boxing a guy who was taller and bigger than I was and he would stand up on the ridge and get the advantage and would, would put his stomach about even with my (laughter) shoulders so I hit him in the stomach once, I closed my eyes and hit him in the stomach he fell and then all the guys jumped up and so I decided that--I was reading a book a day then so I switched over to reading a book on boxing (laughter) so I put up a little--a little bag in the clothes line fence and hung it up and put rags in a duffle bag an, an cut the, the--like they told me to cut the ends off the, the leather gloves and I would--I drew the face on the bag and I would, I would teach myself how to do it and I had that dream.  I--if I had stayed in San Diego [California] I would have gotten into boxing then. But I went back to the farm [in Slick, Oklahoma] where they didn't have boxing I had gotten a hold to-for-boxing gloves, I had gotten a speed bag, I that's why I'm very good on the speed bag (laughter) and so, and I had a duffle bag that my father [Seddie Hare] would try to--when he came back briefly, would try to get me not to hit it but I, I did have that, that dream and then I grew up and went to college [at Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma].  I got into--I found out that blacks could--they let--they started my senior year in college they started letting blacks box in Golden Gloves in Oklahoma.  And so I got into Golden Gloves, I got all the guys together that wanted to go and train--we practiced up by training up, we were in really good shape and I, I'd won the regional championship, there's div--the west side of Oklahoma and then went to the tournament and got robbed I was not the only one that got robbed.  Six guys got robbed, without regard to race anybody who's not boxing for the Tulsa [Oklahoma], the host city lost to split decisions 'cause the referee with--Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] was say who'd won and then the two judges would go for Tulsa and so (laughter) they had some very bad decisions.  I didn't have the worst one that night so I didn't win the, the state because of that.  But then I went--I graduated and went to--I had gotten a fellowship to, to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] because my professor, [Dr.] E. R. Edmonds, had insisted that I--he was also the dean of men, and, I--he told me to fill out this application for the Danforth Fellowship and I had not done it so he said, "Bring that back by Thursday, you don't there's going to be hell to pay."  So I filled it out and I came back.  I did get the Danforth Fellowship and they paved the way to get the Ph.D. And I went to University of Chicago and there I started boxing on the side and I, I went--I did box--I--well I went to the finals there but I lost to a guy.  I, had, I had a way of getting a cold every time I got to the finals because I think it's bronchitis or something or some kind of respiratory thing.  But I would always--of course in the winter time when you're boxing indoors and I would--by the time you get to the finals I would have a cold and I just wouldn't be myself.   In fact, the guy that I lost to nevertheless, feel pretty good about it--beat him anyway because he, he knocked everybody down he fought, including the national champion, but the national champion got up and won the decision.  But, but he didn't knock me down nobody, knocked me down, one--except one time and he didn't--nobody knew that he knocked me down then I got up and they had to stop the fight and pulled me off of him.  But anyway, so I sorta did this on the side because everybody said you, you shouldn't fight.  It isn't like it is now where coloreds guys will fight sometimes and they said well you shouldn't fight and so you're going to ruin your brain and kept on doin' so I--I stopped and then I'd go back, stop and then go back and finally when I, I quit it all together, but when I went to--I got my Ph.D. And went to teach at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] I decided to go ahead and try to box awhile (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so you did--
Speaker 2: --and I did turn pro.
Story_ID: 191689
Speaker 1: When you finished high school [at L'Ouverture High School, Slick, Oklahoma] and you were--you had to--you were going off to college [at Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma], what did you--what were your goals--what were you--what did you think you wanted to do in college?  What--I mean, what did you--what were you planning on studying--what were you--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, when I went to college I didn't have any goals, any, any career, career goals other than become a boxer.  I, I--when I left there, course you had the war--the Korean War come up and, and, and then eventually I met my wife [HM Julia Hare] and so all that kinda kept me there, but when I had no, no goals--I majored in English because Miss Vorchae [ph.] had been the English teacher and she was, she was kinda real close and so I, I majored in English at first.  I quit because, I think she gave me a B and I got A's and I didn't have--I couldn't have B in my major and they tried to beg me back into it but I stayed out of it and so I had no goals except the only thing is--that mattered to me was I was a good guy, I was a guy who supposed to do well an, an so therefore I studied and did good, I did well (laughter).  You know even so, even though I had no real interest in going anywhere I switched over to sociology simply because my--this professor, who was a fraternity advisor asked me, he said, "Well, you don't know what you want to be, then, you can be a--you can go into sociology", which is what he was teaching because you can--sociology is pre law, pre social work, pre, pre whatever you want to do so I switched over there and(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --and it just sort of drifted into that, but I can't say that I had a goal of going to college and being anything through college.  I simply knew that I was going to be outstanding, I thought I was going to be rich and, and famous, but I didn't--more so rich, but I didn't become either one of those things (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --and, and so therefore I didn't achieve tha--the goal, the only goal I had and never really achieved, but, but, I, but if you're going to be at college you're going to be the best student in the class.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I always knew.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I would make the high score on a test, if the teacher read--if the essay--if they read my paper and so therefore I didn't--that was what I felt.  But I had no goals.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Like after career (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --and that.
Speaker 1: So, you went to Langston College [sic, Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: Yes, Langston University.
Speaker 1: Can you describe how was it coming from a small town and going to, to college (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right--
Speaker 1: --what was college like for you?
Speaker 2: --I went to a small college town, in fact it went down academically at that time, it's improved a lot now, but my English teacher and math teacher were better in high school than in college, but I did--it was a small town also, 400 people in it.  The, the college was up about a half hour from there in a, in a red clay place.  We didn't have paved roads at first, we got paved roads now but they didn't have paved roads at, at first.  No telephone, in fact they had got a telephone where you can crank it up and the woman who fed her chickens would come and sometimes hook you up to somebody--take a long time getting off getting the--your call through and you had to come back sometime and get a--when she had gotten through she'd let you now and so it was that kind of place, we were out--it was the first all black town in, in the United States, even though other towns have laid claim to that Langston [Oklahoma] was started in 1897 and I--when I went back to get the--at the alumni award for Langston University in 1975 they were talking about making--closing Langston and--for integration purposes and everything, so I said, well, Langston was here and according to the state of Oklahoma, I say a whole black--across the pages said Langston until I left Oklahoma because they were closing the theat--the, the news was that they were going to close Langston, yet here was this speaker is saying that Langston will outlive Oklahoma, I said, "Langston was here ten years before there was a state of Oklahoma and Langston will be here ten years after there is no longer a state of Oklahoma,"  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) so, that's--what I--it was a--great place.  I was taught by some good people there too, great people like Melvin Tolson, and of course [Dr.] E. R. Edmonds himself he lived to became outstanding too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in the, in the civil rights era.
Speaker 1: Did you--were you involved in any student activities at college?
Speaker 2: Well, in college I, I didn't, I, hung around with my wife [HM Julia Hare].  I was in a fraternity, but they lulled me into it and I sort of was involved in that I didn't become president until--because my senior year as the president, the guy who did become president asked me to campaign for him, he got me for himself and I voted for him, he voted for himself and he still won only by one vote (laughter).  But any case I was in that and I was dormitory director, in my--when I was--quit the dining hall--in a huff with the boss I became the dormitory proctor, then became a freshman tutor and I got the best tutor award that out of all the eight tutors in the--in the college and then I just was around them things, I was not a very sociable person per se, but was, involved quite the social fabric.
Speaker 1: Okay, were you married then? When you were at school? (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I married two years after--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I was out of college.
Speaker 1: Okay, Okay, so--and, and you worked while you were in school?
Speaker 2: Yes I had to work because I had to have my full room and board as well as my tuition and in the summer time I usually work on getting my tuition for the next year, with, with some notions of maybe not going back but, but then, by time August come you couldn't wait to get back you were thinking about the people there and everything and so--and it was no longer any question once the war [the Korean War] broke out and once I met my wife, I was going to go ahead and graduate--
Story_ID: 191690
Speaker 1: --but I had a fight before I got the Ph.D. [at University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and then I got the Ph.D. and then I fought--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I see.
Speaker 1: --I had five fights all together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In fact I won my fight, got my picture with [Muhammad] Ali in Ebony wrote an article saying all the great black boxers, had a picture of my last fight in there and then other places in Jet, six pages in Jet and stuff like that.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: And so I was on the (unclear) and went in and started at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], they put that in there too, my last fight.
Speaker 2: Okay, could you--I just want to go back a second.  Could you please tell us the name of the church that you attended in Slick [Oklahoma]?
Speaker 1: The church I attended was called Landmark Baptist Church [Slick, Oklahoma].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it, it no longer exists, it's, I saw it two years ago, what's left is a little pile of debris.  It had fallen through the years, deteriorated into nothing but a little pile of brush, boards and things.  And so--but that was there then.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: As a landmark (laughter) in a way.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, it was, it was.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All I can say I guess about that church.
Story_ID: 191691
Speaker 1: When you were at Langston [University, Langston, Oklahoma] what was your major?
Speaker 2: I majored in English and switched over to sociology.
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: I was at--I went to school in 1950 I got out in 1954.  I graduated in 1954 and then I went to University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and sociology, of course--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --continuing.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And, I sort of, I wanted to switch back to English, In fact, but I couldn't do it financially at the University of Chicago.  And a teacher tried to get me to stay at Langston another semester in English and switch over to English, because I had a minor in English and, I--she would give me all--any kind of fellowship that I was given in sociology but I didn't want to stay another semester, I look back and think I should have.
Speaker 1: Okay were you in the service--[U.S.] Military (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I--
Speaker 1: --could you tell us something about that?
Speaker 2: --so I went into the Military and I went to--I went for six months mil--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: --[U.S.] Army Reserve.  Actually six months active duty which was a bad mistake 'cause I could have gotten a lot of boxing experience if I had stayed in there.  But also because I wasn't really ready when I came out to really get going, but I was married too, that was another reason I had to kinda' get out.  And I stayed six months in the Army and, and I then went back to Chicago [Illinois] and eventually went to get--finish the Ph.D. in sociology.
Speaker 1: So the six months was--you were like still in school at Langston?
Speaker 2: No, I was, I was in school at--I already had a master's degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was, that was lil' odd too, I was a little too old to be in the Military and be anything--I never put my stripes crook--straight, but they wouldn't bother my stripes (laughter) because I guess the inspector come by and I guess he threw up his hand they wouldn't say nothin' and like I got somethin' on my--if I got somethin' on my bib he'd tell me I ought to go and get it--change my clothes, but he'd make the other guys do push-ups.  'Cause, of course, the com--the regiment commander was a boxing fan and I knocked a guy out of the ring in his lap one day, he was sitting by the ringside (laughter) and so I could do no wrong.  And I got--even when I didn't fight you're supposed to get a three day pass when you got a--won a fight, I got a pass whether I fought or not and so I was more clean cut these guys were like--more like from the slums and more like delinquent.  And so, younger, a little younger too and so they like the fact I was clean cut and winning and so that was, was good and I--in fact the other guys used to come and ask me, they were better, at least than I was as a boxer.  But they'd come and ask me to get the athletes off, get the athletes privileges and because of the, the guys fondness for boxing.
Speaker 1: Okay, you had mentioned that some of your friends don't know you by your name Nathan, they call you Champ, could you explain how that nickname came about?
Speaker 2: When I was in college in my freshman year they--there was some older guys who, who fell into a little argument with me and so they sai--told me about a guy who could beat me up whose father was--had been a professional boxer, he was a real muscular guy.  And so they set up this match on one Saturday morning and went behind the dormitory and I hit him and knocked him out and so the guy who was with me jumped up and said, "The champ, the champ, the champ." And so I guess he took it from there because the people just started calling me the Champ, calling me Champ.  A lot of people knew me only as Champ and that is what everybody called me, including many of the teachers call me Champ and that's where I get it--I guess that answers the question--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --was what happened to the name Champ, how that came about, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 191692
Speaker 1: So you've graduated from Langston [University, Langston, Oklahoma] and you've been in the [U.S.] military and you decided to go to Chicago [Illinois] to University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], what prompted you to go there?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what were you going to study?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I went to University of Chicago before I went to the Military.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: And, and so--course I--see I was--oh I had been a poor athlete because of my hip and my osteoarthritis in this, in this leg.  I was--which is what, what kids get for doing too much exercise and too much work, overindulging physically and so we didn't know what it was then, but nevertheless I--on the basis of that without examining me they gave me 4F, so I was 4F through Langston.  And then when I went in--when I told them I was moving to Chicago they they examined me and give me 1A, so then I had to take the selective service exam in Chicago to stay out of the military and when I went to teach at Virginia State [University, Petersburg, Virginia], they called me, I told you about that story.  About how they inducted me and I got those induction papers cancelled--if I was coming the [U.S.] Army Reserve and I could stay the rest of the year as a teacher and then go into the Army Reserve.  So I went to the University of Chicago because I won a fellowship to--in sociology because my sociology professor who was very, authoritarian and also dean of men and he insisted that I bring--fill out the application for the Danforth Fellowship and I went to the--he took me to the interview in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma], and the director who was interviewing me asked me for my favorite classical music and I--my wife [HM Julia Hare] is a pianist, a very--but they both start--I guess one of the very best pianists in the whole school--university.  And so I would sit around while she practiced several of her numbers and so I told him the only two numbers I hear her practicing which was two by [Frederic] Chopin called, Polonaise and the Revolutionary Etude and so he said, "Well you seem to have some culture deficits but I'm going to go ahead and give you this fellowship if you can get in the University of Chicago, get in at the University of Chicago and so that's how I went to the University of Chicago because they put in the paper that I had both won a trophy--a trophy for the boxing and also getting a fellowship.  And so I--it went in the other hand (laughter) and so everybody was giving me a send off and saying what a great thing it was and I had nothing else to do because I was going to box anyway, I felt.  And so I went on to Chicago where you could box, better than you could at Langston certainly, and so that's what, I--that's why I went to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's why I went to graduate school, because I had a fellowship, I still had no particular interest--I picked up an interest after I got into it because everybody in the, in the graduate school there felt they were going to be outstanding sociologist.  And they communi--communicated that idea to me, an, and so I got the idea of being a sociologist of some significance I thought.  In fact, Allison Davis had showed that he wasn't the very good anthropologist we thought when he told me how much he loved me, said, "You have a great future," (laughter).  So he didn't--got that one wrong.  But, but at least I picked up the idea there that was going to be a sociologist of some consequence.  In fact when, when I was in college my, professor who had gone to school there too by chance, another professor who taught social research she would read to us every morning from a very antiquated book and not even look at us and then tell us to go to the library and see how they do it in journals and do it the way they do it.  And I was the only student in class who did that, and so she went running through the hall telling the other teachers that I was going to be an important scholar, and so I thought, I picked that up there too.
Story_ID: 191693
Speaker 1: When you were in school were there any teachers or any books that you read that influenced you in the path that you were going to go in sociology?
Speaker 2: No, I went--I majored in sociology because the professor--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Had told you--right.
Speaker 2: [Dr.] E. R. Edmunds persuaded me that for a person who didn't know what they wanted to be academically, other than a boxer, that, that sociology was a good catch all, so (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But do--at the, at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] was there anybody that you studied with who was--you enjoyed--was kind of like a mentor, or any books that you read, any--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I had a number of, of people at the University of Chicago who--and at Langston [University, Langston, Oklahoma] for that matter, Melvin Tolson, E. R. Edmonds and I guess that's about all there.  But then at the University of Chicago we had a lot of outstanding professors there and one of them was Everett C. Hughes and he was interested in--he was a race relations specialist.  He was a Kentucky guy, but he was very liberal and so he--I was impressed by him and his thoughts he was quite ahead of his time in the I sat in a class with David Riesman, David Riesman who wrote, 'The Lonely Crowd,' was the first sociologist to be on the cover of Time magazine.  He was auditing this course from Hughes, who was older and Hughes was quite renowned there and he had been a student of [Robert Ezra] Park, who had founded the [sociology] department there and was in the whole, so called school of sociology, they called it the Chicago School, there's no other coll--university that has a school, not actually a building, but an approach to the study of sociology.  It's called a school but it's at Chicago, it's at the University of Chicago it's called the Chicago School.  And people both admire, and other schools both admire and condemn it, but he had studied from Park, who created that school, and so [David] Riesman who had come out of chemistry and the law, and written this famous book, 'The Lonely Crowd' was sitting there--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --auditing the class too but I also was influenced by--I got a job in the Population [Research] Center [at the University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] by--under orders of Stanley Duncan [sic, Otis Dudley Duncan], who still lives, his wife is dead.  I wasn't that close to him.  But, he did give me that research assistantship, which I needed at the time.  And he also--I got the idea I was going to teach at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and so when two professors were visiting him from Howard, I told him that, he introduce--that--them us--together, each other and I told them that I'm going to teach at Howard (laughter) I know you had to go through process that they had to have an opening and everything 'cause Howard was the major university, major black university.  And so I wrote and told--so they said, "Well let us know when you get out," (laughter).  And so I told my mother [Tishia Lee Davis] I was going to teach at Howard, then I wrote her and then when I got out I did apply and I think Dudley [Duncan] had something to do with getting me in there because he knew the same people and I got to teach at Howard.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, although, everybody told me to take--to become the first minority full-time black at, at Colorado State University at Fort Collins [Colorado] and they would give much more money.  They said, "Well you name a salary, you, you suggest a salary," and "You're making a big mistake," everybody said, "going to make a living on segregation by going to Howard," but I wanted to go there because I wanted to make black students more concerned and aware about the, the race situation and I felt they--Howard being a major university would have an impact on--these people would become the leading blacks, if not the black leaders.  And, and other black colleges would follow them--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and where most black students were at the time--
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: --and they would have an impact on the entire, you know, race, but I got there and they thought I was crazy.
Story_ID: 191694
Speaker 1: What was your dissertation about?
Speaker 2: Well I had two dissertations; of course I got two Ph.Ds, but my dissertation at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In, in psych--sociology?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) at--my master's degr--thesis, I should say, was on professional box--I studied professional boxing, professional boxers and that was condensed, sort of like re-edited but condensed in the Saturday Evening Post which was a big thing because Saturday Evening Post was big then.  And so everybody--some--In fact, had just saw the, the first black boar--member of the board of regents for the State of Oklahoma and that's what he mentioned about that, that article that he had seen, called, 'What Makes a Man a Fighter?' in the Saturday Evening Post.  And so then, my Ph.D. I had to get it--I wanted to make a study on the black Muslims who were just coming to prominence.  Their national headquarters was about two blocks behind where I lived [in Chicago, Illinois] and I wanted to study them but the professor didn't want me to study them.  They wanted me to study them but to condemn them and, I, and also the Muslims didn't want to be studied, they wanted to tell me what they want me to know and I had to do--go through the exercise of research and paraphernalia that they were teaching me at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], they demanded that and so I locked on both sides for doing my dissertation on black Muslims.  And so what I did, I had already done a whole--nevertheless, pushed ahead and I had a whole thirty-two page proposal but then this professor, [Otis Dudley] Duncan, would not take no for an answer he wanted me to use some of the work I was doin' there.  The very work I was doing, in fact, two guys took the work that he was trying to give to me and they become one teacher at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and one teacher is at--he was a senior professor at Harvard and one teaches at University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and so they, others have used the very subject they were trying to get me to use and variations of that built off on that.  But they, they wanted me to be the black demographer but I wasn't interested in that nevertheless, I finally decided I would go ahead and finish my dissertation there in that field because I had finished it at work, and get on out of there and that's what I did.  It was a dual study called, 'The Changing Occupational Structure of the Negro in the United States:  An Intracohort Analysis,' [sic, 'The Changing Occupation Status of the Negro in the United States: An Intracohort Analysis,' Nathan Hare] which is how we had gained ground in the '50s [1950s] as up against the '40s [1940s] and where the--when the whites moved up but--blacks moved but whites moved up faster, but in the '50s [1950s] we had gotten it, and so anyway, I did dual dissertation and got an article published in the Journal of Social Forces [sic, Social Forces] off of it too.  After I got graduated in 1963 I published an article in the Journal of Social Forces which was praised by Oliver Cox, who was about the number two sociologist, at the time, in the country, Oliver Cox.  He wrote, 'Race, Cast and Class,' [sic, 'Caste, Class, and Race: A Study in Social Dynamics,' Oliver C. Cox] and he thought it was promising if I kept up with that.  But of course I didn't, I turned my attention to essays.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And there was a magazine called, The Negro Digest and I started sounding off in there (laughter) and writing articles in The Negro Digest and wherever I could.  And Negro history books and Negro education, whatever as I went away from demography and statistical analysis and research to essaying--doing essays, in fact, when Jet--when Negro Digest was killed by Johnson Publications, who was putting out Ebony, Jet, they said in Jet that Negro Digest had discovered me and Ernest [J.] Gaines the novelist.  And they didn't have the essayist so they're just gonna use the novelist and put it in Jet and so I did do that, turn my back on my sociological training and I used it as insight but I turned my back on its, its paraphernalia and just said what I wanted to say--
Story_ID: 191695
Speaker 1: So then you begin your teaching career?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I began--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, what were you teaching?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the teaching career.
Speaker 1: --what courses? (Simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was teaching sociology at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and, and there was quite a little bit of stumble at first, but I had the advantage I could talk a lot of stuff that they wou--to help at Chicago [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], in fact, when it go to--in my tea--my course in urban sociology, it was thought to be very good for taking the graduate record exam because my--a couple of my teachers had been on the graduate record exam made it up, but any case, I stumbled around there about three or four years.  But I began to, to see the students would joke about--would laugh about different things I'd say and whenever they would laugh I'd put it down and next time I would say it deliberately in future classes and so pretty soon it was quite a thing.  My class would be filled on the first one the first day.  And I begin great, kinda gain popularity, but I had Stokely Carmichael [later, Kwame Ture] most of the national SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], black power group, had taken classes from me, the Central Committee at Howard, those who went to Howard done that.  And so it drew Stokely Carmichael, in fact, his obituary mentioned me as one of his teachers along with [HM] Sterling Brown, who had taught him English, and so, I taught there and I became very popular by sixty--late '65 [1965] as things were turning and so more than--I'd never seen anything like it anywhere on a campus.  And so then the administration got on me and started saying they, they, they wanted to observe my class and stuff like that, so I told them I was the best cotton picker in Creek County Oklahoma and I could always bring my doctorate and go back to pickin' cotton 'cause they were burning draft cards and so I'd burn my doctorate (laughter) go back to pickin' cotton and it was in the school paper, oh, because I wrote in the school paper a letter to the editor.  I read in the Washington Post in September 6, 1966 issue that they were going to make Howard a predominantly white school by 1966 and--1970 rather, in three or four years and I thought we already had a lot of good white schools and we needn't give Howard--them Howard, now, now ,now you have to understand that, that, that there's no racist here--even in reverse, that the white students were closer to me early on than, than, than the blacks were.  I--the Jamaicans, the West Indians were, were--liked me best, and then second was a tie between the Africans and the white liberals and then last were the African Americans.  But then as times changed and Malcolm [X] got killed and the Watts riots then I--it switched around and as I matured as a teacher a bit, that developed so. so they--but in any case I didn't want--I wrote a letter mocking the idea of making Howard 60 percent white by 1970 and so they just came down on me with all feet, the, the Amos 'n' Andy administrators there (laughter) came down on me with all, all--both feet and that's how I, I finally wound up joining the students and fighting back briefly.  One of the things I did was invite Mohammad Ali to speak on the campus.  First time, to my knowledge a heavy weight champion ever spoke on a college campus.  It was so unusual they put it in all the papers, in fact, if you see a documentary of him to this day, invariably they're going to show my, my face standing up beside him 'cause I introduced him when he spoke at Howard, and they always show that in the documentary as, as speaking at Howard.  An, an he gave his black--his best speech there an, and they set up the microphone they closed down the auditorium for the rest of the year when they heard he was coming an, an, an and even though students started skinning me about really coming when, on a Saturday morning I set the microphone up myself, and set (unclear) Frederick Douglass [Memorial] Hall and about 4,000 people gathered at a moment's notice out there and heard him speak and so we went through all that and, the Vietnam War had started and I joined a group of professors called the Faculty Forum which was all white, but me.  The, the black professors were, were scared to say anything one way or the other; if there was a forum on Vietnam they would not be a part of it like they had eight people on the forum once, on Vietnam I remember and they had me and all the whites and one Vietnamese Asian who was for it (laughter), so on their side, but the blacks didn't want to be on their side, so they were very conservative and moderate at the time scared about their way and so I operated the Faculty Forum, for want of anything else to do and they were--in fact they were the ones who, who also asked me to invite Stokely Carmichael to speak there, the white professors.  In the Faculty Forum I did invite Stokely Carmichael to speak there and he did come and speak there, after he had become famous as a black power advocate, but that was the last year of the stay at Howard.
Story_ID: 191696
Speaker 1: After you left Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] what did you do?
Speaker 2: Well, I went back to boxing, this time under my own name.  I'd boxed before under the Nat Harris, and I went to box under Nathan Hare, that's when I had my last fight, December the 5th, 1967 and the reason I won by knock out in the first round, I was supposed to have another fight in February 22nd, but the students out at state college--San Francisco State College [later, San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California] were--had started something called black studies and they wanted me to be the director of that because I had not only been--come to their attention at Howard, an uprising there in the spring, but I also had written an article in Ebony in the summer in August called, 'Behind the Black College Student Revolt.'  And so they wanted me to come out and speak and I said well, I was busy but I would come out there to present a paper on American Sociological Association in August and I would speak then, which I did and it took me to visit the administrators and they said that I would--I was--they thought I was their man, but they weren't going to start black studies officially at that time, and they would let me know so I went back and started boxing under my own name and people kept saying, well you shouldn't be boxing, well you should be--you're throwing away this and you shouldn't be boxing--my in-laws, everybody else, my own relatives and so I decided--so they called me up, Jimmy Garrett was the black student union leader at state college [San Francisco State College, later, San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California], called me up in late January, said, "Brother, I got a job for you brother."  I said, "I'm not looking for a job."  He said, "Well, we're depending on you." And so it rocked on and on and finally I decided to go ahead and go, because I had had other offers to teach but, but I didn't want to teach at these--teach sociology at these universities and so I decided to--black studies would be something I'd be interested in so I therefore did take the job and I came out here [to San Francisco, California] February 1st, in '68 [1968] to be the coordinator of black studies, which was the first one in the United States to coordinate a black studies program.  To be hired to coordinate a black studies program and then I wrote the press proposal for department of black studies and it was still around the country--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --by the thousands and, and set the model for that.  Although it strayed from what we had in mind, black studies is not following what we had in mind.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay
Speaker 2: In the end.
Story_ID: 191697
Speaker 1: You had some very interesting students at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] and some other people, could you--
Speaker 2: Claude Brown is the most known--
Speaker 1: Claude Brown, right.
Speaker 2: --he wrote, 'Manchild in the Promised Land' and he was taking my class then, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right, and you said the people that were in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, this was the beginning of black power, and the beginning of the student--
Speaker 2: Well, before, yeah--
Speaker 1: --student movement (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) before black power but, but it was, it was about two or three years later--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --they, they formed black power.  Things were turning blacker you might say, and blacks were getting the consciousness out of the Berkley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]--University of Cal, Berkley free speech movement, in fact, Art Goldberg had come to Howard, he looked me up in the (unclear), he in there to go to law school, he said, "I heard you're one of the good guys and I'm going here now to law school at Howard 'cause I couldn't go to Berkley," I said, "If I couldn't go to Berkley, I was gonna bring Berkley here to Howard" (laughter) and so he came here and so I had to--all those people were there. And then things were getting a little more concerned, people were perking their ears about what I--they always started perking their ears up about what I was saying, not about race alone, but about other things in general.  'Cause I took the same approach to everything, not just race and so, he--they would be in this--I remember Stokely Carmichael saying to somebody that my notion of a closed ranks approach, modeled after [W.E.B.] Du Bois, but a turning within yourself to beef up yourself and then to confront the, the wall of segregation was the best thing going.  But, but first time I ever saw Stokely was when I came there and he was standing--somebody had taken me by the NAG office, Nonviolent Action Group, which was the name of Friends of SNCC because the administration would not let them have a Friends of SNCC group there on campus, but they had to call it Nonviolent Action Group and so a young fellow sat down with us saying--he said, "I don't believe in this nonviolence, but there's nothing else going on so I guess, I'm fooling with that now," and that was Stokely Carmichael I learned later. And so they were there and he was a very good student.  I knew he would be outstanding no matter what he had gone into, he could have been a very great mainstream senator or whatever.  He--when--I never was surprised, people said were you surprised at, at Stokely Carmichael, I said no, he was two, two years overdue.  In fact when Claude Brown, who was a surprise, Claude Brown was always telling me he was writing his autobiography, he had written an article in, in  det- detalis- Dissent magazine, called 'Growing Up in Harlem.'  He's writing this book on growing up in Harlem, which later on became 'Manchild in the Promised Land,' but I said, "Yeah, yeah, well, I'll leave him alone," because I really didn't think he was really doing anything and so he came out with this book and it became a best seller. And then Stokely Carmichael came by, and he came by my class when he was visiting here, he wasn't famous then and he said--I said, "What do you think of--," going down the hall later, I said, "What do you think about Claude Brown writing that book?" And so he said, "Well, if Claude Brown can do it, anybody can do it."  It become so famous I said--writing that book--become so famous he said, "If Claude Brown can do it anybody can do it." Within a year he came back there and we invited him to speak and you couldn't get into the whole building because of, because the people, he had become famous with the black power.  But I knew he was going to be outstanding.  He was the best student I'd ever had.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: He was, he was unusual.
Story_ID: 191698
Speaker 1: I've noticed a trend that you keep going back to boxing, you really enjoy--you really enjoy it--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it's, it was what I thought I was going to be and so it was the thing that I went back to as long as I could.  Matter a fact, even when I came out here as late as 1978 I became a licensed professional trainer (laughter) and we didn't have a fighters for a while and so that--so--in fact, I quit boxing in the first place in 1963 Emile Griffith [sic, Benny Paret] had gotten killed in '62 [1962] and we knew he was just about dead, but kept on but then, then when Davey Moore got killed, the feather weight champion, who hadn't been battered, then I end up--my wife [HM Julia Hare] already getting hysterical about it and wanted me to stop boxing as everybody did, so then I, I said well, I didn't--when Dave Moore got killed I didn't come back to the gym for, for a whole, whole week.  Then a week after that I was in the dressing room while some--a friend was fighting and somebody's opponent didn't show up, they let me in the dressing room because they knew me, but somebody's opponent didn't show up and so I took the fight and the, the guy knew I hadn't been training and, was overwheight, but I took it an, and I won a decision.  I was getting ready to knock him out at the end of the fight but I waited too late and the bell rang.  But, but afterwards I came back out and I was dressed like the fighters because some of them know that I was teaching at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and the fact that when, when they first--somebody first found out about it the gym owner bet fifteen dollars which is, which is more money now, that, like, $150, $200 and he said well, he wasn't--I'm not teaching at Howard.  And so I, I did that,--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You enjoyed it.
Speaker 2: --So I enjoyed boxing and I meant to do boxing to took the stand not to go back to--I did have that fight and then when I got dressed and came back out to the ring I was sitting talking to these fellas dressed in my down clothes and we were yelling at the other fighters we knew in the gym instructions like you do, you know, stick, move do this and that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and somebody says, "Somebody's over there calling you," and so I looked over there and there was the associate dean of liberal arts and the, the dean of men.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I went over there and the wife of one of them.  So I went over there and, and they said--I said I was doing research for a book and that's how they told me to choose between teaching an fighting I started to go back to boxing but I said I didn't go back because I had promised my wife I wouldn't go back.
Speaker 1: When you said you were doing research for the--your book was that your--the book, 'Black Anglo-Saxons,' [sic, 'The Black Anglo-Saxons,' Nathan Hare] could you--
Speaker 2: No, I said I was doing--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--no, that was after--
Speaker 2: (simultaneous)--research for boxing--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)could you tell us something about that one?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but for 'Black Anglo-Saxons' I simply watched the people around Howard and my co-workers and colleagues (laughter) and I watched the ones in Washington, D. C and I read the newspapers and the society pages and all that and I--E. Franklin Frazier was still at Howard then, he--it was his last year.  And I--he was one of the main reason I chose to go to Howard anyway, and so we were getting ready to work together but, but he died.  He had a heart attack and so he--so I went there and I--he had done, 'Black Bourgeoisie' all of them--what I was doing was not just a class thing, I thought that it was a attitude, but people took it to be a middle class thing because most of my examples were of middle class people and so--an it didn't have the wherewithal to manifest this, this black Anglo-Saxonism, this, this misidentification with the white race and just identifying with their own race, biological race and so they manifested that and so I wrote that mainly for anecdotal and observational participant observation.
Story_ID: 191206
Speaker 1: You have a Ph.D. in sociology and you were at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], the beginning of Civil Rights Movement and so were wondering as a sociologist, how did you, you find this, this was a great social change going about in the country?
Speaker 2: Well, well the change had been something I had been wanting for a long time and had been sitting in front of the bus (laugher) you know for a long--many years then and I'd gone into the restaurants and order something knowing I can't get it.  They'll give it to me and I start biting out the hamburger and then they would say, "You can't--have to eat it--take it out," so I'd just leave it and wouldn't pay for it.  And I could tell stories about that so, so I had the civil rights movement in my head all the time.  I wasn't for it--that is for the racism that we had an in Oklahoma and so when I grew up I got to University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] while were in this great liberal cemetery (laughter) and everything was great in its way, for instance, one time I was on a committee and of course, I'm the only black and this white racist is ignoring me and so the other white guys start ignoring him until he ignored me--till he related to me.  And they made me vice-president of the student group.  'Course they, they always used, in those days you put a black person as vice-president and made--even though he wasn' in control, but had a honor, at least honorific position and maybe could do some of the work as the vice-president.  And so I had this concern but yet ironically, being in this different world, having been in an all black college and then coming--an all black town, where my English professor was mayor of the town and then coming to, to Chicago [Illinois] and I'm in this--I'm learning all this liberal--thought--thinkers, philosophers--philosophies  and, and here I am and yet I'm the only black and yet I can sense it very clearly, they're bring--it would have some thoughts about Arthur and Lucy or whatever is coming on in the news and I would see that was not--at least the same as mine and so consequently I became acutely aware of the race issue probably--perhaps more so there than I did then, and so, I mean before when I was in the middle of this so I started thinking about it and reading about it and I know I once found the book, 'The Name Negro: Its Origins and Evil Uses'['The Name Negro: Its Origin and Evil Use', by Richard B. Moore] and my professor, showed it to him and he said--it's Everett Hughes--he said, "Wow! Where'd you get that?"  And so that kind of thing I was--I'd go down to the library and sit in the stacks on a Saturday afternoon and just read whatever I wanted to read, but not taking the book out but just reading it and that was great.  And so it--I read everything I could find black after a while.  By 1958 had--I was reading everything--in fact it was good I was going to the University of Chicago because I went--they had the method where, once you had passed the comprehensive exam, you didn't have to pass any courses, you could register for the courses and get a P or an R, P means you pass or R you registered and you would know--you didn't present evidence of your work and so, no offence to your reputation, but anyway, I, cause I couldn't bring myself to read all that stuff they'd have me read but I could read all these books and so I passed the--I tried to take the comprehensive exam a year in advance, in order to get the feel of it because nobody ever passed it the first time, you know--typically they wouldn't pass the first some, some they would and so when I took it I, in fact I went interviewing on a part-time job that week-end I kept my population job thirty hours a week, other people take for a whole six weeks, anyway I passed the test to my surprise, one reason, it used to be too long.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) but I did pass it, but and then I didn't have to work as hard.  But that was good in that I was concerned about the race issue--
Story_ID: 191207
Speaker 1: --And I went to, stopped down and went to Virginia, you have to understand, going between these different milieus.  And I went to Virginia and then went to the [U.S.] Army and then six months, then I came back and went to Chicago [Illinois], so by the time, you know--I'm ready to go.  In fact I was thinking this in'58 [1958] the way other peoples thought in '68 [1968], you know in the [Civil Rights] Movement and so I, one day I went--one night I went to here two black kids speak at the university--from Alabama State [University, Montgomery, Alabama], they had come to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  I was the only black in the room, mind you, at the University of Chicago an just to hear them speak and they were sit-in people, the sit-in movement had broken out but I had known it to break out in '58, by high school students in Oklahoma, but it didn't get much news but then in '61 [1961] and '60 [1960] it broke out in dead of winter and they got a lot of news at Greensboro A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], but these Alabama State students were there speaking and this white guy says, a student said, "Well can white people take part in this major conference you guys are getting ready to have?" he says, "Yeah," he scratched his head for a while, he says, "Yeah, but you can take part but I ask you please not to take over," (laughter).  And so anyway it went on but my consciousness was already there and I then decided to go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to, for that reason (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and so the, the movement was out there I didn't believe in assimilationism and nonviolence per se and so I never really took to the, to that part of the movement.  But I gave, you know I supported it, but, but I really--and I was not in the South, you had to go south like Stokely [Carmichael, later Kwame Ture] and those guys went south in the summertime as students and stuff where you had to give up things you give up your whole life and just go there and live as Alice Walker, and people like that did and so I didn't do that I stayed just a student of social change (laughter) and so I taught eclectic behavior at Howard for example and that's really what I wanted to do my Ph.D. dissertation in.
Speaker 2: And so, when things starts happening and--really, I never meant to be an activist you understand, I was going to be a person who kindled concern and insight, but not to be an activist but when that thing came about making Howard white and I laughingly wrote a little letter to the, to the, newspaper, campus newspaper, mocking the idea and, and yet they came down on me so hard.  And so when those students came to me want to start a--Black Power Committee.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 191208
Speaker 1: In my final year, they [Black Power Committee at Howard University, Washington, D.C.] were going to break up the speech of General [Lewis] Hershey, General Hershey was the head of the selective service.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Where, you had the draft then, we got off Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] before we left.  Howard we got the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] off the campus, but, but he, but we did have this General Hershey come to speak at Howard (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and so this group decided they were going to break up his speech.
Speaker 2: Right, okay.
Speaker 1: An next day, next morning after they broke up the speech, then I stood with the students and read the, having had had written, at their request, the Black Power Manifesto--Black University Manifesto, where we gonna raise the black university, make the--overcome, "overthrow the Negro college with white innards (laughter) and to raise in its place a black university relevant to the black community and its needs."  And we read that along with the, with the homecoming queen who had been chosen by the students but she didn't have a--she was about your color, and yet she had afro hair, she wore the first afro hair on the campus and was so anarchistic some of the students opposed it and so the administration were hounding her and so they stood with me and the chairman and the head of the Black Power Committee which was semi-underground group and read the black power, Black University Manifesto and it went on from there.  We did different activisms around on campus.  Had a one day boycott and of course next year they took over the administration building and I--the moderate students, 'cause these other students who got put in jail, the militant students they had put in jail, which was a group of about eleven an in another matter in the summertime in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and so they go put in jail.  In fact they tried to round us all up at the time and thought they were going to get me, in fact they start--came around trying to snare me with violence and different products and I could tell they were policemen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was this university or the police?
Speaker 1: The police, and they're working together, in fact that's how they knew these kids were going to be in Philadelphia they were listening on the telephone and--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I see.
Speaker 1: --they kept--I let them use my telephone they kept on tellin' them, it's not a good idea to use the telephone but they use the telephone to--and they were listening in on I presume, that's why I, why I think they knew but they didn't know--and they, they met them and I got fired on the same day that they arrested them.  (Laughter) And they thought they were going to get me in there too 'cause I was supposed to be there but I went to do a lecture series at the University of Wisconsin in Milwaukee [Wisconsin].  And afterwards I didn't go home awhile, about a month I went up and down from Kansas City [Missouri] to Chicago [Illinois] and back to Milwaukee and back and forth by train, bus and plane (laughter).  So, they never caught up with me.  And so I--when I got back to--nevertheless, when I got back to Washington, D.C they had a dragnet tryin' to snare me into things and I knew that the policemen tryin' to snare me into it so I wouldn't deal with them.  An then in the summer, a little later, of course they had the riots New York [New York] and Detroit [Michigan] and I was sitting there one night when--with a cousin, we'd been talking tough and here was this picture of this ten year old black boy on the cover of LIFE magazine and he was sprawled out there, having been killed by the [U.S.] National Guards, went to get his milk, milk all spilled out there too, for his grandmother.  And so we so that picture an so, so SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] called me up, which is Stokely Carmichaels' [later, Kwame Ture] group and they said that [H.] Rap Brown had been arrested and they couldn't get anybody to go his bail for $10,000 and I guess it'd be 100,000 now but $10,000, and so I said well you got these physicians, these lawyers, you know, (laughter) get 'em.  I'm, I don't have any money, I'm br--I've been fired.  And so they kept calling, they called back at about two o'clock in the morning so they said, well you know, we can't get nobody so I put up  my savings account, not a wise idea, but I put up my savings account up for $10,000 and went to Rap Brown's bail but I had no id--no thought of losing it, 'cause in those days, you know, you took the law in your own hands an, and I knew the guys and no way were they not going to pay my money back, but other people thought it was a, a grave idea and so then (unclear) magazine did a story on me called 'Black Power Professor with a Punch' and so they said it was $25,000 (laughter) and so I, I didn't find out until after my mother [Tishia Lee Davis] and my father [Settie Hare] had died that they thought that I had given--lost that $25,000 to, to Rap Brown's bail, just give it up.  But I hadn't, I didn't lose a penny in Rap Brown's bail, all my family thought I had given up $25,000 to Rap Brown, I hadn't given him anything (laughter).  And so that was, but I did do the $10,000, put the savings account up and then when I--school started and I didn't have my job and I told SNCC I need my money back an, then I they gave me my pass, but they say, do I know anybody else and I told them 'bout Dr. E--Johnson, Edmond Johnson who is a white liberal an I think he put up a $10,000 one of his passbooks and I feel a little bad about that because he died not long after that.  An I'm not sure that he lost his money 'cause Rap Brown jumped bail and I'm not sure what happened about that but, certainly, I hadn't been able to get any black people to go up (laughter) and we got this white liberal to go and so one night when we had a party, when Stokely Carmichael came to town.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: There was a party in Baltimore [Maryland] put on by a Morgan State [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] professor he--kept calling Stokely--criticized Stokely a lot and so Stokely finally said, well, why--how you, how you call me a racist when, when, I accepted professor Harris, who is the same guy, by chance later with the bail, I accepted professor Harris absolutely and he has white hair, is white with white hair and I reject you absolutely and you're black (laughter), so how you call me a black racist.  And so, so anyway, that was the story of the bail.
Speaker 2: Right, okay--
Story_ID: 191209
Speaker 1: And then you went to California--came to California, to San Francisco State [College, later, San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I came to San Francisco (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Could you tell us about that, how you came here and what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, I--everybody wanted me to get a visible job, I was making a living, economic living as lecturer, of course my wife [HM Julia Hare] was a teacher as usual and she was, she was prize winning, she had won the award for all the teachers in Washington D. C. of all grade levels there that year.  And so but everybody want me to get a job instead of boxing, and the people said they thought boxing was givin' up the black movement by going into boxing you were giving up the black movement, I don't understand how that twisted thinking was, that's what they said.  And so anyway, I decided this, this student out here at state college [San Francisco State College, later, San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California], Jimmy Garret the head of the black student union, who had tried to get me to come out there and then it didn't work out because administration put their foot on it for a while, when they got the go ahead he called me up and said, "Brother, I got a job for you," and I said, "I'm not looking for a job," but he said, "No, we depending on you."  And so, wouldn't take no for an answer, I finally said I would come on out here [San Francisco, California] and I got to the campus and I realized I'd made a mistake because they--I knew they didn't want a black studies program and they tried to get me--break up a problem that was going on between the black students and the substitute white professors and I told them I had not come to Central State [sic, San Francisco State Collehe, later San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California] looking for the Nobel Peace Prize--[Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] had just gotten it, so I said I wasn't a peacemaker anyway and so the president [Dr. John Summerskill], thought that was funny and so he sent word down not to use me as a trouble--troubleshooter.  And they had a troubleshooter and they--then things rocked on and he had me to his--the (unclear) he bought me to his house, me and my wife to his house, and his wife [Mimi LaFollette Summerskill] one afternoon, and he apologized for having lured me out here on the idea they'd have a black studies program knowing that the university did not want a black studies program and so that was the kind of situation I found, a lot of people trying to stop--keep me from writing a proposal, some people think I shouldn't write it and so that, that was a very bad situation to be in.  They lied about my salary and said, "Well come on," I said, "Letters here," they said, "Well come on must be some mistake," and I got there and he brought the letter out and it was much less than the salary they promised me.  I should have turned around and gone back the very day but I didn't do it I stayed on and rocked on and we battled around and I still tried to get along so much so that at the end of the year the academic affairs department had a roasting of me at the restaurant on, on Temont Street [San Francisco, California]--what a great guy I was and I guess they thought I was a good guy--I always told them that if it came to me choosing between the black interest and them, I would not hesitate to choose the black interest.  And so, but I guess they got a little cocky so as school started approaching I think they heard it was going to be a strike and so they decided to move on us and they cut back on the courses that we already had and so I went--got with the students and we decided to have a five month strike where we would--well it did last the five months and we started it on November 6th, 1968 and it went all through the fall and the early winter.  And, for the, the department of black studies and of course after that my contract was not renewed, S. I. [Hayakawa] was called, had to come on the scene that's a long story too, but we did get a black studies program and the first department of black studies in the country and--but they had a paper department and they went off on a different tangent than what we had in mind--
Story_ID: 191210
Speaker 1: We [the Department of Black Studies at San Francisco State College, later San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California] had in mind a new approach to scholarship and teaching, pedagogy.  It was to be a program that would wed the black community and the educational process to bring the black--what will give the education to the--transmit the education to the black community that previously had been excluded from the education and then to at the same time to transform and the black community and make it more relevant to education, as we made education more relevant to black community we make community more relevant and attuned to the education.  "Unite the cannon in the street," was our slogan.  And so we--"Wed the cannon in the street," too (laughter) we sometimes said.  And so we did that, campus as community approach and we wanted every course to have a community component where, where--you're tryin' to--do things instead of going to take trips and tours in Africa and look at the pyramids we would bring Africa to here.  But it just started out as a club, a history club.  Every history class would have a history club and that would mean that, that you bringing organization to the community, history.  It could be put all over the community bit by bit, you put a history clubs in the community an African history or whatever history in the community and we would also have very practical things--practicum so you actually doing things in the African community.  So as you're learning you're also doing things to transform the community and we want to do that kind of thing we had history an (unclear) as a jab, left jab but not as the, the Sunday punch.  But it came to be that the administration and the, the moderates that they brought out to take our place, places, they--these persons preferred to make the, the, the history and Afro Canada the Sunday punch.  So if you just learn about the past and follow back the battle an you, you didn't--you had put African an black content into the course, but otherwise everything is still the same no different from a white studies course--regular study course as now called a U.S. history course.  And so, they went off on that tangent, right away from what we were doing which was a course tied to the daily lives of the students and study, like for example Black English.  One, one of the popular courses on the campus, was Black English, and yet--when they came up as Ebonics, over in Oakland [California], they thought it such an odd thing and they wouldn't allow--paper would not allow anybody to say that there was a Black English course already at state college.  And before back in the '60s this was very popular--'68 [1968] and '69 [1969] and so they--but both the blacks and the whites misunderstood.  See, it was not about creating a separate language like Ebonics where that--where think it's a slanguage or a language you see we were not talking about linguistics, we were talking about pedagogy.  We were trying to have a new approach to teaching English when we say Black English, black math or whatever.  We're not talking about making a whole new math or new English.  And that's what people thought we were doing and they block--tried to block it and so we got, it got the blacks studying African syntax and African what to do you call it when you break the verbs down and the?
Speaker 2: Conjugation?
Speaker 1: Yeah, conjugation of verbs and stuff (laughter) an they think that's what Black English is but, but that was not what we had in mind as Black English was, same thing with all the courses.  Black English now became remedial English, black math became remedial math.  And so, most people thought it was no such thing because they were looking at the thing itself rather than the teaching of the thing itself and the pedagogy of the thing, and so blacks sort of went of into a esoteric ancient kind of thing.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Other worldly kind of thing, which is the way education does in the U.S. rather than dealing with the here and now of the black community and the black student uplift.
Story_ID: 191211
Speaker 1: When you were there [the Department of Black Studies at San Francisco State College, later San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California] did you--were you able to hire any teachers in the black studies program?
Speaker 2: Well, well, we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And who were they?
Speaker 2: We were able to work at hiring them.  We had Harold Cruse for example who had written, 'The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual' ['The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual: A Historical Analysis of the Failure of Black Leadership,' Harold Cruse].  He wanted to come here because he said he was a big city boy and actually the white administration blocked and sat on his application.  An, an some others, and a white guy named Frank Coskin [ph.]. who had a Ph.D. in physics and a Ph.D. in history and he was going to come here and he had written, 'The Road Till We Got Here,' which was an article advocating violence and self-defense way back in the early '60s [1960] and so I got, I met him at the social scholars conference and he been on the panel.  I was sharing the panel with him and Harry Aptech and C. Vann Woodward from Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], and they were all on the panel--he'd keep me upstairs so I wouldn't be able to say much, by having me chairing the panel while they did all the talking, but any case, I tried to hire him and they sat on his app, I guess they were scarred of him or whatever, they sat on his, his application.  Then finally we got into the strike, well the strike was based upon a non-negotiability, which was a new concept then, in this society so we, one--I had applied for three professors, to start the department of black studies so, went through the liberal committees and they said, well, you don't just put three in, if you want three you got to ask for ten.  The American way is to ask for more then you want then bargain down to three, so I went back and said, my error, so I went back and wrote, asked for ten.  Well, the academic dean came and said, well you can't just ask for ten, you gotta compute a, a formula, use a formula it's called FTE, Full-Time Equivalent student.  So many full-time equivalent students generate so many--demand so many professors so therefore we calculated that it came to 11.3 so I said, 11.3 but they, they said, we can't give you any 11.3, in fact, we can't give you three.  We can loan you three, as school approaches, we can loan you three if some of the other departments don't use their slots.  Well that's when I sided with the students about the strike.  And so then, in the middle of the strike they gonna make me break the strike by, by making me take those 11.3 professors that they wouldn't give before.  And I--and the students--I was going to take them but then the EFT's [ph.] the white EFT, predominantly white, EFT, which was the faculty union said we're breaking the strike by taking those professors and so we didn't take the professors anymore and so we sat on them until the strike ended.  And then after the strike ended by that time Harold Cruse had gone to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], where he retired just now, he is emeritus there, and, all the other professors were--they--we hired some professors, I sat, although I was fired, I nevertheless sat with the committee at their request they have to choose, pick the people that they did have left there and we hired some but they got rid of all them.  They got rid of professors for two years solid until they got the ones that they could live with, which was those who were based off antiquity an African antiquity and stuff like that and not dealing with, you know, a new approach to scholarship, black studies will be only stuff, content and not methodology, methodology would be the same but the content would be, would be different only.  And so you'd have a white course with black content is what they basically have.  Black studies became white, I mean black content as they say now, Afro centric content and Eurocentric methodology (laughter).  So that's what they came up with as, after they got rid of us.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And then the people that followed us for two years solid.
Story_ID: 191212
Speaker 1: Then what did you do is this when you went back to get your--another Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Well, I first went to--got with a professor there and a printer, he's a white guy, I met in Sausalito [California] and this black, English professor we decided to start a journal called, The Black Scholar and it was quite an impact because its--we got a, he got a fella who was gettin' $1,000 a page for, for designing covers, he designed our cover for free, and we then started out with a good looking thing and also we--I went--I was invited to--I had been invited to, to the World Council Churches as a consultant in London [England] and then I was invited to the first Pan-African Cultural Festival [1969] in Algiers [Algeria] and so over there I knew Stokely Carmichael [later, Kwame Ture] was gonna be there and also Eldridge Cleaver and they both had invited--they put me on the list and so I wanted to--every time they'd have a shoot out--for this first issue I was going to cover the conference and cover whatever they did and then also I was gonna get articles from all these big guys.  So I got an article from Eldridge, I got an article from [Amiri] Baraka [formerly LeRoi Jones] who had some trouble with his passport; I got an article from John [Oliver] Killens, the black novelist.  And I did this; I covered this conference and thing which was later on put into a new black voices, a book called, 'New Black Voices' ['New Black Voices: An Anthology of Contemporary Afro-American Literature,' Abraham Chapman] by somebody [sic, Abraham Chapman].  And then I wrote--I interviewed Stokely Carmichael and with his permission turned it into an article.  And so we came back with Stokely Carmichael, Eldridge Cleaver, John O. Killens, Amiri Baraka, myself covering this thing and friendships abound you know so, we had 10,000 subscribers before we even put out the first issue just from the brochure, and different libraries got it, you know, it was the time for it just at the twilight of the black conscious movement an so it was quite, quite a send off of The Black Scholars, people talk about it now and what it used to be.  It was legendary and so I did that for a while and then I--we got into--a lot of people, a lot of different conflicts there and ideology and personalities more than anything else, and so everybody was leaving.  I finally left too, but I left because I got, by chance, I--interested in black psychology and I was getting these jour--these mag--these books in psychology and I decided, that's interesting to complete my picture of the human being I would, I would get psychology to go with, with sociology.  And so what happened was that one day a guy called me up and said he was with the foundation and did I want to be on the board of directors at the Point Foundation, which I'm talking about--Stuart Brand was there and his foundation an saw him a while ago an so he, they said--I said, "Well, I guess so," and so he said, "Well there are not too many disadvantages and some advantages," he laughed and said that and I'll send you a letter and so forth and so on, so it turn out I would be three years on that board.  And I would get $15,000 a year which is like a pretty good salary, then you know, livable and at the same time I'd give away $55,000 a year to different people of my own choosing, I would--whatever amounts, little amounts of $3,000, $5,000 here that I thought they were doing they, I wanted to, and so I decided to go to California School of Professional Psychology [San Francisco, California] and get a psychology degree because I ran into a psychologist in a bar an my, down the street from where we lived and my wife [HM Julia Hare] paged me, came home and paged me and he heard my name and he came an introduced himself and said he was a psychologist or something, I found out.  So, I said I always wanted to be a psychologist, he said well, why don't you, get it--do it now (laughter).
Story_ID: 191213
Speaker 1: So, I--he set up a meeting for me to go out and get interviewed [at, California School of Professional Psychology, San Francisco, California] they wanted me to teach culture, you know, afr--black culture--community culture there, but I did teach the first trimester, but I meanwhile I had--was a full-time student and so I went to school there and got the Ph.D. an middle way through that, just at the end of that, in fact, toward the end of it my--the wife of one of--they asked her to quit The Black Scholar, an my wife and the guys daughter he had died, they persuaded me to go ahead and get out of, out of it and so that's when I got my Ph.D. that summer in psychology and then I worked at Children's Hospital [Oakland] there in Oakland [California].  I worked at child development services--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --in [Children's Hospital] Oakland and Highland Hospital [Oakland, California] and so on and then finally took the license exam and began in private practice.
Speaker 2: Okay, what was your--what field were you interested in psychology, children's psychology or behavior or what? (Simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, I was interested in combining psychology and sociology--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --to a deeper understanding of the black condition I thought (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --all that is add on two, two layers, but, but actually I taught--I studied children because I might have to have that as an employment era--area.  There was the belief that black boys needed role models and this that and the other.  Need a black psychotherapist and could always get a job if I needed to, and I also thought that all grown-ups were once children and if I understood children I'd understand adults better and that's how I got into doing children for--in part, I never was full-time in children.  But I worked part-time at the Children's Hospital and that's because somebody called me up and offered me the job and I did take it and so, but eventually I stopped--I saw children, even here for a while in private practice but I--weeded out, I didn't continue it because I didn't find them as interesting as adults.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: And so I really, but I say--also, I always tried to understand the black child and my wife and I did do the book, 'Bringing the Black Boy to Manhood: The Passage,' which was the catalyst to the rites of passage movement.
Story_ID: 191136
Speaker 1: When we ended the last tape, we were starting to talk about the Black Think Tank, so could you describe how you, how it came about and when it began and your work with the Black Think Tank?
Speaker 2: Well, it--we [Hare and his wife, HM Julia Hare] started a journal called Black Male/Female Relationships.  We were starting a journal and we wanted to have a foundation to make it non-profit and put it out.  [HM] Willie [L.] Brown was our lawyer then and we wanted to call it, The Black Brain Trust, and he said he'd put it through, when he came back he said it wouldn't go through and we'd have to call it somthin' else.  So I said, "The Black Think Tank" on the spot.  And so we began to see it and other people began to see it as--and we already--even with the black brain trust stimulate more understanding of our condition, we had more and more information but less and less understanding and the scholars above all thought we were failing in this black family issue.  They thought--they were saying that the black family was strong, they want to push a policy called strengths of black family because they were trying to put an image thing together and prove to--protect an image and we thought they should recognize that the, the family was going to crumble because we saw that the white feminist movement was not dealing with the black male, they were putting the black male on the back burner.  And over the same thing because the white race had a woman problem and the black race had a woman problem and a man problem, and so therefore we needed to deal with the black male and so we, we anticipated that the black family would be worse off income-wise by the time the next census came out because the black male being put on the back burner and so, in fact, in my dissertation which was on the black male/female relations, I had seen that as the white women's coming into the labor force the black male going out of the labor force for whatever reason and so I thought that this is going to be a problem later on and wanted them to deal with the problem and instead of trying to deny psychologists they put it--we thought to raise the thoughts, the wisdom, the genius of the people at large to try to get ways to have people stimulate the black intellectual class is what we were trying to do and we never did got it off to much we sort of kept it kinda informal and quiet.  We did have membership, people joined, we had official membership for a while and then we, we had people we worked with different people doing different things like we got a group trying to change the educational situation, called State of Black Education [ph.], which is, 'cause this is people all over the country including New York, right now it's just in the formative stages, but, it's, it has had several meetings and they were--tried to have eventual concern and then put into the black educational issues, we're doing all that and we tried to--we pushed the rites of passage movement, where I told you before, by putting out a little booklet called, "Bringing the Black Boy to Manhood" ['Bringing the Black Boy to Manhood: The Passage' by Nathan Hare] and so we got the rites of passage movement all over the country and other people helped with that, they, they started having like--[Dr.] Jawanza Kunjufu in Chicago [Illinois], rewrote his book, revised his book called, 'Conspiracy to Destroy Black Boys' [sic, 'Countering the Conspiracy to Destroy Black Boys,' Dr. Jawanza Kunjufu], which is a popular book and he put it in there and it helped a lot too and we lectured an consulted to Urban League, the chapters and the national conferences as well as NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] all other kinds of groups and so we did that and went around trying to stimulate that and so we have plans to do more and we're talking with different people about getting that together.  They've had people trying to volunteer to help us but we don't want to put it in one ideology.  Every time somebody comes they come with some different ideology not another and they want to keep it in a particular ideology and we're trying to keep it a little open for that, for that--conservatives, radicals and liberals can all dialogue there is what we are planning to do in the future.
Story_ID: 191137
Speaker 1: There's a been a theme that's been going through your, your--our conversation and the thing that's kind of interested me is this, this idea of on one hand you're this renowned scholar, you've written many, many books you've given talks all over the world, you're highly renowned and then on the other hand there's this boxer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) and you, you keep going back to it, an you've even become a trainer, how do you, how do you see--do you see--some people might think, well, that's, that's a bit strange--(simultaneous)--(laughter)
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It is strange.
Speaker 1: --but evidently you don't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In fact, one of my professors, a psycho analyst, he said that--he asked me about my life a little bit and he said, "Well you had to have become a fighter," (laughter).  And so he felt when I fight against somebody I'm unleashing somethin' in there, he felt.  But I think boxing is very fundamental to human encounters it's, it is something--you will see all the basketball players, football players when they get into, they get mad they start throwing punches and put down the bat and start throwing punches even and so that's there.  An I think that that's--So I think--I've always had--been fightin' back against this racism and the poverty I came up in and so I think that that's what I was doing in a certain basic level , was unleasing this kind of thing.  I never really wanted to hurt anybody in the ring.  I didn't want to hurt them, but I felt I got more joy from hitting the punchin' bag and imagining it to be somebody I was mad at rather than, than actually hurting somebody.  But, but you have to hurt them, you find out pretty quick or they're going to hurt you and so you go ahead and do it.  But, so I think that it just came out of a basic fighting back and my mother's [Tishia Lee Davis] teaching.  See we had not only to fight back when attacked, not only must you fight back when attacked, you better win or you're going to get another whippin' when you get home and so, we fought back and we won.  And when we were coming up and we didn't have many fights after while your reputation got around and you didn't have fights and so that was always there.  And then pretty soon it becomes just a career, it becomes a hobby like any other hobby or any other occupation, it's like asking somebody why did you get interested in music when you're a chemist, you know you have people like that an why did you do that you looking at the careers, these singers and entertainers you'll find a lot of them had careers in studies and other things and so in fact, one of the great problems I had with boxing, pursuing the idea of boxing was, aside from coming in late was, based on my background and location in Oklahoma, was that people that don't think you should do more than one thing.  People think you should only be good at one thing, if you can do one thing you can't be very good at another.  And if they get to know you as one thing, if they can help it, they will not let you be the other thing.  I'm not talking about just boxing, I'm talking about whatever it may be.  They do not want--on one hand they admire that in a certain sense, but they don't want you to become good at two things when they can't be good at one (laughter).  I guess that's why I thought they're doing it for, but certainly they do have that resistance to doing more than one thing.  And I just kept on doing what I like, by then you like it and simple as that, If I could box now, if the society would allow me to box--like seventy year old people, if they had a league for seventy year old boxers I would join it right now and finish what I didn't finish when I was younger.  And I would probably be champion of the seventy year olds (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 2: --(laughter) at my weight.  I'd lose a lotta weight though, I'd lose a lotta weight, but when I came down to my weight I would probably be the champion of the seventy year olds--'cause I learned so much, I learned more about boxing when I was boxing, I didn't have a clue.  I really learned as a trainer and watching other trainers and watching television and really studying it and I didn't even know how to hit then, you know, and so, so therefore I think that I could do it.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 191138
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you'd like to add that we didn't, we didn't ask?
Speaker 2: No, you asked me something about regrets--I didn't--I don't think--I don't know whether I had too many of them.  I think that my biggest disappointment has been in the way that people don't really stick to their guns when they try to make social change.  And I also have been disappointed in the way that they don't want to think outside the box when they're trying to do it.  Like working with some educators now and they think that you, you, we need to find some big technique, some--first they think you need great teachers to work with.  Great teachers you will have with you always, but you need something that ordinary teachers can do and you need some techniques that ordinary teachers can do, not, not some great technique.  What you need to do is get people involved in education.  The black community, the black parents, everybody involved in education, but they don't want to try that.  They want to try to find some--a model.  I say it's just like a diet, whatever you'll follow, it gets you to follow will work, any diet, all potatoes, no potatoes (laughter) you know, whatever, whatever you will follow will work to lose your weight if you will follow it.  Same thing with education, it can be an Afro centric thing, studying Africa like some people do, it can be studying Shakespeare, like [HM] Marva Collins, you remember the teacher in Chicago [Illinois] did?
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: And so it doesn't have to be any particular thing, it just has to be to get people to do it.  Well, if you put it out in the community it won't, it will cease being a problem of motivation, it becomes a problem of mobilization.  You don't need to motivate these individuals you need to mobilize the group, the community and get them involved in education by paying, honoring, whatever you do--putting it there and then, the people--individuals among them will tend to be motivated because it becomes the fad, the fashion, the norm for them.  And they'll grow into it and some born into it and some will grow into it.  But you can't get them to do anything looking for some esoteric technique somewhere that will magically solve the problems of these children and it will not happen because one thing the people are so much in place who are, who are running education now you have to have a battle with them to get them out of the way, they got their pension plans they got everything they want to keep and they also think they know how to do it (laughter) and so therefore--but, but they won't move unless they force them to however, I think we could deal with them but the change advocates themselves will not think out of the box and they will not stick to their guns and so that was a disappointment.  I also, whereas I have no problems about not being welcome myself, I do sometimes wish I could have done more for my family and people like that.  Both my immediate family as well as the people who are relatives to me who think that just because you go to school you, you see doctor that means rich and you should be able to help them out when they get in trouble and stuff like that, or need money.  So that's the only thing--I regret that part of it, but, but otherwise I don't have any regrets and I think that a lot of people look at me and see, and see that I have become a sort of a--in their minds--I was a guy who suffered a lot and I got fired, I got this, I got that, but I also had a lot of enjoyments.  I got a lot of people like me, know a lot of people who didn't an so I didn't do as well as I thought I would do, but always taking the different point of view, I never, I never even really could, could agree with the black Muslims let alone with the white establishment.  And so therefore--and the only time I kinda was in the corner with the black Muslims was in the late '60s [1960s] and so after that we started falling apart again in our view of things and so therefore I didn't get as much mobility--success as I might, but I thought I got more than most of my peers.  And so therefore it's been a mixed bag of tricks and I'm pretty sad about it.  Other people they think I should have gotten more and look, look down on me I regret that--not look down, but look like a pity, with a--certain sympathy or something that you didn't get this, you didn't get that.  You didn't retire from some big job or some university or something like that, never got to be a associate professor let alone full professor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: An, an, so stuff like that you know.
Speaker 1: I see, what are you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And starting black studies--helping to start black studies and can't even get a job in it.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: Couldn't after the '60s [1960s]
Speaker 1: I agree, I agree, that's a sad point.
Story_ID: 191139
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: What are the concerns?
Speaker 1: In the future, yeah, your concerns for the future, and your hopes?
Speaker 2: There're so many, the African American community like any other one wants to get the best of--that's entitled to them, that is coming to them.  They want to get recognition, resources, they want to be as comfortable as other people do and they want to be recognized above all--seems to me African Americans want to be recognized because they've been so denigrated by the very skin color, by the very physiognomy so there for they have a very need to be liked and to be loved and respected by other people.  But I think the way they need to do that is to continue to try to do as much good in the world as they can, both in terms of personal accomplishments as well as helping out the others.  I now the Chinese, I have some Chinese patients an they're very much into giving, you know they always give for birthdays and Christmas and things, much, much more than we do and I think--I see--I began to see the benefit of that because you're sharing the money, you're also spreading good will to each other and other people help you out.  You're spreading the idea of, of, of, self-sacrifice and helping of others and I think that on a base level and reinforced by other things like the, some of the philosophers, I think it helps them to, to get on a bet against adversity.  So I think we need to, to step up to the, the bat--stiffen our backs and do better than we've done.  We always tryin' to talk about how much we've done, we want to praise how much we've done--sing about what they did but Reverend [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] is tired and we need to--some--somebody was saying that it's not so much about what we know about the past, what we know about the past now, but in the future it will about what the past knows about us.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: And, I think that that's--instead of tryin' to study history so much we need to study it, but we need to try to change our history and make the history that we would want to have.  Or other people will make it for us and so we need to look to the future and get our heads out of trying to win acceptance.  It seems like we are consumed with acceptance and now we're going back to--even to ancient past (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) to try to get acceptance when we need to go from this day forward.
Story_ID: 191140
Speaker 1: Okay, I expect that you will have at least another thirty, forty years on this planet, I hope so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) That's optimism.
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I hope so, no, I have great faith that you will be here for--but--concerning how far you've come so far, how do you want to be remembered, what do you want people to say about you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --in forty years time?
Speaker 2: I like that--what Thurgood Marshall said, he said he did the best he could with what he had.  Bu, But I think that I want them to tell the truth I don't like when, when people tell lies.  Like, they say that I got fired, you think that's a negative, it's a positive.  At least it's truth and it--for people who have been in different places and publications that, that I resigned from, from the black studies department, you know is kind of preposterous, even takes away your suffering, you now.  And so, so therefore I want people to remember me as a nice guy I was who tried to do good.  Who did his--much--gave as much as he got and I tell my wife [HM Julia Hare] anybody that can't get along with me can't get along with anybody (laughter).  She doesn't think much of that but certainly I become the opposite when I get, you know when I see, maybe two or three times you keep on, you know change your ways, then I get the opposite.  But I'm the nicest guy you're gonna find--one of the nicest guys you're going to find, let's say (laughter).  And so--and people say that, some people say I'm too nice, so they can say I was a nice guy and I tried to do the best I could.
Story_ID: 191141
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Go ahead and tell us for this photo, I know you just did, but I wasn't rolling so--
Speaker 2: Well this is the 1967 era when I just had been battling at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and he, he had this sort of short afro--he was going up with the afro, you know the short afro, the days when we were battling Howard in the spring and summer of 1967.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Go ahead, sir.
Speaker 1: This, this, photo was taken at Stanford University [Stanford, California], I'd been invited to speak at Stanford University an also San Jose State [University, San Jose, California] when I--before I came out here [to San Francisco, California], to work at San Francisco State [College, later, San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California] and so by the time I got to the date, I was working at San Francisco State, so I went from San Francisco State here over to Stanford to fulfill my black history speech.  It was a speech for the black history month and that was taking there at Stanford 1968.
Speaker 2: Okay, thank you.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA-DISCUSSION
Speaker 1: That was, that was 1971, when I thought I had become a city slicker and I was that was when I decided to go into the study of psychology (laughter) and I did take up psychology.  I was dressed a little mod or something at the time and so I must have been about, getting toward thirty--thirty-eight huh, yeah thirty-eight.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION
Speaker 2: That was a picture done in the early 1970s when--middle '74 [1974] era to five era.  It's when I was at The Black Scholar, I was trying to publish The Black Scholar and I was there then and we were in the Afro era and it--had to have the Afro.  And that's--I know that and I remember the, the clothing too, it was representing what I had at the time and I was at The Black Scholar.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION
Speaker 2: This was in, about 1980, I had been named to the honorary board of directors of the San Francisco Afro American Historical Society [later, San Francisco African American Historical and Cultural Society, San Francisco, California] and this was an occasion where they had put on a lecture by James Baldwin, who is there next to the woman who is Jules Anderson who once was superintendent of schools--board of education rather for the city of San Francisco [California] and, Huey [P.] Newton standing beside Baldwin who come by there at the end of Baldwin's speech and of course, me standing over to the left I had been asked to take a picture with these renowned individuals (laughter) by the San Francisco African American Historical Society.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Great, next.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION
Speaker 1: 'The Black Anglo-Saxons' was the book I wrote in 1963--summer of 1963, I finished it and I had been writing all during school year when I had time, about a group of people who misidentified with the black race and tried to--in their quest for status and, and recognition they over-identified with the white Anglo-Saxons and tried to take on their mannerisms and even way of talking, snarling-twang so that there becomes "theere" and law becomes "luau", nine becomes "niyen" and stuff (laughter) like that so you can't understand them half the time, but they do all kinds of things like that and so I wrote that about it.  In two years I found a publisher, I finally sent it to them because the major publisher was saying when they saw my article on the subject in Negro Digest they said, it's great--intriguing, but then when they saw the book they thought I was too harsh on the people and, and so I finally found a book--publisher, that had done 'Negroes and Guns,' by Robert [F.] Williams (laughter) so I sent it to him and he published it and then he, he sold out and then he went broke putting out other things and so they said he was going to put it out so it rocked on and Floyd McKissick the national director of CORE [Congress Of Racial Equality], started a little publishing company called Thunder and Lightening Press and he put it out--distributing through Connelly-McMillian, and then it went sour again and finally, Third World Press had been begging me to publish it for years, I thought I'd revise it but then I never did and so finally I let them put it out and--about 1990 and they still been--they're still putting it--have it going now.
Speaker 2: Okay, thank you.
Speaker 1: That was my only suggestion, my wife [HM Julia Hare]--it's not a particular issue of any consequence to me.  But it's one of the issues--
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION
Speaker 1: --its one of the issues--The Black Scholar that we put out, with different designs on the cover.  But I always using that black board and still using that and we had folks on particular topics each issue and put it out ten times a year, now comes out four times a year.  And we--so that was one of the copies of The Black Scholar, even though I didn't have an article in there unless it was an editorial, I wrote editorials in there under N. Hare, but I didn't have one in there even if I had that editorial.
Speaker 2: Thank you, okay, and the last one.
Speaker 1: And that's the Black Male/Female Relationships, black male/female relationships which generally we started trying to get them, the black intellectuals interested in the black male/female problem--conflict we thought was, was emerging.  We got an article--I think even the cover of that first issue in Newsweek and a picture of me and my wife and so we put that out for a while and it was trying to make the black male/female relationships into a movement we had been trying to do that so this, by then it was a movement and we put it into that and helped it a little bit and now it has become trivialized.  It refused to see in--it as political and how the outside world--the conflict with the outside world situation of the race and definitions that are made would impact upon their relationships and so now it's been trivialized into how to love a black woman--fifty ways to love a black woman, stuff like that an how to kiss and stuff, which is okay, but we were concerned more politics--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and I think to some intellectuals they thought that that was a trivial subject to begin with.  And they insisted on keeping it and so.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION
Speaker 1: Well, that's a picture in these, in these days, it must have been around in the time of maybe 1990 but it was a picture it has no particular meaning.  I took it because my wife was taking some pictures for a particular purpose of her own and we went there and they persuaded me to take some too.  And that is a picture of a guy who is trying to, to understand--that is he understands, he thinks, more than he did before, but he's trying to take advantage of his disadvantages.  His point of view--you did in the past it didn't work you might do less of that and do more of what did work, at least you know times getting short and you need to move on with it and that's about the time of the, the Black Think Tank era coming on that we needed to step up the pace and deal with.
