Story_ID: 238601
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Observing is Bonnie Scott [ph.], Deborah Hill [ph.], Deborah Hill, rather, Sheila Williams [ph.], and Delsey Mackens [ph.].  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Vicki Hallman, spelled V-I-C-K-I; Hallman is H-A-L-L-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: All right, now do you have any nickname or?
Speaker 2: No, not that I can tell you on camera (laughter), no, no nicknames.
Speaker 1: Okay, any, a middle name?
Speaker 2: Gale.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: 10/20/54 [October 20, 1954], just had a birthday last week; and place of birth is Dallas, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, and all right, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm the regional director [Region II Director] for the Texas Department of Criminal Justice.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is 10/26/04 [October 26, 2004].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in a conference room located at the parole office, 1010 Cadiz [Street], Suite 204B, in Dallas, Texas, parole offices, of course, Texas Department of Criminal Justice.  We're in my domain--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --where I spend the majority of my time.
Story_ID: 238602
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions we always ask--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and they on, they, they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, ribs, barbecue ribs.
Speaker 1: All right, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, purple.
Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Oh, the spring.  I like it when it's not too cold and not too hot.  Spring and the fall are both my favorite time of the year.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Jamaica.
Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite, last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me," [Philippians 4:13].
Story_ID: 238603
Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you about your family history first of all.  I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side and your father's [Curtis McCarty] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We'll start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Her name is Bobbie, B-O-B-B-I-E, Chism, C-H-I-S-M, McCarty, M-C-C-A-R-T-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the middle name Chism is spelled C-H--
Speaker 2: Her maiden name is Chism, C-H-I-S-M.
Speaker 1: S-M?  Okay, McCarthy.
Speaker 2: M, McCarty, M-C-C--
Speaker 1: McCarty, okay.
Speaker 2: --A-R-T-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is 10/25/35 [October 25, 1935], think that's right.
Speaker 1: Was she born in Dallas [Texas] too?
Speaker 2: Paris, Texas.
Speaker 1: Paris, Texas, okay.  That's north of Dallas, right, sort of?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --northeast.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now, what can you tell us about her side of the family?  How, how far back can you trace the ancestors on her side?
Speaker 2: Can't, just really just to my great-grandmother.  My great-grandmother was part Indian [Native American], part African American.  We called her Maimie [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know what Indian tribe?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right, and are there any stories about her that you, that, that are passed down?
Speaker 2: No.  When I was growing up, Maimie was kind of older and feeble, spent a lot of time, I remember my most fondest memories of Maimie was the long hair.  She used to let us, my sister [Donna McCarty-Taylor] and I, braid her hair in two different braids.  And it would reach down to the middle of her back.  And we thought that that was the joy of all joys, when she would let us brush her hair, and spent some time with her just nurturing there.  And even though she was old and feeble, she always would let us sit on her lap and just braid and brush her hair.  That was our treat as little girls.  She died when I was really, really young, so, not a lot of memories.  Just that's probably one of my most memorable occasions, spending time with my great-grandmother there.  Both sides of my family was really small.  They don't have a lot of siblings, so we were really, we're a really small-knit family, lots of cousins, but my immediate family is really small.  So I, I grew up with a really strong family base support, because we were so small.  We did the holidays; we didn't miss a holiday without spending time with one another.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: --did, did she talk, did your great-grandmother talk about growing up at all?  Do you remember anything she said about that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or did your grandmother [Lucy Hamilton] talk about--
Speaker 2: My grandmother--
Speaker 1: --how she grew up, I mean how, how her mother grew up or?
Speaker 2: Not, not much that I could actually recall or recant back to you.  Mostly the memories that I have as far as my growing up would be from my grandmother.  They were from, they say Paris, Texas, but it's a little place outside of Paris, Texas, in the country called Arthur City.  And--
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: A-R-T-U-H-U-R, Arthur City, Texas.
Speaker 1: Oh, Arthur City, Texas, okay.  Now is this like mostly a black part of, I mean a--
Speaker 2: Well probably--
Speaker 1: --gathering--
Speaker 2: --now, but back then it was a mixture, black and white, but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --probably most people 'cause it was such a, such a country.  I mean you have to--no streets or nothing.  The trees would mark where you're going.  We used to, I used to hate going to Arthur City when I was little, because I always thought we was going off in the woods and wasn't gonna come back out.  But we spent a lot of time there, so I got a chance to get an opportunity to understand both sides of life, the rural life, the really rural life versus the city life, because we spent a lot of our times when we were small, during the summer in the country.
Story_ID: 238604
Speaker 1: Okay, so your, your grandmother [Lucy Hamilton] and great-grandmother like grew up in the country basically--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --a country situation?
Speaker 2: --yes, they did.  And then my grandmother subsequently moved to, to Dallas [Texas].  I'm not really sure when, but she moved to Dallas.  And so the majority of my memories are when my grandmother was right here in this city.
Speaker 1: Okay, did your grandmother move to Dallas when she was young or when she was middle age or--
Speaker 2: Well, see, my mom [Bobbie Chism McCarty] was nineteen I think when she moved to Dallas.  So, I'm not sure if my grandmother was already here, or I just knew that my grandmother was here when I was born.  So I would say in the '50s [1950s] that she was here.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now did your mother talk about growing up here in Dallas and--
Speaker 2: She grew up, my mother grew up, she talks about growing up in the country 'cause that's where she grew up.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: By the time she came to Dallas--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, she came here when she was nineteen, right.
Speaker 2: --yeah, she was married and with me.  But growing up in the country, she literally talked about the smaller classrooms, you know, and how it may be just six in a class, but always smart.  My mom was a tomboy, so we hear all the stories of the climbing the trees. and the chucking the rocks at the beehives and running, and all the things that made them fun, and how she could whup anybody, any man, any boy her age, and expect--she used to beat up her older brother.  So mom grew up really being tough and was spoiled rotten.  So she talks about even back then that she could literally do no wrong.  My grandfather [Tim Hamilton] would not allow anybody to whup her.  She didn't get spankings or anything like that because she was the baby girl and she was tough, but she did basically what she wanted to do.  But she talks about the strong spiritual guidance that she always received.  They were always in church, always strong believers in God.  And my grandparents were really advocate believers in, in God, and going to church, and morals and, instilling that in the children.  And so it just come up through the years.
Speaker 1: What, what was the name of the church that they attended--(unclear)--you know?
Speaker 2: Oh my God, I couldn't tell you.
Speaker 1: Were they Baptist or Methodist or--
Speaker 2: Baptist, they were Baptist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Both sides of my family have always been Baptist--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so.
Speaker 1: Do you have any ministers in your family at all?
Speaker 2: Not in my immediate family, but I do have ministers in my family, cousins and so forth, but my immediate family, no.  Everybody thinks that my father [Curtis McCarty] should have been a minster.  He's really very knowledgeable of the Bible, very good speaker/layman preacher.  Probably I got my abilities to stand before an audience and speak from him, because as long as I can remember, he was always speaking in church and very, very knowledgeable.  They used to, they called him the tall, the tall Texan 'cause he goes, he speaks everywhere, in, even up now he goes to different churches and different places and speaks.  And so that's what they always nicknamed him.
Speaker 1: Okay now--
Speaker 2: Don't remember a lot about--I know on my other side, when you start talking about my father's family, I do know the church that they grew up in because we spent a lot of time in that church, but not--
Speaker 1: Not on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: No, my mother, my mother's affiliation, my, my grandmother's affiliation and her church was here in Dallas, and she always belonged to New Bethany Baptist Church [Dallas, Texas] here in Dallas.  And so, even when we were young, like I said, when I was four or five, the church that I visited with my grandmother was her church in North Park [Elm Thicket, Dallas, Texas], in Dallas.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I don't remember any from Arthur City [Texas] at all.
Speaker 1: Now did, did your mother have a chance to go very far in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, graduated high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, in, in Arthur City?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, was it called Arthur City's--
Speaker 2: Oh, I wish I knew (laughter).  I can't remember.  I remember they went to Gibbons, I do--Givens I think is the name of it, G-I-V-E-N-S.  I don't remember if that time, you know, if the elementary school went all the way up to the high school, so you didn't have a separate elementary or secondary school; they were all together.  So everybody in that community, of course, were either relatives or knew everybody because it's such a small class.  And even those people that were from there, they're still really good friends with my family now.  They've always stayed in contact with their friends from Arthur City and Paris [Texas], especially those that have migrated here to Dallas.  Always, they've always been good friends, very good support system for my family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think there was a movie called 'Paris, Texas,' with (laughter)--you, you ever heard of that?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 238605
Speaker 1: Well, tell us your father's full name and can you spell it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Curtis, C-U-R-T-I-S, Louis, L-O-U-I-S, McCarty.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is February 23rd, 1933, I think.  I get their, I get their years confused.  I don't remember if she [Hallman's mother, Bobbie Chism McCarty] was born in '35 [1935] or '37 [1937], and he was born in '33 [1933] or '35 [1935], two years apart; I do know that.  I have it written down in my--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in my--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --stuff, so.
Speaker 1: Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Can't go back either.  I'm not able to trace the family tree or any line like that.  Both of my grandparents were from Paris, Texas.  My grandmother, Pauline McCarty, born and raised, educated in Paris, and she's deceased.  All of my, both of my sets of grandparents are now deceased.  But my grandfather and my grandmother were divorced by the time that I was born but still was pretty close to both of 'em.  His name is William McCarty.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Both of 'em are from Paris, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so did they like, live on a farm or, or like a--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, farm.
Speaker 1: So they lived in town?
Speaker 2: They're, they're in town.  Yeah, they're actually from Paris, the big city.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They lived--
Speaker 1: What did they do--
Speaker 2: --in Paris.
Speaker 1: --for a living?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was a carpenter.  My grandmother was, always did domestic work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My both of my grandmothers on both sides did domestic work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did, so did your, do, do they have stories about, you know, stories about, that they've passed down about, about anything, really, and that would be of--
Speaker 2: No, no big stories, just the typical family stories of when my father and, was growing up, he and his brother and his younger sister--my father was a basketball player when he was in high, high school.  My father's 6'5", so, 6'5" and wiry, so everybody expected him to be able to play basketball, back then if you were any height.  And luckily he was good at it, in fact, got a scholarship to go to Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas] but didn't, he didn't utilize that scholarship.  He got married and moved to Dallas [Texas] and didn't go to college, but they just--
Speaker 1: But he, he had a scholarship to college and, and didn't go?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, went to the [U.S. military] service.
Speaker 1: Why didn't he go to college?
Speaker 2: Well, got married and went to the service and felt like taking care of his family became his major priority instead of playing basketball, chose not to do so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Never regrets it though, because my father's really done very, very well, as he say, with his high school diploma.  He's a brilliant man.  Both of my parents are very smart.  My father's intellect was extreme.  He's become a very prominent businessman here, utilizing his brains.  He's really good at it, one of the smartest men that I know in fact, arrogant (laughter).  Arrogance made us grow up to have a lot of pride in who we were, who we were, who we are, and who we were, and what we could be.  I got a lot of that from him.  There is no obstacle, no mountain too high, no obstacle.  So he grew up that way, very poor, both sides of my family, very, very poor.  In the country they didn't consider themselves poor from my mother's part of the family because everything was there, the vegetables, the, the hogs, the meat, you know.  But from my father's side it was more, his mom grew up in a single-parent home.  His mom had to work real, really, really hard to provide for them.  He and his older brother worked very, very early.  They talk about picking cotton.  Picking cotton was a thing both of them did.  They talk about those days that you don't really know a really good hard day's work until you've been out there picking cotton, girl.  You know, so we heard, heard that all the time.  So they were no strangers to hard work.  And they taught us that hard work, a good day's work pays off for a good night's sleep.  And they just believed in that.  They got that from their parents.  As far as I can remember, until my grandmothers either got really too sick, they worked.  They worked really, really hard.  And so both of my parents worked until my father was able to, you know, make enough money my mom didn't have to work anymore.  But he's a hard worker right now as we speak (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Now--
Story_ID: 238606
Speaker 1: Now what kind of business is your father [Curtis McCarty] in and--
Speaker 2: My father is what he calls all kind of business.  His primary business was the automotive business.  He started out, when he first came to Dallas [Texas] he worked for aircraft supply company.  And he learned all he could about that, selling airports to, you know, different airlines and different things like that, and he learned all that he could.  He was really young, at that time the only black that was in this little small company, but they trusted him.  A lot of times he'd just say the temptations would be there.  They'd have a lot of things there just to see if he would do something wrong.  But because of his strong spiritual background, he never, ever breached any of his integrity.  And so, as the years went by, the man that owned the company just trusted him with everything.  And so, as a result, he learned how to manage money and manage businesses.  And he learned as much as he could, and then he branched out on his own.  And he went to automotive school while he was working, and he got his mechanic's license.  And I grew up in a household my father cut hair on Saturdays.  He had a bootleg barbershop chair that he put in the garage.  You'd drive up and at any given point you might find five different cars in our yard where he's working on cars at the same time.  And he just balanced a lot so that me and my sister [Donna McCarty-Taylor] would be able to have a decent living.  And he opened up his own business, you know, after that.  He took the knowledge that he learned from the aircraft company.  He sold parts for a while, kind of in, inside the business.  He had a dual business.  It was an auto paint and body shop, and then he sold cars.  Well, the business grew, and he was able to open up another one and then another one until he was able to offer anything anybody needed.  One thing he said, I found a job where it's always gonna be needed.  Somebody's gonna have a rick.  Somebody's car is gonna not work or and if so, therefore I'm gonna always be in business.  But he didn't stop there.  He started buying up real estate, just property and rental houses, just anything, beauty salons, tire shops.  My father, you name it, he's owned it and made a dollar.  You make a buck.  If he'd see it wasn't major profit in the long-term, he'd sell it, or he still has a lot of property not that he just rents.  But he's really got a really good business savvy, and so he's made a really good living just on taking chances and making money turn over and work for him.  So, he always say, you're the most educated thing that we have in the family, but you make less money than, than he could ever imagine.
Story_ID: 238607
Speaker 1: But on, on the flip side, my mom [Bobbie Chism McCarty] always taught me it wasn't about the money.  It's what you are doing for people.  So I got that balance from the both of them.  She's one of the good-spirited individuals who the first thing that I think I can remember from my mom when I was little is the golden rule: do unto others as you would have them do unto you.  I learned that so early, until she made us live our life by that when we were growing up.  You don't do anything to anybody that you didn't want them to do to you.  So at an early age we were respectful of our elders.  We could not act out in school, or we'd get a beat-down when we got back home because they believed in discipline, but mainly treating people the way you wanted to be treated.  I think that was probably the first thing I could recite as a young girl, was that golden rule.  And so it's just become part of my life as I grew up, and I got that from her.
Speaker 2: Now did your mother work, too, outside the home or did she--
Speaker 1: Yeah, my mother worked just general labor outside the home probably up until I was about nine or ten, no more than ten years old, and then she didn't have to work anymore.  So she was a stay at mom and got really, really active in what we did in school, PTA [Parent Teacher Association], chaperone, you know, she was there.  If we had a school function, I don't care what it was, my mom was always sitting out in the audience.  My daddy [Curtis McCarty] was always working, but we could look out in the audience and there was gonna be my mom sitting there.  To hear that little two-line speech that we had my mom was sitting there, very, very supportive because she was able to do that.  She wasn't working.  So when we got home, my mom was at home, you know.
Story_ID: 238608
Speaker 1: Now you had like one, you had a sister [Donna McCarty-Taylor], right?
Speaker 2: One sister, yes.
Speaker 1: One, one sister, right.
Speaker 2: It's only the two of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My sister died last year.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And so, so it's two.  The household basically included your mother [Bobbie Chism McCarty], father [Curtis McCarty], you, and your sister and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --did any grandmother or grandparents live with you or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My grandparents have always lived independently.  My grandmother [Lucy Hamilton] died in 2000, and she was still had her own, living alone in her home in Dallas [Texas].
Story_ID: 238609
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell me about growing up.  Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh, I have so many.  My earliest childhood memory is probably our family vacations.  That was something, no, no matter how hard my father [Curtis McCarty] worked, once a year he packed us in the car, and we went somewhere, I mean, San Antonio [Texas], Mexico, California.  We got in that car and we drove somewhere, that's one thing.  We had, Friday nights was our night to go to the movies, go bowl, something together as a family.  Sunday, of course, was always church, all day long was church, but we did it together, from Sunday school to, 11:00 service to what they used to call BTU [Baptist Training Union] to 7:00 service we were there, and so, spent a lot of time together as a family.  We never ate a apart, ever, from breakfast sitting around the table, to dinner at night; we never ate apart.  I remember wanting to stay outside with the other kids because at that time when I was growing up, the streetlight became your timepiece.  When that streetlight came on, you'd better be inside.  And some of the kids in neighborhood were able to stay out a little, little longer.  But I knew that if we were not at least heading in the direction, somebody was gonna be on the porch saying Vicki Gale [HistoryMaker Vicki Hallman], Vicki Gale, you know better, and so, very, very structured, I thought too structured.  Gosh, we had rules.  And what I really remember is just I often think about people growing up.  Me and my sister [Donna McCarty-Taylor] were four and a half years apart.  We never had a fight, argument, yeah.  Your leg is on my side of the bed; get it over, yeah, never physically exchanged a lick, ever, never even came close to it.  It was not permitted, and we just didn't do it.  And even as grownups, we grew up as grownups, we'd have the argument; it never lasts long because we always just knew it was just the two of us, and we were raised to take care of one another.  And I raised my children the same way.  And it's ten years difference in them, but I raise my children the same way.  So my memories was the foundation of family.  My biggest childhood memory was, you got your family support, boy, you can conquer anything.  And they used to always say ooh, you McCartys stick together.  We McCartys felt like we were all we had.  Outside the world we always knew we had each other.  So, if anyone had anything to tell my parents negative about us, they better come correct because they were not just going to listen to it and nothing be addressed or looked into or done about it, because they were one of those if they said they were acting up in school, boy, you'd better had an explanation as to why you were acting up in school.  We were not allowed that, so making Cs was not permitted.  I never made a C till I went to college [East Texas State University; Texas Agricultural and Mechanical University-Commerce, Commerce, Texas] and then was scared when my, my card went home, when the report went home then because my father always believed that intelligence is the first thing that people meet.  Often if you can't sit down and have an intelligent conversation with someone, they're never gonna take you serious.  So, you always show on paper.  That's what I teach my staff now, you always show on paper.  You don't know anything about me today, so the first thing that you're gonna do is take a look at me on paper.  And the rest I'll have to be able to prove to you that I am what I am.
Story_ID: 238610
Speaker 1: What was your neighborhood like when you were growing up?  I mean what, did you grow up in a black community, or--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --was it--
Speaker 2: --sir.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I grew up in a black community.  In fact, for a long time I thought that was the only community in the city.  You didn't hardly go outside of my community.  I grew up in a community called Hamilton Park [Dallas, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My sister [Donna McCarty-Taylor] and her family lived in Hamilton Park until her death.  We grew up there, and you know the old ver- proverb that it takes a village to raise a child?  I grew up in that village.  I grew up in the neighbors had something to do and had something to say about what you did.  You better pay attention to the neighbor just like you would a parent.  If that neighbor says get out of the street, you better get to skippin'.  Get out of the street because neighbor would walk down few, if it took a few blocks for them to walk--really small neighborhood.  It's not spread out really, just really intense, but everybody knew everybody.  The neighborhood I grew up in was sort of like the school I was describing in Arthur City [Texas].  Hamilton Park Elementary [Hamilton Park School; Hamilton Park Pacesetter Magnet, Dallas, Texas] was the first grade to the twelfth grade.  Now, after the ninth grade in '71 [1971]--'70 [1970], busing issues came, and, and I was one of the first products to be bused to another school.  But prior to '70 [1970] up until '69 [1969], if you grew up in Hamilton Park, you went from the first grade to the twelfth grade, and you graduated.  So, we really never ventured out of that neighborhood.  I didn't know what it was like to come this far north or this far south.
Story_ID: 238611
Speaker 1: Now, what, what were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Ooh, cooking; everybody cooked a meal.  Mothers were at home at a decent hour, and the, the skillets were all placed on that stove around the same time.  So, you didn't go to anybody house and there was not some type of aroma of something good coming out of that kitchen.  We didn't do a lot of eating at neighbors' house 'cause you ate at home.  Most of my childhood friends grew up the same way I did.  You went home and you sat down and you ate with your family.  And so we all would go home.  We knew what time it was to eat, even if we ate early enough to get ready, able to go back outside, it was a joy in the summer, but most of us ate--(unclear).  So, I never will forget the sounds of children playing in the streets, 'cause that's what we did; we played in the streets.  All our games was red light, hide and seek, you know.  We didn't have computers, so everything we did was made up: tag, you're it, football, volleyball, kickball.  We'd make our own basketball.  So I learned how to play everything because we played out on the streets.  So you didn't come into Hamilton Park [Dallas, Texas] without seeing children everywhere, God, the sounds of laughing and running.  And people knew not to drive fast through Hamilton Park because the streets were just covered with children playing.  That was probably one of the most fondest memory that I would have of growing up, the girls and the boys all ages.  We didn't have, if you were in this grade, you played together.  Everybody got out there, and we played.  And we looked out for the smaller children to make sure that we didn't run over them while we were playing football or just waited for them.  They would just sit on the curbs and hope I get older next year where I can get out there and play with the older kids, but they'd wait their time.
Speaker 1: Now the girls played football too?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  I was good, could catch.
Speaker 1: Did you play tackle?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, they didn't allow us.  It was touch football.
Speaker 1: I was trying to see how far this went (laughter).
Speaker 2: Nah, nah, 'cause God knew, boy, we came home with skinned knees or skinned up elbows they'd have to pay for, so we always played a safe game of football.  But at time it'd be tough to, actually I think that was my first time learning I could compete in a, in a man's game.  And it kind of--as you look back on it, I'm in a man's game in this field that I work in.  And so the competition was just automatic for me from when I was early.  If I didn't catch that ball just like the guy across the street, then, boy, was I gonna catch it from whoever team I was on.  So, and I was always kind of really timid, didn't wanna grow up.  My sister [Donna McCarty-Taylor] was a tomboy.  She took after my mom [Bobbie Chism McCarty].  I was the dainty one.  I didn't want any scars on me.  Now, I'd play football, but you couldn't pay me to climb a tree.  I might scratch up these legs of mine, and I wasn't gonna have it (laughter)--
Story_ID: 238612
Speaker 1: Now, how would you describe yourself as a little girl?  What kind of little girl were you?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was bossy.  Oh my God, I was bossy.  I always wanted to be the leader.  I had to be the leader.  My favorite group when I was a little girl was The Supremes, and I always Diana Ross, gonna be there in the middle and 'Come See About Me.' And I had my Supremes on the left and right.  But my mom [Bobbie Chism McCarty] used to say, you've gotta stop being so bossy, [HistoryMaker] Vicki [Hallman].  But I couldn't help it, just always felt like I could be a leader, always, and was always a leader, was--if I was gonna belong to an organization, I was gonna be the president.  It's been like that from Girl Scouts [of the United States of America] to now.  I'm gonna be the leader.  And so, as much as I thought at that point being bossy was a negative characteristic as you, as I grew up, found out that bossiness was a major contributing factor of leadership.  What I had to learn how to do was be an effective leader.  But from very, very young I always been bossy.
Story_ID: 238613
Speaker 1: So you liked to play sports, but you said you were kind of, you didn't want to get scarred up or anything.
Speaker 2: Oh no.  And Hamilton Park [Dallas, Texas], at that time we, we, we talked about I, I loved Hamilton Park 'cause Hamilton Park is where my most fondest memories are.  It was a African American community, one of the middle-class communities of the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s].  When you left the projects and moved to Hamilton Park, you moved up, the two-car garage or, and sometimes in an instance one-car garage.  But the, the fence, wasn't, wasn't a picket fence; we had the aluminum fence, but--the wire fences, but it was still all the houses neat.  Everybody took pride.  It was a community of pride, and so if you couldn't cut your yard that week, the neighbor cut it for you because they wanted all the yards to look and be neat.  In fact, when I was talking about my dad [Curtis McCarty] used to have all of these cars parked everywhere when he be working on 'em.  He was that bootleg mechanic back then.  And we lived in front of a big open field, and the community wouldn't say very much about the cars out front, but they knew that it was distasteful for, at, at that time, so he moved 'em to the back, and the cars would be in the field.  And he set up an old swing set where he would put a big chain on it.  And he'd pull out motors, and he'd work on transmissions.  And he did everything in that field behind our house after a while so that when people drove down our street, that they would see the same type of neat house just like everybody else in the neighborhood.  People didn't come into Hamilton Park.  Strangers were not allowed.  They'd run out (laughter).  The older boys would run you out.  If you didn't belong or sometimes we'd have visiting relatives or visiting friends, you'd better get escorted 'cause it was one way in and one way out.  And if your, you were not familiar, you didn't get to be in that community.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your street?
Speaker 2: I lived on Bunche Drive, 8439 Bunche Drive [Dallas, Texas].
Story_ID: 238614
Speaker 1: Okay, and who were some of the leaders of the Hamilton Park [Dallas, Texas] community?
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, Reverend Zan [Wesley] Holmes [Jr.] was a major leader.  He lived on my street, in fact.  That time he was the preacher for the Methodist church [Hamilton Park United Methodist Church, Dallas, Texas] that we had in Hamilton Park.  And he was one of the first leaders we had that actually went into politics.  And so, boy, we thought that was something.  (Unclear) our church, a, a pastor is from that area were our leaders, Reverend J. L[ee]. Foster, who was the pastor for the Baptist church [First Baptist Church of Hamilton Park, Dallas, Texas].  There was one Baptist church and one Methodist church right with inside the community.  Mostly everybody belonged there, 'cause we drove north to my church 'cause that's where my parents [Curtis McCarty and Bobbie Chism McCarty] belonged.  But almost everybody in the community belonged to either one of those two churches, so those became our community advocates.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what, what office did--what was the first pastor's name again?  I'm sorry--
Speaker 2: Reverend Zan Holmes.
Speaker 1: Zan Holmes, right--
Speaker 2: Ran for [Texas] state representative--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Did he win?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, and boy, were we proud.  And he--
Speaker 1: Was--
Speaker 2: --subsequently moved out of Hamilton Park, moved to another church, St. Luke ["Community"] United Methodist [Dallas, Texas].  He just recently, within the last five years, retired as a ministry.  He was out of politics after a while, but he's still a major political figure here in this city now.
Story_ID: 238615
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about school.  Now, you said you were a good student.  You didn't make a C till, till you got to college, right?
Speaker 2: Excellent student.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Excellent student--
Speaker 1: What, what was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: --straight A's.  Hamilton Park [School; Hamilton Park Pacesetter Magnet, Dallas, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, and, and you went from, you know, kindergarten--
Speaker 2: I went from--
Speaker 1: --to--
Speaker 2: --from the first grade to the ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that year, 1970, they started busing, thrown into a whole different world now.
Speaker 1: So what school did you have to go to then?
Speaker 2: My sophomore year I went to Richardson High School [Richardson, Texas].  All the kids at Hamilton Park on one side of Hamilton Park [Dallas, Texas] went to Richardson High School; the other went to Lake Highlands [High School, Dallas, Texas].  And that was the first time our community was split, and we were sent to two different schools, really strange for us, because, of course, they were rivals.  I didn't graduate there.  I was only there for one year because we then moved out of Hamilton Park to at that time where the rich black people lived, to, it was called McShann Estates [Dallas, Texas], and that's where my parents [Curtis McCarty and Bobbie Chism McCarty] live now.  And I went to Hillcrest High School [Dallas, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's where you graduated--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --from?
Speaker 2: What was unique about that, I learned true cultural diversity.  This was one of the largest high schools in the city, and they only had ten African Americans when I went.  I was one of the ten, yeah, really a big change for me.  I'd come from an all-black neighborhood, and now here I am in a school where there's only ten black people.  And in the early '70s [1970s] there was still a lot of racial unrest.  So, financially, I lived where the more affluent whites live, so kind of fit in because we had the financial status.  But old Curious George of the whites and the blacks learning about each other, I was right there in the middle of it.  They had never been subjected to black people in, in, in their realm of their world, and I had never been subjected to the magnitude of Anglos [Anglo Saxon] as I was thrown into in '71 [1971].  Now, in '70 [1970] I still was with my--mind you, when I went to Richardson, which was also a white school, but I still had the ma, majority of my comrades that I grew up with that were there with me.  We did the bus trip together, the whole nine yards.  Well, in '71 [1971], when I went to Hillcrest, it was totally different for me.  I grew up a lot.  I learned the ups and downs of actually being, I was smart.  I was really smart, so I was on the student council; I was in journalism; I was in the drill team, you know, that type of thing, but I was the only person.  I took the speech classes, the drama classes, everything that enhanced my abilities that my teachers found in me--was a little insecure.  No matter how arrogant and prideful I was raised, that was the first time I knew what it was like to feel insecure.  I was insecure there.  Our culture was different.  Black people didn't shave their legs, something small as that.  I went to gym the first time and my legs wasn't shaved, and I was humiliated and couldn't understand it.  Well, you know, what's the difference?  What's the big deal about this hair on my legs?  But learned to adapt and adopt.  I started modeling when I was in high school.  And it was so funny because it didn't take me long to fit in because I was as smart as I was.  People at least felt comfortable with me because if they was gonna bring me home to meet their parents, they bought home a smart one anyway.  So, I learned what it was like to go to the country clubs.  It was a whole world outside of Hamilton Park, you know, to, to, to be the only person in a country club, to go to the houses where they had housekeepers and indoor swimming pools and wow.  Even though we lived in a really nice house, and I was just getting accustomed to living like that, it still was a whole different world for me.
Speaker 1: Now that, now that's something that, that is kind of, is something I faced when I was in high school, even like going to a high school and being one of the only blacks there and have, and their classmates having servants that--I mean, my aunt actually worked for one of the people--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --close by the, you know.
Speaker 2: I didn't know anyone in particular that was housekeeper, but you know, I'd always get that same look when they'd open the door, "Wow," you know.  "Are you at the wrong house?"  You know, and then my classmate would run to the door, "It's [HistoryMaker] Vicki [Hallman], it's Vicki!"--
Story_ID: 238616
Speaker 1: I was sportin' a big six-inch afro, you see some of the pictures, you know.
Speaker 2: I think it's more like twelve inches--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I, I, there is a photo.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We'll, we'll, show the photos--
Speaker 1: Yeah, boy.
Speaker 2: --later, but that's a--
Speaker 1: That's a big afro--
Speaker 2: --that's an afro--
Speaker 1: --wasn't it?
Speaker 2: --that [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis would be--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, very proud of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I was real proud of that.  Boy, I'd shape that afro before I went to school because I was representing.  And that was a the look of the '70s [1970s], and I sported it well, lots of hair, so you know that was a big deal.  And the curi--that's what I was telling you about the curiosity from, how did you do that?  And they'd sometimes make me feel like I was a spectacle, 'cause the kids would stand around, I mean, and want to touch your hair.  And they can't imagine how did you get it to stand up like that, but, and I'd tease 'em.  Oh, it take a lot of braiding, and just braid it.  And braid your hair at night, and when you wake up in the morning and pick it out; it'll stand up.  And so, they'd try it, and you know, it'll flop.  And they'd come and say it didn't work, you know.  And so that was a good joke that I had for a long time because I was known for that afro, even when I went back to my ten-year class reunion [for Hillcrest High School, Dallas, Texas], and I was no longer sportin' that afro.  People were like, we're looking for [HistoryMaker] Vicki [Hallman].  You know, they were still expecting me to come through the door with that afro on my shoulder and--
Speaker 2: So, you're saying they really didn't understand that was a natural--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --hairstyle?  That wasn't--
Speaker 1: No, it was different.
Speaker 2: --just, they thought it was--
Speaker 1: Ignorance is bliss.  They didn't know.  The texture of our hair was different.  They know that.  You can't do this on your own.  It's gonna take a lot of hairspray to get this done, but no, they'd try.  So I got to have a joke, you know.  I remember you guys humiliated me about the hair on my legs, so it's my turn.  I get a chance.  Now the joke's on you.
Story_ID: 238617
Speaker 1: But my real challenge came when I was a senior [at Hillcrest High School, Dallas, Texas].  That's when I had to really, really, really go through some emotional things, because I had made, found my way into the Anglo [Saxon] world.  I was it; I was accepted; I got a chance to really make some good friends.  My first modeling job was one of the girls that I was in P.E. [physical education] with was a model, simply gorgeous I thought.  And back then we were still struggling with our definition of being black and our color.  It was still struggle between light-skin blacks and dark-skin black, and of course, I was on the dark-skin end, so the brunt of a lot of jokes from light-skin counterparts.  And so I always really insecure about this dark skin.  And no matter how much my parents [Curtis McCarty and Bobbie Chism McCarty] would come out with say it loud, I'm black and I'm proud, you didn't feel it on the inside.  It was something rhetorical to say, but it was nothing that you really felt on the inside.  And then one day I was in gym, and the girl who was a model was sick, and she had a photo shoot that she needed to do.  And she recommended me to take her place.  And I'm, me?  I thought that was a joke.  I literally thought I was gonna show up at the studio and be humiliated again.  But I tell you my arrogant father says you never turn down an opportunity to expand your horizons, and so I did, showed up.  And what's so funny is the white people made me more secure than the black people ever did.  They went on and ranted and raved about these big eyes that I had and how, wow, photogenic I was and the beautiful skin.  And boy, after three hours I didn't want to leave there.  That's the best I had felt about myself and this dark skin probably in years, and I left in awe of myself, thought, oh, maybe I am kind of cute, you know.  They actually made me feel that.  And so, strangely as it sounds, that's where I first came into my own.  And then that was the challenge of I started feeling good about [HistoryMaker] Vicki [Hallman].  And along with the intelligence came the self-assuredness.  So I began to get into, more involved in more things, more--I wasn't ever in the background, but I was never up front and center.  Then I tried, then I started beginning to try out for the leads of plays, and I got on the debate team and different things because I started feeling pretty good.
Story_ID: 238618
Speaker 1: My senior year [at Hillcrest High School, Dallas, Texas], all of that seemed to go down the drain because my senior year they bused the kids from the projects to my school.  God, I was glad to see black people, thought this is really gonna be wonderful.  I get a chance to hear black music and dance the black dance and be black again just like I was in Hamilton Park [Dallas, Texas].  But I didn't fit in.  I didn't fit in there, so I was in the middle.  The black people wouldn't accept me because they said I was sellout.  I lived over there with the whites.  The white people accepted me, but here comes all these other black people and all the fear and anxiety that they had of black people came back.  And I then became one of them, so--
Speaker 2: Now that's been now--
Speaker 1: It was a balance within one year.
Speaker 2: There, there's a, it's been stated by some others that there is some kind of a critical mass of black--I mean one black person is all right in a lot of white settings.  And it's just--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --this is historical.  It goes all the way back--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --to Richard Allen and the founder of the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church.  But you know, there seems to be like a critical number.  And once you get that many, then white people become afraid and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --or, is, is that what kind of happened?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then, after about three or four months of wanting to be accepted and I just really got down on myself again because I didn't feel like I fit in.  Now I belong to the most elitist of the organizations where your brain was who you were, and I became the sellout--very confused, wanted to be really so much part of that black culture and just didn't.  So for a while I just kind of withdrew again.  I didn't know what to do.  Then came let's pick sides.  You'd better pick a side, us or them?  This came from the blacks.  Us or them?  Well, I really had become close to a lot of Anglo [Saxon] friends, a lot of them, really, really close, to their families, and I didn't want to pick sides.
Speaker 2: Now, what context did this take?  I mean what, what, what specifically did they ask you--
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: --I mean what--
Speaker 1: --we were back in, back then it was still in the days where you protested.  We're gonna have a walkout.  Are you with us?  Are you gonna walk out?  Well, I hadn't been discriminated against.  I hadn't been belittled or demeaned.  I didn't want to walk out.  But yet--
Speaker 2: But were the other--
Speaker 1: --I wanted to show that I'm still black, and if I've got to walk out, I'll walk out.  But I didn't know to be a person of principle, that if my principalities didn't say that you should walk out; you shouldn't be a part of it.  I just wanted to belong.  So, picking sides was difficult, but I chose to go with the black side.  That's want I wanted to do, just to be accepted, didn't have very much recourse on how things were done because it was a new, new year, very, very new, trying to determine how this integration thing was gonna work.
Speaker 2: Now, you didn't think now when this walkout or boycott took place, did, did you think that the black students had legitimate concerns?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, of course--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I did.
Speaker 2: All right, so I'm just trying to--
Speaker 1: I did, individually--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --no.
Speaker 2: So it wasn't just--
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: --because--
Speaker 1: Oh no, they wasn't walking out.
Speaker 2: --they were walking--
Speaker 1: They were walking out because--
Speaker 2: --all walking out together.
Speaker 1: --they were not allowed to participate in some things and then came all these grounds rules that if you didn't belong to this school for two years or three years you couldn't be on the drill team, or you couldn't be part of this, instead of them waiving some of the rules that existed already in the school, that they came into a lot of rules which would not allow for them to be part of a lot of things.  And from the schools that they came from, these were captains and co-captains and presidents and things like that, and there was no room in this school for them to be part of it.  And so, yeah, the rationale of wanting to walk out was quite legitimate.
Speaker 2: Okay, so there was principle involved--
Speaker 1: Of course.
Speaker 2: --in getting involved with the black side of this.
Speaker 1: Of course it was.
Speaker 2: It wasn't just because they were--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: Not at all.
Speaker 2: All right.
Story_ID: 238619
Speaker 1: But you know what happened?  Things tended to work out for me.  It made me a bigger, stronger, more holistic person, because I decided somewhere in that year that I'm gonna be [HistoryMaker] Vicki [Hallman], and either you are gonna accept me--and something about materialistic things, I had a car.  When no other black, all the other blacks were riding the bus, I had a car.  So they used me, and I allowed it.  Take me here; take me there.  I was a private taxi for a while, just to fill in, just to fit in.  And so, that got tiresome.  A, again, remember, I came from a very strong family of principles, and you didn't be used.  And even though I was being used, I allowed it, I knew it; it wasn't anything that wasn't known to me.  I allowed it just so that I could fit in.  But that, after a while it became tiresome, so I found my way in both worlds.  That's when I knew that it's good being me.  I had the personality.  I had the know-how.  I think that's when my first leadership abilities actually meant something.  It was no more being Diana Ross and these were my Supremes.  It's now, actually standing for something and having reason to stand.  And so when there was things that were I think against the blacks that was there, I rallied and stood in support of that, and I became a spokesman.  And because I'd already established myself within the confines of the school [Hillcrest High School, Dallas, Texas], when I talked, people listened.  My ability to make people listen was something that simply amazed me.  And I graduated in a class of six hundred plus students, and I graduated in the top 10 percent.  Only three blacks was in my graduating class, and I felt good about that, really, really good about that.  And some of the same friends, same black--(unclear)--still now my friends.  Some of 'em under supervision here now.  I think I lost contact with most of the white ones that I had because we all went different ways.  But I know that, I know some of 'em are still around.  In fact, Minyards is probably one of the biggest chain for, chain food stores that are here in the city.  And [Lisbeth] Liz Minyard was a really good friend of mine.  And I've been able to pick up the phone through the years and call her and get things done for some of the clients that I have now.  So we've maintained not a close relationship, but we've maintained a relationship through the years.  Zales Corporation, I went to school with all the Zales, because this was a really, really affluent area of Dallas [Texas].  When we're talking about busing, we're not just talking about busing to any old high school or any old community.  We're talking about a very, very affluent community, which mostly consisted of Jews, prominent businesspeople.  And it was a just different world, and as a result of me being me, a lot of the whites and the blacks came together and actually developed friendships.  So, the latter part of my senior year was not as difficult as what it started out being, because you could then look around the hallways, and people are actually talking, and laughing, and conversing, and what perceived to be getting along.  The year that I graduated, the following year, some of the same blacks that were there that started out in the busing era, they then became part of the football teams, the drill teams.  One of 'em was actually captain.  So it made me feel good that historically I was part of this and that somebody allowed me to stand up and represent both sides--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --very well.
Story_ID: 238620
Speaker 1: What subject matter were you the most interested in in school?
Speaker 2: Ooh, the law.  I always been interested in the law, anything that would allow me to talk and debate.  Debate an issue (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  So you like civics class and--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --did you have like--
Speaker 2: --hated--no, actually I hated civics, really did, did well in it, didn't like it.  Government was civics, really didn't care anything about government.  Government was politics.  I've never wanted to be a politician.  But when you start talking about the penal system, and crime, and anything from a sociologist or a psychological aspect, boy, you had my attention.  So, I debated a lot.  I was on the debate team.  I loved to debate issues relevant to social reform and things like that.  That was always--
Speaker 1: Now did--
Speaker 2: --my forte.
Story_ID: 238621
Speaker 1: Did you have any heroes on the national scene, you know, that were spokespeople, like, like--
Speaker 2: Oh, of course, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].  Martin Luther King was just it for me.  I could listen to that I Have a Dream speech and just imagine him giving it.  Just, it would engulf my whole spirit of one of these days we're gonna be equal.  One of these days, I know about Martin Luther King's dream because just this little part of my senior year [at Hillcrest High School, Dallas, Texas] I've had to live that dream.  We all had to go to school together and be treated as equal.  So I didn't just hear the speech; I lived the speech.  So he was my hero.  But you know who my biggest heroes were?  They were not on a national level.  They were my teachers from Hamilton Park [School; Hamilton Park Pacesetter Magnet, Dallas, Texas].  They were my teachers who said good grammar is all we will accept in this classroom.  You're gonna learn how to enunciate your words.  You're gonna learn what periods, and commas, and exclamation points are actually meant to serve when you're writing a sentence.  You're not gonna just turn me in a paper, and it does not come from within your soul.  They, they were my heroes because they never, ever in their community told us what we couldn't be.  They always told us what we were gonna be.
Speaker 1: What are the names of some of those teachers?
Speaker 2: Oh, Ms. Garnet [ph.].  Ms. Garnet was my English teacher.  Ms. Garnet was the strictest thing that I think ever existed.  Ms. Garnet saw a diamond in the rough in me.  I had several, but Ms. Garnet stands out.  Ms. Callahan [ph.], Ms. Callahan was my second grade teacher.  I skipped a grade.  I didn't talk about that.  I skipped a grade in school because I was smart, and wasn't gonna do it.  My mom [Bobbie Chism McCarty] wanted me to graduate with, you know, my little kindergarten class I started out with.  There's no need.  She's, we're wasting her time.  So I went from the first grade to the third grade, and there was no need--at that time they test you to see exactly what your IQ was and your abilities, and they would promote you to another class.  And so, didn't think that was anything back then.  But Ms. Callahan was my teacher, and she wouldn't a, allow me to make excuses that I was younger than everybody else, and everybody was a year older than me and had an opportunity to learn some things.  And Ms. Callahan said you in this class, you're gonna do the work this class did.  So, competition was something that was instilled with me forever.  And so from probably the third grade on I was competitive. If I didn't make a A plus --I remember one time, I, I, I always wanted to bring home A+'s.  Back then you got the numerical, not the, the, the, not the numerical grades; you got A, B, C, D, Es, or Fs, or you got A+'s, B+'s, C+'s.  If I didn't have a plus behind that A, I didn't think I did well.  And so one time I got an A-, never forget this, got an A-.  Oh, I did not want to take that A- home to my parents, so I took an ink pen and made that minus into a plus and got a beat-down for it because I forgot to match the ink up (laughter).  And that's just how much I wanted to accelerate.  But my mom was always, you couldn't get anything through her.  My dad [Curtis McCarty], I was dad's little girl.  He probably would have looked at that A+ and thought oh, good, baby, you're so smart.  My mom took a look at that and said something doesn't look quite right about this, took it back to school, had the teacher pull out her grades and said no, she should have got an A-.  And they saw that I changed it to a A+.  Boy, did I get in trouble.  But I got in trouble because my mom wanted us to earn every single thing that we got.  You didn't cheat for it.  You didn't lie for it.  You didn't deceive anybody.  You earned it, you felt good about it.  And so that was the only time that I ever did that.  But that was just how being at the top of the game, that's how early in my life I had to be at the top.
Story_ID: 238622
Speaker 1: Tell us about your sister.
Speaker 2: Oh, my baby sister.  Baby sister's name was Donna Demetria McCarty-Taylor.  Donna's four and a half years younger.  I talked about we grew up dressed alike.  My mom [Bobbie Chism McCarty] dressed us alike.  Some of the pictures I have to show you today we're dressed alike, always dressed up, full regalia whatever the occasion was.  If I was anybody's hero at an early age, I was my sister's.  She was the epitome of looking up to her big sister.  If her big sister said this is how it's gonna be, this is how it's gonna be.  If I told her that the sky was green, regardless if she knew that it was blue, the sky then became green.  My mom used to get so upset with her.  At her funeral one of the things that I talked about is at an early age one day my mom came in.  My sister was under the bed, and I was sitting on top of the bed.  And she was, Donna, what are you doing under the bed?  Well, I'm looking for Vicki's [HistoryMaker Vicki Hallman] other shoe.  And she says, why you under the bed looking for Vicki's shoe?  Why isn't Vicki looking for her own shoe?  She'll mess up her afro.  I've gotta get it for her.  I mean, she ca- she catered to me like no other person have ever catered to me before, and it was remarkable.  I did not realize what it was like to be someone's hero and didn't even appreciate it until we got older.  My sister was probably one of the strongest individuals that I know to date.  When she was twenty-two she was diagnosed as having kidney failure and subsequently had to have a kidney transplant.  She was on dialysis for a while before, prior to the kidney transplant, but she had a kidney transplant.  And even at an early age, just having that type of disease allowed for her to be able to do a lot of things normally that somebody else would do.  She never complained.  I'd wake up and say oh, I've got a headache.  And then I would remember, she got way more aches than I have, and she never complained.  I always used to tell people God always knew what he was doing, that probably had it been me that was stricken with such a disease, that it probably would have engulfed me emotionally much, much faster than it did her, physical, emotional changes, the countless amount of surgeries that she's had to have through her years.  They even told her that she could never have a kid.  They never wanted her to have a kid, but she wanted to have a, a daught- she had a kid; she had a daughter.  My niece's name is Suzanne [ph.].  She'll be twelve years old on her birthday next month.  And we wanted to literally name her miracle, because that's just what she was, because when she got pregnant and decided to keep it against all of the medical advice, they gave her all this list of things that could be wrong with her, and when that little girl was born with the ten fingers and ten toes and everything was fine, it was such a miracle.  But because we are such a close-knit family, we name our children basically after our family members.  And so she named Suzanne after my mom.  Her name is Bobbie Suzanne.  And how befitting because during that time, my sister was extremely ill trying to carry a baby, and my mom was her best friend.  She took her everywhere, every doctor's appointment.  My sister didn't feel good, it was my mom was there, because they lived really close in proximity.  My sister was still in Hamilton Park [Dallas, Texas] living.  My mom, of course, was living on McShann [ph.], which was not far at all, no more than ten minutes away from where my sister lived.  And so she was always been able to be there for her, and they were literally best friends--
Story_ID: 238623
Speaker 1: We got to truly understand, as a family, the ups and downs.  But instead of it dividing our family apart, it made us even stronger, through prayer.  We did a lot of pra--we spent a lot of time in the hospital emergency rooms through the years.  Every single time that doctor would come out and say I don't know what she's [Hallman's sister, Donna McCarty-Taylor] made of, but it's the strongest person I know.  She's gonna be fine, every time, to the day that she died.  I thought they were gonna walk out and say the same thing.
Speaker 2: She just passed last year, right?
Speaker 1: April 1st, 2003.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Still waiting on the doctor to walk and say don't know what this girl is made of, but she's something else.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it just didn't happen that way, devastated us.  No one expected.  She died of a massive heart attack, but never.  Two days before my sister died, I got my car stolen.  And I called her 'cause I couldn't remember my dad's [Curtis McCarty] cell phone number I was so upset about it.  And she's always took that attitude: don't worry about it, [HistoryMaker] Vicki [Hallman].  You know, there's nothing you can do about it.  You got insurance.  You know, it was just, she took life so as a matter of fact.  You let yourself worry about things you can't control, the last thing my sister said to me.  That was the 30th of March.  She died on the 1st of April, profound person she was.
Speaker 2: Okay, take your time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You have any tissue?
Speaker 1: And so what I do is I take her strength, and the ladies that are on parole who are released from prison with all these different adversities, I always use my sister as an example that God has some things in store for you.  It's just up to you on how you're gonna handle it.  So, everybody knows about my sister 'cause I talk about her everywhere I go.  She, she was my hero, and I was hers.  So, she's missed a lot.
Story_ID: 238624
Speaker 1: Well, let me, let me kind of switch gears and take you to--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --go back to the school.  Now you, when you were a senior in high school [Hillcrest High School, Dallas, Texas], you, how did you choose a college?  How did you, what were you looking for?
Speaker 2: My college was chosen for me.  I, I graduated in the top 10 percent, so you know I didn't get a scholarship?  No.  Those times regards to how smart you, and I was really disappointed because when I was in Hamilton Park [School; Hamilton Park Pacesetter Magnet, Dallas, Texas], and Ms. Garnet [ph.] and Ms. Callahans [ph.], they always taught me you be really, really smart, and you can write your own ticket to whatever college or university.  I never got a scholarship offer.
Speaker 1: Now it seems, now this seems odd, but I think there's, correct me if I'm wrong here, but I've seen other similar situations where if you, you know, when you're in a black school in a black community with those committed black teachers that you discussed at Hamilton Park, if had you stayed there, more than likely they would have--
Speaker 2: Most--
Speaker 1: --figured out a way to get--
Speaker 2: --definitely.
Speaker 1: --you in a black college, right--
Speaker 2: Most definitely--
Speaker 1: --you know, but, but--
Speaker 2: --most definitely.
Speaker 1: --now you're in a different environment, and there's no scholarship offered.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Even though you're in the top 10, 10 percent of the class.
Speaker 2: None, none whatsoever.  So I took a look at education, wow.  I worked really, really hard to be smart, and where did it get me?  Again, I learned what God has for you, He has for you.  Because my dad [Curtis McCarty] was able to send me to college without a grant, without financial aid, without anything.  And as a result, they also got to choose my college for me, and, and narrowed it down.  I was gonna, I had to go to Baylor [University, Waco, Texas].  But East Texas State University [Texas A&M University-Commerce, Commerce, Texas] was an hour away from home by car, an hour away from my grandmother [Pauline McCarty] in Paris [Texas] by car (laughter), so I was in the middle.  And they wanted to make sure that if anything ever happened to me, somebody could get to me.  I was the first in my family to go to college, so keeping me pretty close-knit, and remind you, I came from a very disciplined family.  So they needed to be able to put their finger on me at any given time, 'cause my parents would drive down to ET [East Texas State University] without me knowing that they were coming.  And I'd better be somewhere where they could find me.
Story_ID: 238625
Speaker 1: But that's how I chose East Texas State [University; Texas A&M University-Commerce, Commerce, Texas] and actually very glad, didn't really like, 'cause it's a really small, what I consider country town, that the only big thing going for Commerce, Texas, was the university.  The biggest thing they had at that time was a Walgreens, which was the drug store.  They didn't even have a Walmart.  And, but what it did, it took me back to Hamilton Park [Dallas, Texas], because we became another community within a university.  All the blacks knew each other.  We hung out together.  Everybody knew everybody; we were very, very close there.  So, initially I was homesick, but that didn't last long because I, I, I had a lot of friends.  I got a lot of friends there.
Speaker 2: Now, now what year is this?  Now, what, what year did you graduate from [Hillcrest] High School [Dallas, Texas]?
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-two [1972].
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-two [1972], okay.  So it's fall '72 [1972] and, okay.
Speaker 1: Then two of my really close friends from Hamilton Park, my, my neighborhood friends, they also went there, so that was a good thing.  We missed my junior year and my senior year going to school together, but we were gonna be reunited, so, boy, we're excited.  We were the Three Musketeers when were in school, and then now the Three Musketeers got an opportunity to reunite again when we got to college.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, you said that the black students were real cohesive at East Texas State.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: About how many students were there altogether, and how many black students?
Speaker 1: All right, gosh, that was a pretty large university.  In the '70s [1970s], we probably made up I'd say one-tenth, wasn't a lot.
Speaker 2: Okay--
Speaker 1: But it was enough to be diverse.  We had all the sororities and the fraternities that were in place, and of course you had the athletes.   And so, one thing I learned when I went to ET [East Texas State University], boy, you were a nobody unless you were in a sorority or a fraternity.  So you still had that clique within the cliques.  So, I didn't pledge a sorority though until I was a junior.  I had to go to ET and at first show my folks [Bobbie Chism McCarty and Curtis McCarty] that I could keep those grades up.  They didn't know anything about a sorority or fraternity.  That wasn't part of me growing up, so it wasn't a big deal.  That was just something that you did if you had the time, if you had the grades.
Story_ID: 238626
Speaker 1: So my freshman year and my sophomore year [at East Texas State University; Texas Agricultural and Mechanical University at Commerce, Commerce, Texas] I had to concentrate strictly on my grades. I was one of those that never changed my major though.  I was a prelaw major, never changed it.  And ironically, I took a lot of psychology classes.  I took one and got hooked on how the mind works.  Boy, that intrigued me, and so I started taking more and more.  And before I knew it, I had a double major.  So I graduated with a double major, not setting out to do that, but honestly ended up with enough class and enough courses till I graduated with a prelaw psychology major.  The law part because I was gonna be a lawyer.  Boy, was I gonna be a lawyer, so I went to college with the idea of I'm gonna go to law school, and I'm gonna be a criminal lawyer.  Crime is always intriguing.  Everything else was boring, corporate law, nah, that wasn't me, politics, government, that was not me.  But that criminal mind, the psychology allowed me to be able to utilize both, the, the law and the criminal element of the mind.  To merge both two together, that's where I found my niche.  And that's the reason why I never changed my major.
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: And it was really hard because when I was there, I was the only prelaw major in the whole, African American in the whole college.  There was not another one.  So when you start talking about firsts, I don't know if I was the first, but I know I was the only.  There was no one else in my classes that was African American, but me the entire time I was there.  I would have some government courses with other African Americans, but my choice of a major, I was it.  So, when I was in a sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] we used to write papers, and one of the things we had to do was save a paper so that as the new sorority members came in, they would have something to reference or look at.  And most of my sorority sisters, of course, were education majors. So, boy, they had it made.  God, I used to think they were lucky.  I had to independently study.  No one could help me and they had it made.  (Unclear) pretty smart in ET [East Texas State University], did a really good job, didn't do a lot of studying.  It came just honestly.  It came just automatic for me.  I could cram the night before and ace and exam.  I always been a procrastinator.  One of the negative things about my personality is procrastination.  I'm gonna wait till the last minute to get something done.  And because I was able to get away with it and do well, my learned behavior of trying to not procrastinate never changed.  It always worked for me.
Story_ID: 238627
Speaker 1: I pledged Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority [AKA].  I have to make that be noted; got in there, was, had twelve line sisters.  It was thirteen of us, whew, had to live in a sorority house, and was that another challenge, all of these women, ooh, my goodness, from these different backgrounds, from, these different personalities, became a leader there, president of my pledge class.  When, when I went over I became dean of pledges.  I mean it was just I always have had to have some type of leadership role, could not sit in the background and just allow things to happen without me making it happen.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, what were the, were some--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: --of your instructors on campus [at East Texas State University; Texas A&M University-Commerce, Commerce, Texas] that stand out, or was there any other campus leaders that--
Speaker 1: Dr. [David Arlington Roberts] Talbot.  Dr. Talbot was, he was also my sorority advisor.  Dr. Talbot was an African American professor, maybe had three at the time.  Dr. Talbot was the only one that I ever had to take classes under.
Speaker 2: What, what did he teach?
Speaker 1: Sa- I took, my psychology classes came from under Dr. Talbot, some of 'em.  But he was also, he was an Omega Psi Phi [Fraternity], so he was the grad advisor for the Omegas and for the AKAs.  He had a dual role, to try to keep both of us in line, where we would adhere to the [National] Pan-Hellenic Council's [NPHC] rules and regulations of being on campus.  At that time, everybody had a sorority or fraternity house, and so he had a role.  He was literally a role model.  We didn't want to get in any trouble because we never wanted to disappoint Dr. Talbot.  Dr. Talbot, I remember one of the first things that really intrigued me about Dr. Talbot.  We were in a sorority house.  We wanted to buy new furniture.  None of us had a job.  None of us had any credit, you know.  Here we are, group of ladies, but we wanted to furnish our living room with brand new furniture.  Dr. Talbot took a chance and co-signed for us.  Never forget that because he, that was not part of what he had to do.  And so as being part of the leadership, we made sure that every single month, I don't care what we had going on in that sorority, we paid that furniture bill.  We did not want to disappoint Dr. Talbot.  And so we did; we paid it off, and he was very, very proud of us for that.  And the fact that he stood up and stood out and went beyond what he had to do as an African American leader, just within that college, always make me admire him for that.
Story_ID: 238628
Speaker 1: Now, were there any campus issues or--
Speaker 2: No, actually, not really, not many.  Again, it was another--ET [East Texas State University; Texas A&M University-Commerce, Commerce, Texas] is, the acronyms, what we called it was a really small-knit campus.  Now, we didn't do a lot of socializing with our Anglo [Saxon] counterparts either.  Everything we did was--the only time we did was once a year [National] Pan-Hellenic Council [NPHC] would give something we would call Derby Day.  And we would compete against the sororities and the fraternities, just, you know, tug-a-war, mud wrestling, you know, different things like that.  That was always fun.  We looked for--that's the only time within that year we all came together.  I remember that exclusively because the sorority house where the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] were, were on the white side of ET's campus.  All the other sororities and fraternities were on the black side, so we were the only one that was right in the middle of all the other white fraternities, the, the big ones, the significant ones.  And even though we shared parking space, very rarely can remember saying hello or goodbye, ever.  So, that was nothing major as far as that.  We represented on the Pan-Hellenic Council, so we had to interact with them there, but no major interaction.   No, we had different sorority parties; we had different fraternities.  All our social gatherings were totally separate.  We very, very rarely came together on that accord.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's see then, well, '7' [1972], well, in the early '70s [1970s], you know, you had [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson emerging as a national leader.  And you had, you know, I guess on, on the campuses for a lot of black students with a chance, would get a chance to go to college that--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --especially in state universities all over the country that have never gone to school before.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The first ones in their family to go.  So there, there are no campus issues at all, at, on the campus surround--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --the students or--
Speaker 2: --no major political issues.  Mind you, I always ran from politics, never wanted to be part of it, don't even, couldn't even rationalize why.  Don't have a clue.  It just was something that I never really became an intricate part of.  I still was in the '70s [1970s], so it was still say it loud, black and I'm proud era.  That truly still existed, but it was so much of a comfort zone there, you know what I'm saying, until the political issues were not as prevalent as on some other major college campuses or universities, because we did our thing.  They did their thing.  You don't come over into my, our way of doing things, and we don't interrupt yours.  And it worked for that campus, so no major rallies, no injustices that I can recall, none at all.
Story_ID: 238629
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, when you graduated what, had you planned to go to graduate school or immediately after--
Speaker 2: I was gonna go to law school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I thought--again, I'm a procrastinator.  And I did really well in college [East Texas State University; Texas A&M University-Commerce, Commerce, Texas] and took the LSAT, did well, passed it, applied, got accepted in the SMU, in fact, Southern Methodist University, here in Dallas [Texas], big joy.  And just at the last minute I decided I'm not gonna waste my dad's [Curtis McCarty] money, because I'm not ready to buckle down and study this hard yet.  And I knew that I couldn't play once I get to law school like I did basically in college.  And so just like most immature, think we know everything people coming out of college, I thought I'm gonna go work and get some work experience.  I need that; I need to work, because I'd never really worked.  I worked some during the summers, but never anything serious enough to say this is what I want to build my career on.  And at the time, I didn't have a clue what I wanted to do.  I, I taught school for just a few months.  I was like a permanent substitute teacher and taught school, hated it (laughter), thought this is not for me.  Kids are out of control.  And I look now, almost thirty years later, wow, kids were very much in control compared to what the teachers go through now.  So it allows me to have a really true and honest respect for educators because I tried it.  It wasn't for me.  Then I worked for Terrell State Hospital [Terrell, Texas], which was a mental hospital, moved to Paris [Texas], couldn't find a job in Dallas [Texas] after I got out.  Got out just like anybody else, on with that degree, thinking, boy, I'm ready to conquer the world.
Speaker 1: This is 1976 I guess.
Speaker 2: Six [1976], ready to conquer the world, couldn't find a job anywhere, couldn't, disappointing thing that ever happened to me in my life.  I thought, wow, here's disappointment number two.  First was I graduated from high school [Hillcrest High School, Dallas, Texas] top 10 percent and didn't get a scholarship, went to school anyway, did it in four years, got out, now I can't find a job.  And so, I decided to, let me go see; maybe I'll go back to where my grandparents [Pauline McCarty and William McCarty] live, in a small town, where educated African Americans are not something you see every day, and maybe I'll do better. And I was blessed with a job and at, I worked at outreach claim for Terrell State Hospital, well, because I had the degree in psychology, where I dealt with youth.  I was an intake officer originally.  The name of the clinic was Paris Outreach Clinic [ph.], still exists on Washington Avenue [sic. Washington Street, Paris, Texas].
Story_ID: 238630
Speaker 1: And I found myself in familiar territory.  I was the only African American they had working there [Paris Outreach Clinic (ph.)].  And people used to always say, "Gosh, you are that--you're the only black.  How do you handle it?"  Well, I learned how being the token black cat is privileges.  I loved it.  I milked that cow till I couldn't milk it anymore.  They were real courteous to me and didn't want to step on my toes and allowed me to do basically what I wanted to do, come in when I got there and leave when I got there.  And, because we were, it was during a conscientious time when people were trying to prove that there are no prejudices, and there are no, no one here is prejudice, and so we're gonna show you, [HistoryMaker] Vicki [Hallman].  And instead, they didn't teach me very good about work ethic because they allowed me to do what I wanted to do.  What they did teach me was in a small town [Paris, Texas] like that, in a small facility where probably there was no more than six of us, I got to go over and beyond what my job duties described.  I learned how to write prescriptions.  We had a psychiatrist that came, but he taught me everything about medications.  I learned probably a wealth of information in the year that I worked there than I could have ever sitting in a classroom, just on-the-job training.  I was a counselor for at-risk youth that had mental problems that had been in a mental institution for one reason or the other, and they had been released.  And so I provided aftercare.  I remember my first group with these youths then.  That's how I learned how to be innovative and creative, because they didn't give you any guidelines.  These are your kids.  Get 'em to open up.  See what you can do with them.  Spent a lot of time in their homes visiting with their parents, you know, talking to them, looking at the background.  And we're talking about a really rural area where at that time black people didn't go to mental institutions.  If you did, you was really whacko, let alone children.  So the stigmatism of just coming from, being in Terrell [State Hospital, Terrell, Texas] or on medication or whatever was really bad.  So I had to a lot of self-esteem building.  So I'm teaching them, the teacher was getting taught about self-esteem and what it's like to step outside of yourself to help someone else, very much a learning experience, a maturing experience for me.  I didn't feel uncomfortable in being the only black because I had lived that at Hillcrest [High School, Dallas, Texas].  So my comfort zone was they treated me good, went to dinners at their houses.  These are my co-workers and my bosses, fit right in, never once felt uncomfortable, never.  Then I had my grandmother [Pauline McCarty] down there, so that was a good thing.  So, I'd go there and had my own apartment.  That was my first apartment, so I was feeling independent, but yet I still could be dependent of others, so I got the best of both worlds.  Couldn't take that small-time living.  I needed to see some city lights.  I only did it for a year, and I left.  I left there, came back to Dallas [Texas].
Story_ID: 238631
Speaker 1: I met my husband [Don Hallman] during that time.
Speaker 2: Okay, was he from Paris [Texas]?
Speaker 1: No.  I met him through one of my [Alpha Kappa Alpha] Sorority sisters.  And I was in Dallas [Texas] one weekend, and we were out partying and clubbing, and he was an entertainer.  I met him, and boy, was that motivating factor enough for me to want to hurry and get back to Dallas because I met this guy and wow.  I didn't marry my college [East Texas State University; Texas A&M University-Commerce, Commerce, Texas] sweetheart.  I thought I was gonna marry my college sweetheart.  That didn't happen, so I was kind of devastated because that was a five-year relationship that didn't turn out to the once up a time and a happily ever after that I thought it was gonna be.  And probably within six months of breaking up with him I met the guy that I married and moved back to Dallas, didn't have job the--so here I am again back out looking for a job--
Story_ID: 238632
Speaker 1: --And so I went back into the school system and taught some more prior to Texas Department of Criminal Justice.  At the time it was just called State Parole, gave me a, gave me a call for an interview, and I was really excited.  And when they called me, I still didn't have a job, so I went and interviewed.  And at the time, they had maybe four females that worked this system.  It wasn't a system for females at all, so they were very, very apprehensive about hiring women, did it anyway, interviewed, and got the job.  And you know what was so funny?  That was probably one of the most unorthodox interviews I ever had.  When is there--(unclear)--and I'm using all of my psychology classes and my social, sociology classes.  And I'm responding the apropos way that I've been taught.  And my interviewer was like, wrong.  Everything, thing I'd answer, wrong.  And I mean I'd never been in an interview, and mind you, before I interviewed for this job, I'd been on several interviews.  Here, I thought I'm gonna flex my intellect, and I'm gonna show them my communications skills, and did the same thing there.  And every single time I would answer something, wrong.  Well, I got mad, figure I'm not gonna get the job anyway, so let me tell him a thing or two.  I told the interviewer off.  I was so outdone at the way I was treated, I told him off.  I told him I don't know how he got the position that he got.  It's just really ridiculous that someone would come of his stature and dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, and I went on a rampage.  I didn't think I got the job.  That's what got me the job, didn't know it till later.  Because at the time, they needed someone that was gonna be tough.  They didn't need a little prissy educated.  I wasn't from the hood, wasn't raised in the hood, so they needed to see that I had the ability to bounce back, and I didn't know that.  And they were pushing buttons that they were trying to push.  I didn't know that either.  But had I not responded, finally got mad and responded the way that I did, I probably would have never gotten the job, because they interviewed hundreds of people because this was the first time they were bringing in this type of magnitude of staff, case workers.  But they had to be really, really sure of what they were doing.
Speaker 2: Now, now what, what year is this?  Is this '78 [1978]?
Speaker 1: This is '77 [1977].
Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977]?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right, so you, you, you been with the tech, the techni- the Texas Department of Criminal Justice--
Speaker 1: Since 1977.
Speaker 2: --since '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I got hired October 17th, 1977.
Speaker 2: All right, now what, what were your--now what does the Texas Department of Criminal Justice do?
Speaker 1: Well, specifically, there are a lot of divisions, because we all came up under one umbrella.  But systemically, we are the criminal justice system for the state, which includes some on probation, CJA[D], Community Justice Assistance Division, the institution division, where they actually house 'em, that's the prison division.  And then you got the parole division, is which where I work, and we provide supervision to offenders who have been incarcerated in the institution division, we are the pro-release.
Story_ID: 238633
Speaker 1: Well, you were telling us what you did for the [Texas] Department [of Criminal Justice] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  I started in as a parole case worker two, which is the entry level, meaning you have no case manager experience, and again, started in during a time there were not that many females in the agency.  All the supervisors basically on the top level were Anglo [Saxon] males.  And exciting job, lot of diversity, totally different from the way I was raised, threw me out there in those project area, the hood, and said hey, you got ninety-five people you're responsible for.  Make sure that they follow the rules and regulations of the release; make sure they stay out of trouble; make sure they're not using drugs; make sure they're reporting every month; you gotta go see them; and if anything goes awry, you better make sure it's documented.  So, didn't have a lot of resources, so we really just provided basic supervision, and fell in love with it.  Didn't make enough, I made enough just to pay my rent, stuff like that, didn't concern myself with the salary.  I had found my niche.
Speaker 1: Now you were married at the time, fresh, freshly married, right?
Speaker 2: When I first, no, I got married the following year.  I got married in '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But when I started out, I was just dating my husband [Don Hallman].  We're no longer married anymore, but at the time I, I got married.  In fact, fact, I was the first pregnant parole officer they had in the state.  So you wanna talk about a lot of firsts, I was the first pregnant field officer that they had, so.
Speaker 1: Were, were you the first black woman they, they hired?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were some more hired with me.  It's--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --one, two, about four of us in, in the Dallas [Texas] area, a few more for Houston [Texas], but not many.  It's probably, they hired twenty-two people.  Four of us were black females.
Speaker 1: So were you assigned to men and women or, or--
Speaker 2: Yes, both--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --men and women.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: In fact, one of my counterparts that was hired with me just retired in July.  She and I were the only ones that stuck it out all these years, and she retired in July, so.  We came across when people didn't believe in rehabilitation.  It was a matter of we're gonna lock 'em up.  We're gonna let 'em out.  They don't do good, they're gonna go back.  There is no gray area.  And so it made the job easy.  It was an easier job because we knew exactly what was expected of us; we knew what to do.  But I also grew up in a time where the authority of being a parole officer was respected by the client.  You were yes, ma'am, and no ma'am.  And here I am barely twenty-two years old, and I'm telling these grown men what they will and will not do, and they're yes ma'am, and no ma'am, totally different (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Okay, so that wasn't--
Story_ID: 238634
Speaker 1: I have to ask this question, now you're right out of college [East Texas State University; Texas A&M University-Commerce, Commerce, Texas].  You look like a model.  You're young, and you had gotta be a parole officer for the, for older black men and I guess some white men too, I suppose--
Speaker 2: Yeah, of course, a mixture.
Speaker 1: --that yeah, and the, and--
Speaker 2: Oh, I had my challenges now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Some examples I can tell you when I first started out was that I didn't know how to conduct myself in the hood, you know.  I didn't know that when you got out of your car, and you see a bunch of black men out there.  It's the summertime, and they throwing down the Budweisers and they're doing the catcalling, hey, baby.  You know, I knew to just put my nose up in the air and keep on going.  But I have common sense.  And to be a good parole officer you have to have common sense, and it's not anything that I can learn in a textbook.  Textbook is truly theory.  When you start working here [Texas Department of Criminal Justice] it's application, and no one tells you how to conduct yourself out there.  And I learned easy fast, that when I go visit my client, when I come back that same group of men that I just ignored are gonna be here when I come back, and it's gonna be worse.  So, without anybody telling me, we didn't have classes where they sent you to training, or they gave any type of dialogue on how you should conduct yourself.  It was a truly commonsense time for me.  And because I have the personality that I have, and I'm really trying not to be afraid of anything or anybody, I wasn't afraid of the hood just because I just didn't live in it or didn't grow up in it.  I never was afraid of it.  I loved it.  I embraced it, embraced the culture of what they referred to back then as the ghetto.  And so I learned easy to when I got out of the car, I acknowledged them first before they could start in on me.  How you guys doing today?  Not get in any type of dialogue, but to just speak.  Worked for me.  The entire time, and I was the, and I was a field officer, a parole officer in the field for nine years.  The first year I also went to a all-white area where mostly elderly Anglo [Saxon] people lived.  And the parole whose caseload I took over was a white female that left, so they were not used to a black person.  I had a gun pulled on me.  They thought I was a burglar.  The par- apartment complex manager came out with a gun, and I'm like, oh my God.  I never--
Speaker 1: What is--
Speaker 2: --panicked.
Speaker 1: --what a contrast.  In the black community you were seen as a, you could be seen as stuck up--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or, and then in the white community, just because you're black you're seen as a burglar, a threat.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: That's the--
Speaker 2: You know, what my biggest challenge was when I first started here?  Went to, there's a little community in, right outside of Dallas [Texas] called Seagoville, Texas.  I hated that.  All my clients that lived in Seagoville I would wait till the very end of the month before I'd go see them.  I hated going there because it was a neighborhood; it was all-white; and when I pulled up, it's like everything stopped.  If they were hanging up clothes, they would stop.  If they were working on a car, they would stop, and everybody would stare.  And I would get a pit, a, a knot in the pit of my stomach every time I would drive down the freeway to reach my destination.  It was a dreaded affair.  And then one day I said I can't live like this.  And I've never been afraid out of making a fool out of myself ever.  So I could laugh at myself, and that's probably been a good thing.  But I knew that I could not let this fear and the anxieties overtake me doing my job.  So one, just out of the blue, I didn't have a clue what I was gonna do.  I drove up, the same reception I would get month after month.  Now at this point they knew who I was.  It was just an intimidation factor I think.  Let me make her uncomfortable.  I got out of the car, and just started screaming to the top of my lung.  I spoke to everybody.  I was just going in circles: how y'all doing?  Hello, good morning, good evening, good afternoon, hi, hi, hi, spoke to everybody.  And everybody's going, is she crazy?  But you know what it did, it opened up the door for me to allow for these people--they laughed at me.  We laughed together at me, because I know that they realize enough had been enough.  And you guys have had control over this for a long time now.  I'm taking the control back.  And I had to use common sense to do it, and I did it in a pleasant manner.  As a result, that same community, I'd go, you want some greens out of my garden?  You want some tomatoes?  You want this?  You want that?  And it's so funny about human nature and people.  That, given a chance, the unknown just clouds people's distortion of what you are and what you're about.  But given an opportunity, most people are decent people.  And so driving to Seagoville wasn't a chore anymore.  In fact, it became pleasant.  My clients would say, "Ah, you missed a month.  They were looking for you out here."  Start--they started to look for me and made me feel really good because that was another negative adversity that I overcame.
Story_ID: 238635
Speaker 1: The biggest was believing in a system that I was working for.  Man, people were coming out, going right back, because we had nothing.  And I really just thought, I'm working; I'm doing a job, but it's not working.  It's not impacting recidivism.  It's not doing anything.  And I would tell everybody around me: "One of these days, if I'm an opport- in a, in, in a decision-making position here, if I'm ever"--at the time the title was regional supervisor [at Texas Department of Criminal Justice]--"if I'm ever regional supervisor, I'm gonna change some things."  Everybody laughed at me.  "It's not gonna happen, [HistoryMaker] Vicki [Hallman].  You're black, girl.  Did you look in the mirror?  You're black, and you're a female, plus you got a big mouth, and you talk too much.  You're so unorthodox, you make people mad; you piss 'em off.  You're not, it's not gonna happen." And lo and behold.  I prayed about it.  I kept saying, God, make me the person you'll have me to be.  I told you earlier I come from a very spiritual family.  And whereas we're not Bible toting evangelists that evangelize to people, this is within, and I know that I can do anything.  That's why my favorite saying and scripture is, "I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me," [Philippians 4:13] because he took me through a lot.  I had a supervisor that could not stand my, the air that I breathe, and he gave me a really hard time.  He tried to run me away.  And I would have run.  My daddy [Curtis McCarty] wouldn't let me (laughter).  "You don't run away from anybody or anything, you know that.  You stand there, and you fight, and you do the best you can."  And so I went through several years of really being treated really bad by this guy.  And I continued to do my job, and I continued to have trouble.  But (unclear) things worked out.  He was transferred out, and I prama- I applied for a unit supervisor's position probably about twelve times, never could go from this level.  And he would tell me in an interview.  I'd be one on one.  "As long as I'm regional supervisor, you're never gonna get promoted."  And I'd leave out that interview, and I would cry, big crybaby.  And I'd call my daddy, and he'd say, "Shut up that crying, girl.  (Unclear) go do better; next one come up, you apply again."  And I'd go back in there.  So the last time we were gonna be smart.  We were take a recorder, a little bitty mini cassette recorder.  We're gonna tape this guy telling me that I'm never gonna get promoted.  It had nothing to do with my job performance or my abilities.  It had to do he just didn't like me.  Lo and behold, the one time I was ready, just as tickled pink.  Well, the personnel person from Austin [Texas] sat in on the interviews, and so, of course, I didn't get that type of feedback from this guy.  He was really sweet.  I didn't get the job either, but I didn't that, to get a chance to record him.  And so after he was transferred out, I got promoted the first time with the new regional supervisor.  So that's my entrance into management, didn't really like it.
Speaker 2: Now what year is this when you finally get promoted?
Speaker 1: In 1987.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 238636
Speaker 1: Didn't like it.  Didn't like it 'cause here I am now responsible for other people's behavior.  I had a unit of thirteen officers [at Texas Department of Criminal Justice], most of 'em older.  And I think that they tricked me.  I thought I had the most problematic unit that somebody could give me.  And I thought, wow, I'm still pretty young--(unclear)--I'm new at this.  They could have given me something easier, but nothing in life comes easy.  And mind you, again, I'm, my sights were set on being a regional supervisor.  And everybody is laughing in my face, and I'm praying about it.  So God threw me two, ooh God, he took me through a lot of different changes so that I could grow, mature some, grow professionally, grow personally, had a lot of personal growth to do.  I had my daughter [Tiffini Hallman] in '79 [1979], so I was a young mom and a young wife.  And here I am, balancing a job that was really meant for a man.  So, all of that was on my plate, and I had to learn how to balance it.  My family, this being their first grandchild, was a major support, so that helped a lot with my daughter.  But I just wanted to be the best.  Everybody was getting promoted around me, and I told you, I was Diana Ross, and I didn't get a chance to be the leader.  For the first time in my life, I was behind the plate.  Everybody else was getting promoted; I wasn't.  So, when I finally did, I wanted to be good at what I was doing.  I was unorganized, had a lot of passion but needed some managerial skills.  See, I had to learn the difference between being a leader and being a manager, and I didn't know it at that point, so some more I'm growing.  But I came good at what I did, and I promoted again within two years.  In 1989, I became a parole supervisor.  I mean I got my own office.  I was an officer manager in less than two years.  Boy, was I delighted.  That was my beginning that allowed me to be where I am now, wow.  I got a chance to make my own decisions and run my office the way I thought it need to be.  I still had policies and procedures I had to issue too.  The agency still hadn't changed its paradigm on the way we supervise our clients.  I still did not agree with that, that we just send people back to prison for anything that they did wrong, but I still went along with it.  I knew that in order to be a good leader, I also had to learn to follow.  So, I followed instructions.  I've always been able to follow instructions very, very well regardless of how I personally felt about 'em.  But when I got my own office, I came into my own.  I was able to hold my own office meeting.  I was back front and center.  So it wasn't just as much of a egotistical thing.  I got my self-assuredness back.  Here I am now responsible for a whole office full of people, and under me are the first line managers.  And so my responsibilities is to build them.  Again, still, all of the supervisors that we were having were white males.  And I was a parole supervisors for three different offices, 'cause around here you get transferred in the blink of an eye, didn't like it.  I'd find my comfort zone and get the office to running.  And so I'm always competitive, so my office was run better than the other office and then boom.  They changed me and put me somewhere else and I would ah, fighting with tooth and nail, but I'd have to go and do it again, and start all over again, and began a process that I knew that I was good at.  I could take all the weaknesses, and I could turn 'em into strength.  People may not like me, but they respected me, and they would do what I asked them to do.  And so from 1989 up until 1995, I served as a parole supervisor.
Story_ID: 238637
Speaker 1: Then the hierarchy of my agency [Texas Department of Criminal Justice] changed, and they brought in assistant regional directors, which is a stepping stone.  And what you did then, you had your own area now.  So, I got promoted.  I served on a taskforce in Austin [Texas] for two years.  It was a taskforce of recidivism.  There I learned numbers and, and, and, and because I never was really inclined to be focused in on statistics.  Statistically, I just knew our system wasn't working.  I didn't care what percentage was or what percentage wasn't.  I was part of the workforce, and I knew that it wasn't working so I really didn't care about statistics.  But when I became part of the taskforce, the first person that allowed for me to actually be me and my ideas across the table, 'cause consisted of people from all over the state.  First time I'm thrown in an arena with people outside of the Dallas [Texas] area.  This was comprised of people from everywhere.  And I was able to sit around at a conference room table in Austin, Texas, or Huntsville [Texas], wherever we may meet, and people listened to my ideas.  They thought, wow, she's innovative; she's passionate; she's a hardhead.  That debate taught me to engulf an issue and learn the facts.  I never said anything where I couldn't back it with a fact.  Some people talk just to hear themselves talk.  I've never been one of those.  I always had some factual information.  And people started looking at me from a different light.  I had shed the stereotype of being a renegade, because through the years of me not being able to promote it, they had built a really stereotype.  She's a renegade.  You can't do anything with her.  She's out of control.  She says what she wants to say, and she has no respect for authority.  I've always respected authority, always, didn't meant that authority was right, but I've always respected it.  I was trained that way, from my teachers, to my professors, to anyone in authori- to the police.  I've always respected authority.  But often when you get a jacket though, there's a stereotypical; it stays with you for a long time.  And with me, it stayed with me.  It went from out of the confines of Dallas to everywhere.  She's a renegade.  You don't wanna do with her because she's gonna hold up your meetings 'cause she's always gonna argue a point.  I never argue anything that makes sense to me, but I never just accept anything that doesn't.  And so being on this taskforce allowed people to be objective and open up and say wow, this girl knows what she's talking about.  And as assistant regional director I was responsible for the operation of parole in Dallas.  I got to be over Dallas.  I had five different parole officers at the time.  I was like, wow.  This is me.  My family is celebrating.  My church [Pilgrim Rest Missionary Baptist Church, Dallas, Texas] celebrated.
Speaker 2: Now, what, what year is this?
Speaker 1: This was in 1995.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I had come into my own.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That was the first of my first: first female here to be assistant regional director; first African American to be assistant regional director.  It was wild.  I got my own area.  All the managers in Dallas were now under me.  Well, I did this probably independently for two years, and they decided this is a lot of territory.  I had more territory to cover.  My staff was larger than everybody else's, and so they bought in another assistant regional director.  My ego did not like it at all.  I thought, I'm doing a really good job.  It's personal for me, but it wasn't personal.  It made sense.  I had a lot of territory.  I had a lot of clients.  I had a lot of employees that was totally different from my counterparts.  And so when they decided to put another assistant regional to usurp some of the responsibility, I didn't want to hear it.  Well, the first one was a white male, and he took over I think one of my offices.  It may have been two, one or two.  I can't remember correctly, but, didn't wanna share that.  And then as things would have it, wow, I came to appreciate it because I got a chance to focus more on the offenders.  I've always been here for the clients, always.  And this is when I came into my own.
Story_ID: 238638
Speaker 1: Some of the people that I introduced you to earlier became part of what I call my team.  We were a team, my A-Team.  And Mr. Moore [ph.], who was originally from Chicago [Illinois], one day came to me and said, "[HistoryMaker] Ms. [Vicki] Hallman, you know, you harp a lot about social changes.  Well, we can do within our own agency [Texas Department of Criminal Justice] instead of looking for resources outside.  You harp on that; you've been working on that.  And why don't we do our own job fair?  Why don't we as an agency host a job fair for these offenders?"  And I thought, that's a lot of hard work, you know.  That's a lot of work.  But here I am, I have someone who wanted to do this.  How dare me not allow him to?  My position at this point in my life was to empower people, to raise them up so that hopefully as we moved as a race, we will be moving upward together.  It wasn't about Vicki just moving up.  It was about the people that believed in what she was trying to do.  And we hosted our first job fair in 1997, January, 1997, cold as heck.  You know if you know anything about Texas, we don't really, really get cold weather.  Out of all the days we chose to host this job fair, it was freezing outside.  And I thought, this is not gonna work.  A ho- we had all these employees and employers show up.  Actually, we were shocked.  We were amazed that whoo, they're actually coming.  They're actually considering coming to a job fair that's gonna be strictly for ex-offenders.  These are the candidates for employment.  It was phenomenal.  Prior to the job fair, one of the things that I decided to do when I got to be assistant regional director is, let me go out here and educate this community that everybody released from prison are not a bad person.  Let me compete with the media, where they hear all the negative connotations about ex-offenders and what it's all about, and I was the first.  I had to go in and people would (intake breath), wow.  Here's somebody working within the system that's talking positive about the ex-offenders, and so I was met with mixed emotions, whoo.  And I went everywhere and anywhere anyone would allow for me to speak, anywhere, audience of two or two hundred.  And so I became the hottest thing going for a while.  Everybody, every civil, social service organization started invited me out to come and speak and educate them, people from the Lions Club [International], the Rotary [International] clubs, and, and some of my most affluent areas.  I started getting invited to go speak everywhere.  I became banquet speakers, luncheon speaker.
Speaker 2: Yeah, what, what was your message (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My message was the same message I have in 2004, deal with the four Cs.  The first message was everybody deserves a second chance, parole and layman's terms, it's a second chance.  It's an opportunity for someone to come out of prison and get it right.  Everybody can change.  To the Christians and the people in church, I talk to them about how hypocritical we were.  We changed.  We didn't lay down a sinner and wake up a saint.  We changed.  We have clients that actually change, choices.  There are some good people incarcerated who made really bad choices.  And last was the challenge, the challenge for my agency, my stage, the community, family, churches, everybody should be part of this challenge, to be part of this reintegration process.  And so our job fair was our first really challenge.  It's one thing to talk a good talk.  But at, to that date, I hadn't walked the walk yet.  And the job fair was the first challenge that we had as an agency to say, under my leadership, to say okay; let's see what we can do out here.  In that cold, in all of that rain, we had over six hundred clients.  The line was lined up prior to 12:00--I mean prior to 7:00 a.m.  I drove up and had to sit in the car.  I couldn't believe.  I thought I was in the wrong place.  I couldn't believe the amount of people that were lined up.  And it reinforced in me that these people really do want to work.  Here is a prime example.  This should tell some employers that, wow, under these conditions, they're standing out there waiting for the doors to open.  They want to work.
Story_ID: 238639
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: I was so proud (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Here in Texas--
Speaker 2: --of my staff [at Texas Department of Criminal Justice].
Speaker 1: --were, were, were conditions favorable for someone on parole to find a job?  I know in Illinois--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --they had issues about--
Speaker 2: No, not at all.
Speaker 1: --people coming out and not even being able to get a driver's license, you know.  I mean what, what--
Speaker 2: The most unfavorable--
Speaker 1: --what was it?
Speaker 2: --conditions that you can find in this state.  It was really bad at the time.  So we had a lot of unemployed people.  Our employment rate was like 52--unemployment rate.  I'm sorry.  It was like 52 percent.  And even the other--
Speaker 1: This is among the people on parole (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And even those that were employed had the low paying, you know, no benefit type of employment situation where it didn't allow them and their approach to life to move from point A to point B.  They worked just to say that they worked because one of the conditions of their parole was they had to work.  And so a lot of people just took whatever menial general day labor job that they could just to comply with the rules.  Mr. Moore's [ph.] focus, which ultimately became my focus, was we're gonna find employers that's not only going to give them a job, and they don't have to go lie on their application, they can, they actually know they're on parole so they can start in and tell the truth about where they've been, removed a lot of anxieties, as well, as they're gonna have some benefits for themselves and their children.  They're gonna know what it's like to have to pay the taxes, and the social security, and the retirement, but yet they're gonna have dental and health.  And it was a glorious time for us because we had over, I'd say about 150 employers that showed up [to the job fair].  That day, that day, one hundred offenders got a job.  We rejoiced like you would've, like it was one thousand.  And of course you got the media that's there saying well, how do you know it's successful?  One person got a job.  That defines success for us, and because of that, we, we got a lot of media attention as a result from editorials to the newspapers.  And prior to the job fair--because I am kind of gutsy.  You know I'll do things that nobody else will do--we called a meeting with The Dallas Morning News, which at the time was our only local newspaper, and met with all the editors.  And one of the things that I asked them is if we can show you the positive things that we're doing, would you report them?  Would you be there to put them in print?  Would you be there?  Give us an opportunity to show the positive side.  And they rose to the occasion.  And so we got a chance to educate Dallas County [Texas] community in a positive manner and showed all of these ladies and gentlemen standing outside in that cold that were willing to go and, and do totally the opposite of what the perception was from the community.  No matter what the adversity is, I wanna work.  That was the beginning of changing things--
Story_ID: 238640
Speaker 1: From there [job fair] we went through programming.  We started putting in programming here.  San Antonio [Texas], which is in another part of Texas, in Central Texas, had what we call a day resource center.  At the time we didn't know anything about that.  We're still providing the regular orthodox supervision.  We didn't know about programming and treatment.  We relied on the community to provide those services.  But when I was on the taskforce I learned a lot about the options.  We looked into other states, what they were doing.  Nobody was really doing anything.  And so the director there at the time said, gave us carte blanche.  Go out, go back to your area, and my area, of course, was Dallas [Texas]--I was still an assistant regional director [at Texas Department of Criminal Justice]--and develop what you can in terms of programming.  And they allowed me to open up a day resource center.  So, we were the second in the state to have a day resource center.  You know what our resource center was? One room, we had one conference.  We had led--you would have thought that we had the building we're in now.  This is an independent building now because we worked really, really hard for it.  But we had that one room.  We provided classes.  We'd shuffle one group out and bring another group in.  We provided life skill classes, GED classes, substance abuse classes.  After they started growing so, we started using the halls; we used the clerical area; we used anything we could to provide these classes.  And lo and behold, after a year--'cause we started in 1996; we had the job fair in '97 [1997]--we had people from the community, from the junior colleges start calling saying I wanna come teach computer.  People started volunteering: I wanna come in.  It was amazing.  It was amazing that now we got people who thought that this was probably one of the worst systems that was develop that are now volunteering to come in and be part of it, and it was wonderful.
Story_ID: 238641
Speaker 1: Let's talk about some of the other programs that--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --oh, well, we, we're in the round, we're around 1997 with you.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And now when did you get promoted to regional supervisor [Region II director, Texas Department of Criminal Justice, parole division]?
Speaker 2: Two thousand and two [2002], August 1st.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I don't want to skip anything, though, but that's--
Speaker 2: Well, actually my professional growth was just, just talking about the programs we implemented.  We implemented something that's probably caused me to be more noted in this state [Texas], in this community, and other places.  Females, First and Foremost [F3], we took a look because I'm a female and know all the obstacles that face females, we took a good at our female offenders.  We started seeing more going to prison.  The increase or the influx of incarceration of females became phenomenal.  And they were leaving children behind for other people to raise.  So we developed a group, a support group, a life skills group, and deal strictly with females and their issues, first gender-based program that they had in the state, and it still exists.  It's one of the most flourishing programs that I have.  The second thing we did that everybody said oh no, we're not gonna try it, we developed a support group for African American males [African American Male Survival Skills (AAMSS)].  And, and these were my mindsets and so I can take full, whereas I share a lot of things with a lot of people, I can take full responsibility for those because this is what I wanted.  And by hook or by crook, we was gonna find a way to do it.  We, when I talk about not only was the change coming in the agency, but the change, my biggest challenge came from changing the staff's attitude about supervision.  It was really, really very easy for staff to supervise the orthodox manner.  We wasn't responsible for anything other than you get out there.  You go do what you're supposed to do.  When you come back next month, you let us know.  The way I wanted to do things, meaning that you had to care about an individual regardless of that number they had on their back, that they're people.  And that was a big paradigm switch for us, said wow.  Two years on the recidivism taskforce allowed me to grasp it, and see it and believe it, and make it part of my being.  But me as a person of God, I always had it there.  It's just bringing the two together and making it work for me at work.
Speaker 1: Now, now, did you have a lot of resistance to, to that?
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Talking about we are not social workers.  We're parole officers.  We don't have time to baby and coddle.  You making us be on parole.  We are not appreciating this.  Second chances, making it too hard for a second chance?  They knew that when they came out they wasn't supposed to use drugs, and now you wanna give them another chance.  Boy, did I have it.  But it didn't make any difference because when you start talking to people and making it personal, oh, a lot of us got second chances and other chances in life.  So don't you think that we are not all into chances.  God is in the chances business.  Don't you never forget that.  And that because a lot of us are here today--some of my staff probably would have went to prison, you know, had it not been for another chance or a second chance.  You put things in perspective, people will buy it.  Go to the community with the same thing.  I don't know what my audiences always like.  I don't know their backgrounds.  I don't really care.  I never try to research it because literally you and I know that all of us have done things some time down the line in our lives that we're not very, very proud of.  We can keep it in the closet, and we can be quiet if we want to, but we know that we've done them.  And so, if you make it personal, took this step back, and think back, step outside of yourself to take a look at yourself, often you'll change the way you think, and spent a lot of time doing that, spent a lot of time with resistance.
Story_ID: 238642
Speaker 1: Now one other impediment to, to do an effective parole as a parole officer is the sheer volume of people--
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.
Speaker 1: --that have to be tracked.  In Illi--I know in Illinois, I mean in the Chicago [Illinois] area, it's just unbelievable the number of people one parole officer has to keep up with.  And I've heard, you know--
Speaker 2: Everywhere.
Speaker 1: --discussed everywhere.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: It's like, it's like they give you a caseload that you can't possibly keep up with.
Speaker 2: It's very difficult.  You know what made it easier?  And this is what started switching people's mindset along with my "challenge choices changing" speech, we start providing our own resources.  I didn't try to grasp the masses of people, because as assistant regional director [Region II, Texas Department of Criminal Justice, parole division], I was only responsible for parole in Dallas [Texas].  I didn't have anything to do with the sister city, Fort Worth [Texas].  It was only Dallas was where my focus was.  And so what we did was say hey, if we do our own resources, if we providing to our own programming, it's easier to keep up with them.  It's easier to make sure that they're do it.  I found a way to show them this would make your jobs easier.
Speaker 1: So, instead of chasing around after the, the parolee--
Speaker 2: Instead of running all over the city--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --trying to make sure they're going to GED classes, trying to make sure they're in substance abuse classes, let's have the classes here [Region II parole office, Dallas, Texas].  We call it the one-stop shopping.  They can shop every one of their needs in one place.  And we found, we identified every need, and we looked at every risk, 'cause mind you, we had a two-fold mission.  Not only was it the reintegration process.  We also had to deal with our biggest mission, the protection of society, to make sure that we're keeping the community safe.
Speaker 1: Now that's another fact that--
Speaker 2: Whoa.
Speaker 1: --people, that's, that's become a part of the discussion around community policing in this, in the nation now, about how in, in the most crime-infested communities, which are the poorest communities, the same people do the same crimes over and over again.  And as soon as they're released, they're likely to do the same thing because they didn't have any, any, there was no change made by sending them to--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --prison.
Speaker 2: --historically that's the way it's been.
Speaker 1: I'm from Dallas, so I can tell you Dallas is a very apathetic city.  We're a city that says if it doesn't affect me in my backyard, I could care less.  We know it happened, i.e., drugs.  Drugs start impacting everybody's community.  So, as I fondly tell people, we not only go to the projects.  We go to the penthouses now because drugs now have invaded the most affluent area, where their loved ones are now going to prison as well.  So people from all walks of life start listening.  It just wasn't inner city ghetto, or inner city project area, or lower economic, people of lower financial status.  It became a holistic approach, a community approach.  So we developed a council called community participatory council, CPC for short.  And that council consists of people from all backgrounds, and we meet once a month.  And we sit around this table right here, and we talk about issues.  But I'm, I'm, I'm skipping ahead of myself.
Story_ID: 238643
Speaker 1: So, as assistant regional director [Texas Department of Criminal Justice, parole division] with, again, with my area [Region II] just being Dallas [Texas], the programming and the things that we developed became outstanding.  Newspaper reporters came in and start doing things just on the programming itself.  I have newspaper articles on the Females, First and Foremost [F3] program from the Cognitive [Restructuring] program.  We really looked long and hard at cognitive behavior because one of the things we decided, if you can change a way a person thinks, ultimately his behavior would change.  So we started getting, I started getting staff trained on the cognitive approach.  Let's deal with the thinking areas.  Let's think about, let's talk about the criminal addictive cycle, what keeps them in this cycle.  And they in, they loved it.  They loved our approach.  They loved the fact that any program you participate in you can come true.  It took a little of my personality out, and I put it into the program to say this is the place where you can say what you want to say.  It's not sitting across the desk from your parole officer where you gotta try to say the right things.  In this place we're not parole agents.  We are people of the community.  I'm somebody's mom.  I'm not a director here.  I'm a female.  I'm, I'm, I'm somebody's ex-wife.  I'm somebody's, you know, we personalized it, and we gave of ourselves.  We shared our stories.  The first time we did that, the clients sitting around looking at us as if we had two heads.  They weren't accustomed to it, but that's how we got the trust factor.  They trust us now.  They trust us that if they got any anger issues to say exactly what they are, in light of going of going out to kill someone of course.  We still have our responsibility to protect the society.  But we wanted it to be well, this is where you can come and be honest.  Let's not talk about, we won't dwell on the fact that you shot dope last night.  This is the place to come and tell us I messed up, and I did some drugs, instead of worrying about us warning, running to get a warrant.  Focus on our programming is not what you did but why.  Why becomes the biggest issue.  Why is the reason we solve a lot of different things.  Why is what allows us to develop the resources that we've developed, and so they're all in one place.  So we eliminated a lot of excuses too.  I don't know where it is.  Oh, you know where this place is; it's the parole office [Dallas, Texas].  I don't have any money.  We're gonna give you bus tokens to get here.  I don't want to get violated.  I don't want to go back to school because I'm too old now, and I didn't like the way the teachers taught me.  So I initially got the [Dallas] Independent School District to come in and provide teaching for GED.  It wasn't working.  It dawned on me, y'all the reason why they dropped out of school in the first place, so I found staff that was, had education in their background.  I got a teacher's certificate, so I was able to teach anything.  So not only did I ask staff to do it, they got a chance to see me.  Never before had they interacted with a director.  I was right there, every, every night I worked long hours.  I was there.  I was there till they start believing in me.  They, they could see me, someone on the street, and they say that's the parole lady.  That's their nickname they call me, because I'm teaching these classes; I'm facilitating; I'm being part of it.  I'm not just asking staff.  And we got no salary.  To this day, we get no extra money for it.  It's just a belief that comes from within that something we're doing extra on the side is making the difference.  That's the reason why I've been acknowledged and recognized in the community.  That's what makes me first.  It's the passion and approach in which I've taken a lot of different things.
Story_ID: 238644
Speaker 1: And then when I got promoted to regional director [Region II, Texas Department of Criminal Justice, parole division], it really made history.  Here is this little, wild, unorthodox, stereotyped person who was a renegade, who had no respect, who people say would never get into management, here she is now regional director.  It's one of the highest honors that could have been bestowed upon me.  So now, now, not only am I responsible for Dallas [Texas], I've got Dallas-Fort Worth [Texas]; I've got all of North Texas.  I, I, I listed all the counties that I'm now responsible for.  I have thirteen parole officers versus five.  I have almost a staff of six hundred people.  That's a lot--
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: --twenty-three thousand clients under my jurisdiction.  I have the largest area in the state by a population of clients and by population of officers, me.  I'm the only female, and I'm the only African American.  I sit around the conference table and I'm it.  But I'm not back at Hillcrest High School [Dallas, Texas] anymore.  I feel good.  I'm confident; I'm self-assured.  I'm gonna do the right thing.  I pray about all decisions that are made.  And I work in a government where you're not supposed to bring in religion.  And I told you, I'm not a, a, a Bible toting evangelist.  I am who I am, and I put God first, and I think that it's because of that, that I, like Jabez [ph.], have got my territory expanded.  And I have judges that call me now.  I'm, I'm meeting with a judge this evening.  I'm gonna be his mouthpiece.  This is from somebody nobody ever paid attention to, just because we took that extra mile, that extra step of not settling for status quo.  When things are going good now, I have my other counterparts from the other parts of the state call me and say okay, what are y'all doing up there?  We need to know 'cause you're doing something.
Speaker 2: Now, so have you reduced recidivism rates significantly?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Our employment, recidivism rate is now 33.3 percent.  We went from 33.3--we went from 48 percent to 33.3.  What a joy that is.  I got the Governor's Award last--no, 2002.  I got the Governor's Award, big, big award for me.  This is still very a conservative city [Dallas, Texas], so regardless to what we're doing, it's still not, city government is not buying into it, but I had a city councilman came and sit down at the table with me on Monday.  Now he wants to become involved in some of the things that I'm trying to do.  So it's a slow process, but it is a process nevertheless, and it's a good process.  And the fact that I'm the head of this process gives me the pride of showing up here every day.  Am I commonplace?  I think so.  I spend a lot of my time with the clients.  I don't think that I know it all, so I ask them.  I'll go in the lobby and sit with them and spend a day with them, asking them what do you guys need, listening to them.  If we don't choose to listen to them, we don't know which direction to go.  And the criminal justice agencies historically don't have the type of time.  I have to make that time in order to be effective, in order to be different.  This is what have allowed for me to stand out from the rest.  It's not just my gender or my race.  Of course, that's something that people see first, but it is the philosophy in which we apply supervision here that has allowed for us to be outstanding.  That's how I got to go to Chicago [Illinois], the Female program [Females, First and Foremost (F3)].  They searched around the, the country for someone else that was doing it.  And I had done a workshop in Jacksonville, Florida, and somebody that was sitting in the audience remembered me and told somebody else and told somebody else.  I've had people from Washington [D.C.], from the [U.S.] Department of Justice, to come and sit around with me to see what is it.  How did you get the community involved?  I mean all of these are honors.  It's nothing that I take for granted.  I try my best to remain humble because it doesn't have to be like that.  At any given point, I, I could not be, have been regional director.  When I got regional director, it was eighteen people that applied for this job.  And all of 'em were just as qualified and, and maybe some more qualified, but it was my time.  Ecclesiastes tell us there's a time under the seasons for everybody, a time and a purpose.  It's my time.  You sitting here today, I told you I wondered what is it that I've done that makes it so remarkable, but it's my season, that someone thought enough of me to send my name in. It's my time.
Story_ID: 238645
Speaker 1: Some of the programs you started are programs I, I just can't imagine a white male starting, like the, the F3 [Females, First and Foremost] program--
Speaker 2: Oh no.
Speaker 1: --and the African American [Male] Survival Skills program [AAMSS], and the--
Speaker 2: Of course, they're the only ones that's in the state [Texas].
Speaker 1: --Hispano, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --[Hispanos] Survival Skills program.
Speaker 2: --still the only one that's in the state.  All three of those programs is the only one.  And we [Texas Department of Criminal Justice] are broken up into five regions in this state--
Speaker 1: And, and, and--
Speaker 2: --in the parole division.
Speaker 1: --these programs are predicated on, on the fact that, I mean that, on the, what, the premise that, that females had special needs.  African American men, of which the prison population all over--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the country is booming with, has some kind of special problem, which it seems like it would be obvious to most people that something's definitely going on, if, if, if most of our prisons are populated with African, by, by African American men or Hispanic men.
Speaker 2: You know why I developed an Hispanos program?  Strictly out of ignorance.  I wanted to approach parole from a gender and cultural perspective.  One day I was sitting down talking to an offender, and I'm demanding that he go get his GED.  It's a Hispanic guy, demanded it.  You need to get a GED.  You get a GED, you're gonna get a better job.  The Hispanic culture is not that, about the education.  It's about the man of the household is the leader, the, the breadwinner.  I didn't know this because it's not my culture.  And I thought, how dare me try to tell someone else when a culture doesn't mandate that they necessarily have to have a GED or any type of education.  The culture mandates that they work.  And as a result, I thought, I can't do this and be effective.  So we developed an Hispanos program, and we used people from the Hispanic community to come in and foster the same things that we're doing in the African American male setting and the female setting but from a cultural perspective.  I walk in there and they're speaking Spanish, can't speak a lick.  I tell people all the time, I know when it's going good: they laugh and I laugh.  I said you guys could be talking about me, but if it's funny, if you're enjoying it, I'm laughing when they're laughing, and it has become a joke now.  And so they love it; the Hispanic community loves it.  They, they get to speak their language.  And some of 'em don't necessarily, all Hispanic people don't speak Spanish, ding dong, reality check.  Don't automatically assume that everybody of Hispanic descent speaks Spanish, so it's a give and take.  And I use Hispanic staff to facilitate this program.  I use African American males here.  And you know what has empowered them?  To want to be better, to be a role model without even knowing that they're role models, to bring together and dialogue what is truly impacting the African American male, that quit utilizing the excuses of growing up in the projects 'cause so does some of my staff, so does some of them; that I'm from a single-parent home.  So is most of my staff; that I could, I can't do this because of this, that, and the other, so is some of my staff.  And I come a fam- from a family of a long line of drug addiction, so does some of my staff.  We've removed the excuses, so let's talk about what to do about it.  Let's talk about how we rose over the obstacles and rose to the occasion; that's what we talk about.
Story_ID: 238646
Speaker 1: Okay, now are any of your programs being duplicated in other regions of the state [Texas]?  Have they tried it, or--
Speaker 2: They're trying.  You know, they tried it several times, and then they dissipate.  And the reason being is they don't have the commitment that I have for my staff.  See, it's not about a Vicki McCarty Hallman [HistoryMaker Vicki Hallman] thing anymore.  It's about the people that I've surrounded myself with, the people who are committed and believe in exactly what I believe in, that come here week, after week, after week without any kind of pay.  And so, as I go anywhere, I'll tell them our curriculum is no different from anybody else's curriculum because the offenders that we address have the same issues, whether it's in Chicago [Illinois], or whether it's in Texas, or whether it's in Dallas [Texas], or whether it's in Atlanta [Georgia].  The issues for people that's been incarcerated are the same, job, housing, you know, bringing a family together, low self-esteem.  All of it is the same.  The thing that makes the difference is the passion in which we address these issues; it's caring.  And I teach my staff, and the analogy may be a bad one, but it's a true one that our offenders are just like dogs.  They know when you're scared; they know when you're lying; they know when it's true.  So you have to come to them, and you'd better come correct, or they're gonna identify you as a phony right away, and you're gonna lose credibility.  So I have committed people.  That is the only formula.  It doesn't take a brain scientist to come up with it.  It's just the formula is people that say yeah.  I see it work.  I wanted to share a letter I got today, this morning.
Speaker 1: Oh, well, okay, well--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I can't read it.  Right, but I just talk--
Speaker 2: I got a letter today.
Speaker 1: But what happened.
Speaker 2: I told you about it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what, what, yeah?
Speaker 2: This is what keeps me going 'cause I get tired.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'm not, to tell you that I don't get tired or weary, I get so tired sometimes.  And when I get tired, I go sit out in the lobby.  That's my dose of medication.  When I get real, when I get tired, I'm thinking, wow.  The system is so big.  It's so much to impact.  I want people to take me serious, and I get so exhausted.  But I go sit out in that lobby, and I get rejuvenated by the clients, when they call me by name, and they sit down, and they feel comfortable with a first-time meeting and sit down and just talking to me about everything.  And what makes me feel better is when I follow up some things they tell me, even if it's that informal setting, that I find the time to follow up, or I get my assistants to look into this for me so I can get back with an individual so they know that that conversation we just had in that lobby did not, it wasn't in vain.  And then on the days that I get tired, it's so funny how things happen.  When I got regional director [Region II, Texas Department of Criminal Justice, parole division], boy, it was a lot of obstacles.  People wanted to say that I got it because of affirmative action.  They had to put a female in there, said today they got two for one.  They got an African American, and they got a female.  No one took into consideration that I'd done twenty years plus when I got promoted to regional director.  That as assistant regional director, I had developed all of these programs.  But just like any organization or any agency, anything, it's always gonna be the jealousies and the people that's gotta say that they believe in what you say and do, and but those are the people that allow me to sometimes get weary.
Story_ID: 238647
Speaker 1: And then I get a card like I got today through the mail that says thanks for your support. This is from a female client who I was about to send back to prison a year ago.  I was so fed up with her addiction.  And I really don't have, most directors [in Texas Department of Criminal Justice, parole division] don't have anything to do with clients one on one.  They don't have that time.  I can't get away from them because they're, they're in my blood, and they're what keeps me going.  And so I do a lot of intervention counseling.  When all my staff have done all that they can do before, in a lot of instances I wanna send 'em back to prison.  I say send 'em to me.  I either do one thing, have my come to Jesus meeting, close the door, or we sit down and we really talk.  I'm going to get through a street game, 'cause they're gonna bring the game to, to, to me at first.  But even though I wasn't from the streets, I've been educated.  I got a Ph.D. in the streets because I spend so much time with my clients, so they teach me.  I know the game.  And this individual lady, so special to me, because I was about to give up.  It was one of those days.  It was a Friday evening.  I'd been doing intervention counseling all day.  Here she comes at 4:00 full of game, all the excuses, wanting to blame everything, the white man, the job situation.  Broke it down, wasn't gonna deal with it.  I'm real up front.  I learned that that same negative connotation that, placed on me as a parole office became my strength.  I'm an in-your-face, upfront individual.  If I'm wrong I'm the first to apologize.  That's what I like about me.  And in this case, she and I were battling.  I was tired.  I was ready to go home.  I was about to give up, and my spirit wouldn't let me do it.  And so I said, "Look, you're gonna go back to prison. " She says, "I'm not gonna."  I said, "You're gonna go back to prison, or you're gonna die on the streets," 'cause she was doing cocaine really bad.  Her attitude was, "I'm going to die anyway.  I'm HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] positive."  Wow, diffused all that anger.  I had, immediately, instantaneously diffused me.  I was at a loss for words.  I am never at a loss for words.  I was at a loss for words.  So I said a silent prayer: God, with the words in my mouth, meditation in my heart, be acceptable in your sight, let me say something to this lady that's gonna cause her to think and feel, didn't even ask that he allow me to change her, just allow her to think and feel.  And so I shifted, went from one hip to the other, had a whole new wind.
Story_ID: 238648
Speaker 1: She'd been HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] positive for fourteen years.  I told her, you take that and use it for your advantage.  There's a lot of HIV positive women out there that don't know what to do with themselves.  God has allowed you to live fourteen years with it.  You've got a story to tell.  You'd better stick around to tell it.  She has grandchildren.  We talked about that, the relation with your grandchildren, for every excuse: "I can't, I can't put a Band-Aid on 'em," "I can't kiss 'em."  "But you can hug 'em."  And we battled and stayed in there with her about an hour and a half.  She left.  It was on a Friday.  I said let's make--let's make one short-term goal.  Let your short-term goal be that over the weekend you don't use, not gonna make it unrealistic, not gonna make it a week, not gonna make it a month, not gonna even say a year, over the weekend.  She called me that Monday just ecstatic.  Part of our conversation was she's part of the Female [First and Foremost (F3)] program.  I said share your story.  I'm scared if I tell 'em, [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Vicki] Hallman, won't nobody sit next to me.  I said I'll sit next to you.  She told me, because when she shared it with her personal friends everybody left her.  So the only people that would call her would be the dope dealers, and they'd call her over there 'cause she knew how to cook the dope real good.  So they'd call her.  So she said she had nobody to call her when she was down and out but the dope dealers 'cause they were the only one that fool with her.  I said call me.  I never give out my cell phone number, never give out that.  Something in my spirit allowed me to give it to her that day.  And that Monday she called and said I didn't use.  And we rejoiced.  You would have thought that we were rejoicing over a year.  That weekend turned into a week, three weeks, one month, two months.  She was feeling really good about herself, and she shared her story with the ladies.  That was a major step for her, and they didn't treat her like she had leprosy, they didn't.  They embraced it, and come to find out, surely, some more of 'em were dealing with it.  And whereas HIV is a confidential matter, I wasn't at liberty to tell her story, not and personalize it.  She can personalize it herself.  And two months later she relapsed.  I was so disappointed, took it real personal, was mad at her.  We had a graduation.  She graduated, but we fictitiously gave her a certificate because she didn't meet all the rules and regulations of graduation, and family full of, room full of family and friends.  And this what made me know that I was on the right track, and this was only last year, she got in front of the class and said I didn't really graduate.  She didn't have to tell anybody.  She says I didn't do the right thing.  I used drugs.  But I'm gonna graduate from this class.  I'll be in the next graduating class, and I'm gonna deserve it.  It was phenomenal for me.  She's been clean for seven months now.  And she's now heading up, been part of a ministry we've started in my church [Pilgrim Rest Missionary Baptist Church, Dallas, Texas], and she's really growing individually.  And I didn't give up on her, got mad at her, but I didn't give up on her.
Story_ID: 238649
Speaker 1: You wanted to talk about the community's involvement--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in what you're doing.
Speaker 2: I'm very, very proud of the community through education and through exposure in a positive light.  The community has truly embraced what we're trying to do here in the parole division [Region II, Texas Department of Criminal Justice].  I smile because last week I got a call from the mayor of Houston [Texas], wanting to know what it was I'm doing here in Dallas [Texas] that allowed us to stand out and be distinct.  And I thought, wow, there's a director in Houston, and they called me.  And one of the things that the community has done, we have a success celebration.  And these are a lot of the faith-based communities, and what they have done is every year, and we've did our fifth annual one year.  We did it last month.  They acknowledge all the vendors who had done parole positive one year, not a long time, one year.  So these people, some of these people have never done anything positive in their life.  They've never graduated from anything; they've never completed anything; they've never been acknowledged for anything.  And the prerequisites are that they: working, don't have arrests, try to have some type of resident stability, that they've gone to a class and actually graduated, they've discharged supervision, or they've exemplified a truly diligent effort in either getting employment or residence.  Diligent efforts count for something in this arena.  And so the first year we did it, we sent out about five hundred invitations to about five hundred clients.  About fifty of 'em showed up.  They thought it was sting.  We was gonna get all of 'em arrested because never in the history of this community or this agency or this state had anything done, anyone done anything like that.  And they knew that this was too good to be true, and they didn't come.  And so the sponsors of this had all of these presents, and they had this dinner catered for 'em.  And it was for their families, 'cause they get a chance to bring their families in.  And here we are, left with all of this food and presents.
Speaker 1: And they thought it was a sting operation--
Speaker 2: Un-huh.
Speaker 1: --like the--
Speaker 2: Didn't show up.  But word of mouth, one thing about the neighborhood, the street grapevine, the word got around.  So the second year, and the third year, and the fourth year, we have moved five different times 'cause we keep outgrowing it.  Everybody's showing up and bringing their families.  And I think that it's such a tremendous thing because it's not the parole division that's doing it.  It's the community that's saying we know that you have to come back to our community.  We accept this now.  We embrace and acknowledge those of you that are really trying.  And we do so by giving you and your family this dinner.  This owner of a restaurant allowed us to use his restaurant this past year.  We ran out of chairs.  I think that one day soon we're gonna have to go and do it at the [Kay Bailey Hutchinson] Convention Center [Dallas, Texas].  That's how large it's gotten, doesn't cost anybody anything; it is through donations from different churches and people that truly believe in what we're trying to do here.  And it's probably one of the most positive things that I could tell you about.
Story_ID: 238650
Speaker 1: And when you talk about what's a good leader, a good leader is knowing that the people that are under them are also being empowered, because just like I got the Governor's Award in 2002, Ms. [Evelyn] Shaffer was my assistant regional director [for Region II, Texas Department of Criminal Justice, parole division], the one that you met earlier, she got it for 2003.  Don't you know what trailblazer that does make me without being acknowledged for it, that it's just not about me.  It's about all the other people who also work around me or that work for me, that they are also too getting knowledge.  That's the impact that I want to leave when I leave this agency, that not only did she just try to look out for herself, but that there were other people around her that were allowed to be acknowledged and exemplified during the course of their everyday hard work as well.  When I come in here and cry, God gave me three angels: one is, three of 'em are were my assistant directors; they're my direct, they're my administrator assistants.  They take care of me, wow.  I tell Dell [ph.] it's just like having my mom [Bobbie Chism McCarty] at work.  You really generally care about what happens to me.  If someone's gonna come in and bring badness to it or whatever, alway--already has been an overwhelming day, they'll say we can't get through Nellsie [ph.].  That's important to me, somebody is actually looking out for my well-being.  My other administrative assistant, she knows how to do, she paraphrase me so well sometimes I forget it wasn't me that wrote it.  She'll say I was you today, when I answered a lot of correspondence.  She takes a lot of things off of me just by being me for the day.  And, and so she takes care a lot of my tedious work as far as communicating and corresponding.  And then I have my Hispanic assistant who steps in for me for the Hispanic community.  And she's kind of new to our, so I'm a little bit different from what she's accustomed to.  But they say women can't work for other women, and I have three wonderful women who works in there with me through my tirades, through my tantrums, through my tears, they're there, and I'm very blessed to have that.
Story_ID: 238651
Speaker 1: Now, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?  This is a question we always ask.
Speaker 2: My hopes and concerns for the African American community is that we go back to that old adage that it's gonna take all of us to raise a child and that we all invest ourselves in our community, that it's no more about me, me, me, and I, I, I, that we reinvest ourselves, spiritually, economically, physically, emotionally into our community.  And if you do that, you've gotta meet every facet and every spectrum of all of the needs that our community has.
Story_ID: 238652
Speaker 1: Now did your parents [Bobbie Chism McCarty and Curtis McCarty] get a chance to see you become--
Speaker 2: Yes my parents--
Speaker 1: --like--
Speaker 2: --are alive.  They're my biggest fans.  If they knew that they had an opportunity to sit here today, they'd be here.  I told you from each one of my parents I learned, they built up my character.  Their DNA has allowed for me to be--my mom's a very caring individual.  I think sometimes I care too much.  That's what keeps me in tears.  I care, and I want people to live by the golden rule, like I grew up: be, do unto others as you have them do unto me [sic.].  That always doesn't happen.  People don't always do unto me the way I do unto them.  But she says you treat them good anyway.  So, I got that from her.  My dad, you don't run from anything, no challenge, no nothing.  You do it and you do it with pride.  And if it means you gotta be arrogant, you be the definitive of arrogance in a positive manner that you are self-assured, because that's what they are.  They're still very prominent.  They're, they're very supportive.  I had a birthday last week.  They were here to help me turn that wonderful age.  And I got to talk about my children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm a good mom, maybe because I work at being a good mom.  It's something that I never take for granted.  I'm a good mom.  And boy, I take pride in that.  And a lot of things that I do on this job is because I'm a good mom.  I do it from a personal perspective and a professional perspective.  I have a fourteen year-old African American son [Nickolas Hallman].  Statistics say he won't live to see twenty-one, and if he does, he'll be in prison.  I'm hoping that I impact his life enough, because I'm a single mom, that I impact his life enough, that I am instilling integrity, and character, and value, and morals in him, but that regardless, there are a lot of families that have also instilled that in their children, and they still went wrong and went to prison, and that if that is in his future, and I pray that it is not, that someone in this criminal justice community that I work in will take the time out to look at his needs and to try to take care of him, whereas I've tried to take care of some of their family members by not just sending 'em back to prison without providing them with substance abuse treatment, or cognitive thinking, or resources and support, that someone would do it for my kid.  My daughter's [Tiffini Hallman] twenty-five.  She's a graduate of Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], very proud of that accomplishment.  She's working on her master's [degree].  She should have it in February, really, really career-driven, but one of the nicest young ladies.  If I had to go and pick 'em out of a garden and choose anybody I want, I'd pick them.  They're my pride and joy, Tiffini and Nickolas.
Story_ID: 238653
Speaker 1: What would you consider at this point now to, well, let me ask this question first: when you look back over your career so far, is there any, any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Yes, I wouldn't take things so personal, because personally, I, taking things so personal allowed me to spend too much time on a pity party, feeling sorry for myself, because I wanted people to treat me the way I treated them; I wouldn't have personalized it.  I'd take that energy and put it somewhere else.  Other than that, I don't think I'd do anything different because I give people the respect.  I acknowledge them.  I never take credit for something that I didn't do.  Even though it may, the, the respond, it may fall back on me, I give the credit to the person who came up with the idea.  And I will always empower people that way.  No, I don't think I'd do anything different other than I wouldn't personalize things so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 238654
Speaker 1: Well, in the same vein, when you look, look back over your career, what would you consider at this point, and you spoke somewhat to it earlier, to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: If I've helped somebody along my way, then my living has not been in vain, period.
Speaker 1: Okay, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that somebody could be a criminal, a co-worker, a stranger, a family member, period.  I don't want to live in vain.  I want it to be that, "Wow, she impacted me in some way."
Story_ID: 238655
Speaker 1: And similar to legacy but a little bit different is the last question we ask is how, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: That I'm a feisty, no-nonsense, can't shoot her the bull, caring, most enduring, understanding, lover of life, period, good mom.  I have a wonderful, wonderful fiance [Donald Dabbs (ph.)].  I'd like to think that I've been a good woman to him and that hopefully he'll be my husband one day--but that I get what I give.  I believe that you give somebody enough, you'll get it back.  Don't expect anything in return.  You get what you give.  Someone's always gonna be on the giving end.  And when I receive it's just surmountable blessing for me.  I never take things for granted, ever.
Story_ID: 238656
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what's next for you?  Is there, what do you think is there?  Where do you want to go from here?
Speaker 2: Next, I hope someone gets a chance to see this.  If not, I'm just proud that I had a chance to tell my story.  There are so many people in, in life that never get a chance to tell their story.  I hope it's significant enough that it impacts someone else.  I did, I did this thing on The Potter's House [Dallas, Texas].  You did ask me earlier about some of the accomplishments.  I went in one time.  I don't know if you know anything about [HistoryMaker Bishop] T. D. Jakes and 'The Potter's House.'  They called me for 'The Potter's House' 'cause they're also major support advocates of what I'm trying to do here.  They said we're doing a type, typing for 'The Potter's Touch,' which is a segment that they view nationwide.  And we want you to come in and be a part of the audience.  I said okay, keep it going 'cause it's about females that are incarcerated.  We just need you to be there to keep it going.  You're part of the audience.  Throw questions out if you may.  I was so excited about just being part of the audience, and get there and you know, 'course the setup, the lighting that took a long time.  And we're sitting around and got comfortable in my chair in the audience, and all of a sudden the producer says, [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Vicki] Hallman, could you come up front.  And they had mic'd individuals.  They had some lady in from Seattle [Washington].  They had already mic'd her up and was ready to go.  And they said we've been listening to you while we're setting up, and--you never know who's listening, you know--and we need for you to do day one.  Wow, I thought, what?  Sure, never stuttered, uttered, I'd never say no.  I said okay, and did that taping; got ready to take the little mic off, they said no, you're phenomenal.  We need you to do day two.  What?  Sure, went, they taped the segment, did day two.  I was getting ready to leave.  They said no, you stick around.  I'm thinking okay because my initial responsibility was to be part of the audience.  It's no fair for me to give up my audience role just because I took a segment role.  And they taped day three and day four, and I ended up doing day five.  So, wherever I go, I'm always having to be on the best behavior, no matter how much I might want to be Vicki sometimes, 'cause people say ah, I saw you on 'The Potter's Touch.'  Never knew the audience in which that segment reached, never knew.  So I started getting phone calls from across the United States of America regarding some of the things that I had to say.  And I thought, you know, you just never know when someone's listening to you.  So, when I leave here, I just want to take a job or be in a position paid for and paid for somebody that's still willing to listen to me, whether it's from a consultant perspective or it's from being a professor.  I don't know.  I pray on it all the time.  You never because as of Wednesday when I had my birthday I'm fully vested to retire here.  And can get 100 percent benefits, but I don't yet know the direction in which I'm going.  I pray on it all the time.  And when I heard from you guys a week ago I thought, wow, maybe God is setting it up for me, so who knows?  I'm just gonna be willing and ready and be an able servant to go where he have me to go.  I know that I didn't want to leave the city [Dallas, Texas] until my son [Nickolas Hallman] graduated because I don't believe in uprooting children to satisfy my professional wants and needs.  So, he's ninth grader, so I wouldn't physically move anywhere for the next three years.  But I'm ready to go and do whatever it is I can do.  I know the system of criminal justice.  I know the ins and outs of it.  I know the, from the courts to the arrests to the parole.  I'm just not educated on the parole components.  I'm educated on all components.  And so it allows me to be an expert in this field.  And most people, a lot of people are not experts in their field.  I can truly tell you I'm an expert in this field.
Story_ID: 238657
Speaker 1: I don't know the individual next to [HistoryMaker] Les Brown, so that's an unknown person.  That's Les Brown, who is a renowned motivational speaker that came in to speak at this luncheon; that's myself; that's Elder George Fitzgerald from The Potter's House [Dallas, Texas].  He was representing [HistoryMaker Bishop] T. D. Jakes; and that's Evelyn Shaffer, assistant regional director for the parole division.
Speaker 2: That's at a luncheon, I mean that is at a banquet where I was to guest speaker.  This is called Exodus Ministries [Dallas, Texas].  I'm on the board there for the ministries, and they deal with offenders being released from prison.  They provide them housing.  And every year they give a banquet for supporters.  That's myself and two of my staff members, David Robinson [ph.] and Evelyn Shaffer.
Speaker 1: That's Black History Month.  We have a black history day in February at the parole office [Dallas, Texas].  And one year we featured the children.  Every year we have a different theme.  This year it was for the children.  And that's one of the young participants of, some of my staff.  I can't remember, somebody's nephew I do recall.  But that was Black History Week.  I was the guest speaker for that occasion.
Speaker 2: That's my family.  On the front, that's my mom [Bobbie Chism McCarty] sitting in the front.  That's my niece, my sister's only child.  That's my dad [Curtis McCarty] that's, they're sitting in his lap.  To the left is my daughter, Tiffini [Hallman].  That's my sister, Donna [McCarty-Taylor], before she died.  That's me, and that's my son, Nickolas [Hallman] to the right.
Speaker 1: That's a church, I was a speaker at a church function, and those are my parents and my son.
Speaker 2: That one is the same luncheon when Les Brown was a speaker.  The officers to the far left is the officer that received, his name is Fred Ruffener [ph.].  He's the one that received Parole Officer of the Year for all of the parole and probation people, state, federal, county-wise.
Speaker 1: Oh my goodness, that is me.  I was, wasn't she, that was when I was a fox.  That was me high s--college.  Alpha Kappa Alpha [Sorority], we had some type of evening affair, and that was me during my college [East Texas State University; Texas A&M University-Commerce, Commerce, Texas] years.
Speaker 2: My wedding.  That's my wedding.  And from left to right that's my maternal grandmother [Lucy Hamilton], then that's my father in the middle, that's my paternal grandmother [Pauline McCarty], Mama Lucy and Mama Pauline.  That's my mother in the pink, of course that's me.  That's my ex-husband, Don [Hallman].  That's his mother to his, by his side, and that's his grandmother, his grandparents, Cora Hallman [ph.] and Warren Hallman [ph.].
Speaker 1: That's my staff.  We, we try to have an appreciation luncheon for the staff.  That was a Greek day, and so you see all the different staff that came in our Greek paraphernalia.  We try to make work fun.  There's so much pressure on us here till we try to take an occasion to have some fun.  And that's one of those occasions where we come up in our Greek paraphernalia this particular occasion.
Speaker 2: That's me and my sister at Easter.  If you think my mom didn't have us dressed up, we're with my father.  Tell you she used to dress us just alike.  We were in different colors, but that was us from head to toe with our hats and our petticoats.
Speaker 1: This is when you were about--
Speaker 2: Oh, I had to, I was I think about nine years old.
Speaker 1: That's my daughter's graduation from high school.  She graduated from Lincoln High School [Lincoln High School and Communications/Humanities Magnet, Dallas, Texas].  And that's her and my son and her boyfriend and his family.
Speaker 2: That's me and my sister and our dog.  I was growing up.  I was in high school at the time, and that was a family pet.  That was Skeeter.
Speaker 1: I was fourteen years old in this picture, and it's with my niece, not the niece by my sister, but that was one of my family members.  That's my niece, Guinevere [ph.].
Speaker 2: Boy, another family picture.  That's my sister to the far left, my mom, that's me.  I was probably about ten, and that's my father.  We were in Paris, Texas, at my grandmother's house.
Speaker 1: That one, that's Mr. Moore [ph.].  We were get, we were just through with a program.  And so that's Mr. Moore and a client and myself.  We had just finished with a graduation.  And we do graduations for everything.  We do the pomp and circumstances for every class we have that graduate, so we always have something going on.
Speaker 2: That's prom night, senior year [at Hillcrest High School, Dallas, Texas], 1972.  My date was my cousin (laughter).
Speaker 1: I didn't have any sisters, so I grew up with three cousins.  They were like my brothers.  They, all five of us were always together.  That's my grandmother from Paris, Texas.  We spent all our holidays there.  That was Easter, and we're at my grandmother's house.  And so that's my cousins, Rodney [ph.], Darrell [ph.], and Chris [ph.], my sister, Donna, and my grandmother.
Speaker 2: That's me as a, actually, I just, I was a unit supervisor at the time.  That was my first level of management and just a picture at work, no specific circumstances.
Story_ID: 238658
Speaker 1: --Four years old.  It was Easter, and we took pictures for every single thing.  I was four.  I was a big, tall four, but I was four years old at the time.
Speaker 2: Ooh, senior year [at Hillcrest High School, Dallas, Texas], afro queen.  I wanted to be [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis and I sported up the hair.  That hairdo took me two hours of preparation, one hour taking it down and thirty minutes picking it out, and thirty minutes shaping it.
Speaker 1: Same year, my senior year.  I was the walking afro.  Everybody else had to go by afro wigs.  I was fortunate enough I didn't have to.  That's all my, my hair.
Speaker 2: That was me.  I was about a--that was in Hamilton Park [Dallas, Texas].  That was the neighborhood I told you I grew up in.  And I was standing in the front yard.  Me and my best girlfriend were taking pictures of each other.  We were always ashamed of our little legs, so I would never--was mad at them for taking the legs, supposed to shoot me knees on up.
Speaker 1: That's my most favorite picture that exists.  I was two years old.  And I was missing my daddy [Curtis McCarty], and I wouldn't smile.  I was a daddy's girl.  And my mom [Bobbie Chism McCarty] drug me away to take those pictures, and I was crying for my daddy.  And since they couldn't make me smile, they finally just took that one.
Speaker 2: That's my management team [Region II, Texas Department of Criminal Justice, parole division].  We took that last year.  We had a manager's meeting.  All of those are my senior managers and assistant regional directors as well as my two assistants, Darrell Z. Mack [ph.] and Juana Favors [ph.].  We, I bought t-shirts for everybody last year.  Oh, actually, it was this year, 2004.  And our theme was managers on the move, stepping up to another level of success.  We don't ever wanna be satisfied with where we are.
Speaker 1: Another black history occasion.  We were eating then.  The best thing about doing something around this place, we feed you well.  I'm sorry you guys missed out on it today 'cause usually you get fed real good.
Speaker 2: That's me in my glamorous days.  I was a model for a long time and thought I was pretty cute, so took that.  I was working here, but it was the early years on.  So, that's been since I was married.
Speaker 1: In the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: In the '80s [1980s], um-hum.
Speaker 1: That's last year.  We had an occasion where we went to a thing on female offenders.  This was a group I was trying to get to work with us.  They work with offenders coming out of prison, and they had a Hats Off to Ladies Luncheon [ph.].  And so me and some of the staff decided we're gonna go and show us, show out in our hats.
Speaker 2: That's my fiance.  That was at Christmas.  That's the man in my life.  That's Donald Dabbs [ph.].  I better give him a name.
Speaker 1: That's my second favorite picture.  This is the year we took this before my sister [Donna McCarty-Taylor] died.  That's all the girls.  Those are my daddy's girls, as he tags us.  That's my sister, my niece, my daughter [Tiffini Hallman], my mom, and myself.  We were gonna do a picture showing out, we were cool, and it came out really fun.  We all, all put our sunglasses on to show we were cool.
Speaker 2: Okay.
