Story_ID: 268421
Speaker 1: I'd say that's probably around 1950, I suppose, 'cause I think those were picture of--in--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Was it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) --passport, they were passport pictures, I think, yes, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And it's, once, for the tape, for the record, can you tell us your name?
Speaker 1: My name is [HistoryMaker] Azira Gonzalez [Sanchez] Hill.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And that's who we're looking at.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And tell us about this one.
Speaker 1: I think this was about 1975, I believe.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And was it a special occasion?
Speaker 1: I think I went to visit my mother [Dominga Sanchez Gonzalez].  I was born in Cuba.  And I would, I used to go often.  At that time, you could go back and forth easier.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: But that was in front of my sister's [Mercedes Gonzalez] house, in Havana [Cuba].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  In Cuba.
Speaker 1: Cuba.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's my husband, Jesse Hill.  And I think we had married recently, I guess, and we're just out on the town.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay. Do you remember where you were?
Speaker 1: I think that was Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, thank you, excellent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's one of my favorite pastime.  That's a baseball game--the [Atlanta] Braves.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And when, when was it?
Speaker 1: I think that must been the old [Atlanta-Fulton County] Stadium [Atlanta, Georgia], I think, that's an old picture.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Do you know approximately what year?
Speaker 1: What year--hm, no, seems--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Just a few years ago maybe?
Speaker 1: Yeah--no, the stadium is built after the [1996 Summer] Olympics [Atlanta, Georgia].  This new stadium [Centennial Olympic Stadium; Turner Field, Atlanta, Georgia] is about nine years, so this must have been about, maybe twelve years ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: At the old stadium.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: This is my house.  I think, I don't know what--probably getting ready to go somewhere.  And somebody thought I looked good, so they shot me (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, I'm ready for the next one.
Speaker 2: I think this, I think this was in Africa, the tip of Arica, what they call the--oh, my goodness, Cape Point, Cape Point, South Africa.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  The Senegal?
Speaker 2: No, it's way down, very tip of South Africa.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oops, graduation picture?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  These were younger days--this what, probably '50, 1950, I suppose.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Was that a school picture?
Speaker 2: Yeah, school picture.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  High school or--
Speaker 2: I think it was our high school [Boylan-Haven School, Jacksonville, Florida].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Did you have it the same way in Cuba or you're not sure?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  All right, ready for the next.
Speaker 2: This is in Havana (unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  This is Havana, did you say?
Speaker 1: Havana, yes.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And when was that?
Speaker 1: The '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  At the same time as the other picture?
Speaker 1: The same, yes, same time as the other.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And were you there for an occasion?
Speaker 1: Well, my mother--I had my mother and, and a sister that lived there.  That, that was not our original home, but this is where my sister live at that time.  And I would visit of them.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, next.
Speaker 1: This is with my husband.  I don't know exactly where we were.  Excuse me.  I don't remember exactly where we were.  But he had dark hair, so it must have been a good while ago (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And, I'm sorry, for the record, your husband's name?
Speaker 2: Jesse Hill.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, thank you.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is school days.  I am, I'm a student nurse at Grady [Memorial] Hospital [Atlanta, Georgia], and it must have been 1952, I suppose--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: --with one of my classmates.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, thank you.  Next.
Speaker 1: I think this is my desk.  I used to be a school nurse, and I think this was my desk at the school I worked.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is with my children--my daughter, Nancy [Hill Cook] and I, and my youngest daughter, Azira [Hill Kendall].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And we can see that is October 1959, I think.
Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959], yes.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very happy-looking family.
Speaker 2: This was '58 [1958]?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes, 1958.
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-eight [1958], and that's my second child, Azira.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is, now, this is '58 [1958] also, 'cause that was both of my daughters.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Do you remember when this one was taken?
Speaker 2: This was while I was working--must have been '70s [1970s], I guess, '78 [1978], '79 [1979].  I worked at a middle school, and you are required to take pictures every year.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So that's why we have those small pictures.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So, that's your yearbook photo?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yearbook (laughter), and that's right, yearbook, that's right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What school were you at?
Speaker 2: [Ralph J.] Bunche Middle School [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Bunche Middle, okay.  Okay, here you go.
Speaker 2: Here's another one--similar.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And do you remember which year maybe?
Speaker 2: Oh, we'll say '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: This is a passport picture, and it's probably younger.  I can't remember what day, what--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Was it after you were married?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, probably 1980, or something like that, maybe.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: This is way, way, like '50s [1950s], 'cause I was not there then.  So, it must have been about '53 [1953], maybe '53 [1953], since school.
Story_ID: 268422
Speaker 1: We're going to get started by slating that my name is Jodi Merriday, and I'm the interviewer.  Matthew Hickey is the videographer, and there are no observers present.  Ma'am, could you please state and spell your name, including your middle name?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Azira [Gonzalez Sanchez] Hill.  My middle name--I use my maiden name--I use as my middle name, is Gonzalez.  My name spells A-Z-I-R-A, and I use G as my initial, Hill, H-I-L-L.
Speaker 1: Could you tell your date and location of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Holguin, Oriente [Province], Cuba [Holguin, Holguin Province, Cuba].
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is August 4th, 1905 [sic. 2005].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the location of this interview is at The HistoryMakers office on Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia].  Could you please tell us your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a registered nurse, retired.
Story_ID: 268423
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask five very light People magazine-ish kinds of questions--just bear with me.  Could you tell me what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: I just like food, probably chicken.  I think that we, we eat a lot of chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring is my favorite time of the year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color, probably red.  I like color--blue.
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: There are many, but probably South Africa probably.  It's just beautiful.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's going to get better.
Story_ID: 268424
Speaker 1: So now I'd like to start by just asking questions about your family background.  Could you please tell me about your mother?  What was her name, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Dominga Sanchez, and she also was in Holguin, [Oriente Province] Cuba [Holguin, Holguin Province, Cuba].  That was where my family originated from.
Speaker 1: And did she grow up there?
Speaker 2: She grew up there--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and had her family there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what do you know about her background and her growing up?
Speaker 2: Growing up, she--I think she was the oldest of five, I think five, children.  And in Holguin, they were, but her father--her mother married twice.  She was of the first set of children, of family, she was the first.  And then, her mother remarried and had all the children.  But they were--her stepfather had a restaurant.  And everybody in the family worked in it, so they all were very industrious.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother?  Did she share any stories with you about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Not really much, considering that she had had a large family, and there wasn't a lot going on.  I was the number seven child.  And that's why I promised myself, I would not have that many children (laughter), because so much, so much you can give your children.  And sometimes, somebody get left behind; not intentionally, I'm sure, but it's just, you know, things happen.  Life changes, and you don't have the time and the energy to do, you know, sit and talk and share.  But she--I can say that, though, that she was a very high-spirited person.  She was very strong.  She liked to take--tell jokes.  And she liked to sing, and she was kind of a fun person to be around, but very strict.
Speaker 1: Did she ever share any stories with you about what it was like growing up in Cuba during her era?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a long time ago.  Maybe I don't remember anything significant, you know, that I can tell of.  But I'm sure there was a--well, it has ups and down, I suppose.  They, they appear--seems to me--to be pretty comfortable.  And because they did have a business, and they, you know, everybody share in it.  So, in that sense, they had a good life, better than some--a few other people around, I suppose.
Story_ID: 268425
Speaker 1: Could you please tell me about your father?  What was his name, and where was he born?  Where did he grow up?
Speaker 2: My father was Jose Gonzalez [ph.].  And he grew up in a little neighboring community not far from Holguin [Oriente Province, Cuba; Holguin, Holguin Province, Cuba].  There was a sugar mill, and that's where his family was from.  And he, too, was the first of the family, and of his family.  And he--his mother also had a second husband.  They had all the children.  And I don't know too much about his childhood.  My father was kind of quiet, and he died when I was about eight or nine years old.  And so, I don't really, you know, not too much about, remembering him vaguely, I guess, and don't, don't know much about his, you know, background of all the family.
Speaker 1: So, do you know much about your grandparents, your parents' parents?  Do you know their names or--
Speaker 2: My father's father--my father's mother was Juana Gonzalez [ph.].  And it--I mean, I did get to know her.  And they seemed to be very--the whole family seemed to be really close, because there were several ones--people with the same name--Juana Gonzalez in the same family.  So, you had to distinguish, you know, the middle name of something else to make sure you knew what the person you are referring to.  That was one thing that, you know, that was--I thought it was kind of significant.  His father was Fernando Lopez [ph.] and he, too, had more than one family.  And there were different hues, you know, so we were all were different shades and all, so that was kind of interesting also.
Speaker 1: So, that's why--
Speaker 2: I didn't get to know him, but he was from Spain.
Story_ID: 268426
Speaker 1: And on your mother's [Dominga Sanchez Gonzalez] side, did you know your grandparents (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On my mother's side, I knew my grandmother--in fact, that she died in 1952.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Serafina Sanchez [ph.].  And she was a tall, beautiful lady, kind of Indian-looking [Native American], and bronze-like, you know.  And, but my father's, my mother's father, she didn't know much of him.  He was--I think he may have been more African, because that's their--our hue came from that side.  Mother was kind of brown-skinned.  And, but she did not know much about him.
Speaker 1: Did she know his name?
Speaker 2: Marguerito Mareiro [ph.].
Speaker 1: Were there any stories that either of your parents shared with you about your grandparents?
Speaker 2: None other than--I think he just, I think she talked about how his father just kind of left them, and she never got to know too much about him.  And for that reason, his mother had children with another man.  And those were the ones that had their restaurant, and he was the one that was a restaurateur, and all of the children worked.  And some of them became, you know, chefs, and that was their industry.  And my mother was a good cook although she--that was not, you know, what she did for a living later.
Story_ID: 268427
Speaker 1: So what did she [Hill's mother, Dominga Sanchez Gonzalez] end up doing for a living later (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She ended up--she did, you know, in that time, they--you go to teacher school and, but she married.  And when she married my father [Jose Gonzalez (ph.)], she didn't work for a while.  They just had, they had nine--they had ten children, really.  And, but when he died, my father died, she had to work.  And she was a seamstress.  She actually was a tailor.  She made men clothing, so she'd make a suit in a day.  And so, that was very taxing, and the--for this reason, she had to be this very disciplined.  Because, having nine children--well, the first one died.  So, there were nine left, and a cousin that lived with us.  But she had--everybody had a job in the house.  All the older kids had something to do, to run the house, because she had to put the entire day in the sewing machine.  And for this reason, she was very strict and disciplinarian, strict disciplinarian.  And my older brother, actually, is what I really looked up to, like my father, because he was about twenty years older than I.  And we respected him, you know, admired him.  He was the man of the house.  And he had to quit school and go to work, but the rest had to do the housework.  They did the cooking, and washed dishes, made beds, and cleaned up.  And so, there was one that would supervise everybody else.  Luckily, I'm number seven, so I didn't have much to do.  I never cooked, and I was kind of spoiled, too.  They kind of spoiled me a bit.
Story_ID: 268428
Speaker 1: What's your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Growing up?  The only thing was kind of difficult, having so many brothers, and didn't have anybody to share with.  I had a cousin that I used to talk to.  And, but my mother [Dominga Sanchez Gonzalez] was always busy, you know, just busy, busy, busy on that sewing machine.  And then, when she got off the machine was, you know, just tired.  So, I had to kind of depend on that cousin, you know, with whom I share my little intimacies.  And my father [Jose Gonzalez (ph.)] died, I was very down.  I couldn't--now, today would have been depressed.  But that day, you didn't, you, you're, in that day, just felt bad, had a headache, you know.  But I remember being so sad, and for a long, long time.  And there were difficult days, because some of my brothers had stopped school and gone to work.  And at one point, I did have to go and stopped school.  And this, for this reason, this was one reason how--why I came to this country because I need--didn't have to pay for books.  My mother didn't have money to buy the books, and I really wanted to go to school.  So, my pastor--we were connected to church after my father died.  And--I was connected with the Methodist church.  My mother was Catholic.  But the people who came to, kind of, console us, and nurture us were the people from the Methodist church.  So, we started going to the Methodist church and working in the church.  And after I had to stop school, because there was no money to buy the books, my pastor came to the United States, and wrote me a letter from here, asking me if I wanted to come to continue my studies.  And I was just like, "Heaven," you know, and that was really a wonderful opportunity for me.  So, I immediately accepted, and everybody rejoiced with me.  And so, I came and went to high school [Boylan-Haven School] here in Jacksonville [Florida], and then--
Speaker 1: How old were you when you came?
Speaker 2: I was, I guess, early teens.  And that was a kind of difficult adjustment, because I didn't speak English, had never been out of the country, though we did travel a little bit in Cuba but, you know, nothing significant.  So, it was quite an adjustment, but I found friends and worked hard, and graduated from high school.  And--
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of your elementary school in Cuba?
Speaker 2: Jose Marti, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my friends, I had some of my friends, some of my friends that were with me in elementary school live here today in Washington, D.C.  And I have some friends--Julie Juarez [ph.] is in Washington.
Story_ID: 268429
Speaker 1: In terms of early memories, can you describe what family life was like when you were in Cuba--holidays, special events, or just daily life in your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: In the neighborhood, we had a pretty large house.  And my brothers played all kinds of instruments.  And so that she [Hill's mother, Dominga Sanchez Gonzalez] could control us, I suppose, we were not allowed to go out too much.  But the neighborhood could come to our house, and so, they would come and play music.  At that time, there was no radio.  We didn't have any radio, but they did--I had, I had plenty of music--all kinds, not just salsa, and all these other thing.  But I knew [Johann Sebastian] Bach, and [Ludwig van] Beethoven, and all that, 'cause my brothers were, you know, serious musicians, and that was fun.  And some days, we read poetry, and play music, and everybody play, and had a good time.  And holidays are wonderful, because, you know, everybody come.  If you were a friend of any of my brothers, you could come to my house, and that was fun.  And there was only one family that I was allowed to go to, and they were three sisters.  Since I didn't have much--I had a sister about ten years younger than I, so we were not peers, you know.  And so, that she would allow me to, you know, interact with those, that family that had these three daughters.  And that was fun.  In fact then, we all married in the same dress (laughter).
Story_ID: 268430
Speaker 1: Could you give your siblings' names in their birth order?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My name--my siblings, my--the oldest was Albert, Umberto [ph.], and but he died.  I think, was two or three months old.  The following was Juan Rafaini [ph.] Gonzalez Sanchez, Jose [ph.] Gonzalez Sanchez, Alfredo Fernando Americo [ph.].  I'm next, and then was Rene Carlos [ph.], and then, finally, I got a sister, Mercedes [Gonzalez].
Speaker 1: And she's the youngest?
Speaker 2: She's the youngest, and she's here now.  She lives there in Alpharetta [Georgia].
Story_ID: 268431
Speaker 1: So, when you were growing up, do you recall the name of the actual street you lived on, or was it a more rural community (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, oh, yes.  It was--no, it was a city.  It was Marterias [ph.] dos cientos dos, 202, Marterias, 202.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Holguin [Oriente Province, Cuba; Holguin, Holguin Province, Cuba].  And the house is still there.  At least, the last time I was there in '93 [1993].  We went back to--by the neighborhood.
Story_ID: 268311
Speaker 1: We were talking about the street that you lived on when you were in Cuba.  And I just want to know, do you recall any neighbors, or what your community was like?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  My block was very international.  Next door was Maria Lamora [ph.], and the--Jose el Chino [ph.] was the Chinese.  Across the street were the Lebanese.  And down, there was, you know, some of the--but it's very, very international, very international.  And you didn't have any, any idea or thought about, you know, black and white, or different, you know.  I just, just--that never occurred to you.  They were just people, you know.  And, I kind of think that may have had--my name, it had, had something to do with Maria Lamora, 'cause you--Moor, kind of Middle Eastern influence.
Story_ID: 268312
Speaker 1: You mentioned earlier the name of your elementary school [Jose Marti].  Were there any teachers that influenced you while, while you were there?  If so, what were their names?
Speaker 2: Yes, there's always somebody who touched you, you know, somebody who, kind of, nice to you, so that you always--you're, you're, you, after, you remember the faces and the, you know, you never forget.  I don't know about names, but there was this lady that, I can't remember, this, at this moment, her name, but she was so nice to me.  I was--never, I never got in any fights.  In fact, that, you know, the little gangs get together and make you, encourage you to go and fight somebody--do this or do that.  And because I didn't do it, one time--we wore uniforms, and we have blue skirts and white blouses.  And some, this little gang of girls, ruined my blouse.  They got some black thing that they put in the street, and then they made the--and they just ruin--
Speaker 1: Oh, like the tar.
Speaker 2: Tar--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --they put, they put tar on my blouse.  And so, I came, you know, I got there dirty and crying, and all that.  And this lady was so sweet, you know.   It is, you know, at that time, they call people by the first name.  And so, she kind of consoled me, and not only that, but she made the class--'cause they make fun of that--paid for my, a new blouse (laughter), yeah.  There's always somebody that you remember forever.
Story_ID: 268313
Speaker 1: Did you go directly from elementary to--
Speaker 2: To a middle school, like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  What was the name of the middle school?
Speaker 2: It's called escuela superior, kind of--I guess superior is a step up.  And that was a little further from my house, but you always walk home.  And I had a brother that always managed to be in the same class.  He was like my guardian angel.  We were like twins.  And because he was eleven months older than I, and he never want anybody to get close to me.  He would carry my books and do whatever he needed to do to keep anybody from getting close, you know, close to me.  But we were just, you know, selected, and just like that.  That was [Alfredo Fernando] Americo [ph.].  In fact, today, in fact, today is--it was his birthday, and he died--that's the day he was born.
Speaker 1: Oh, wow.
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty [1980].
Speaker 1: So you attended part of the middle school years in Cuba, and then part of them here in the U.S.?
Speaker 2: Then I came here to high school [Boylan-Haven School, Jacksonville, Florida].
Speaker 1: Oh, for high school, so--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --were there any other teachers in your middle school that were influential or what was that experience like for you?
Speaker 2: It was a good experience.  We still had a lot of music, 'cause on Fridays, there was a time when the whole school, the whole class was, you know, we had the singing session.  And that was, that was kind of fun.  It was a good experience.
Story_ID: 268314
Speaker 1: And so, when you got to the [United] States, what high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I went to Boylan-Haven [School, Jacksonville, Florida].  It was a Methodist school.  It's a boarding school in Jacksonville [Florida].  And it was, I think, was kind of middle-class kids, you know, mainly.  But it was very interesting, was very kind of high class, I suppose.  They had all kinds of luxury, yet everybody had to work.  There were no servants, but we had white tablecloth and napkins.  And we sat in the same seat, you know, for eating, and very formal.  You had silver--we have silver, so you had--also had to polish silver, and you had to wait tables, and you had to clean classrooms.  Every month, everybody changed duties, as they call.  And there were a few of us that were on scholarships.  And then, those in scholarship, maybe, may had an extra little job.  But some of the girls seemed to be, you know, pretty well-off.  They had nice clothes, and it seems, and in fact, that Johnnetta Cole and Johnnetta Cole's sister [HistoryMaker MaVynee "Beach Lady" Betsch] was my classmate, and Johnnetta went there.
Speaker 1: What sister was it?
Speaker 2: Yvonne [sic.]--
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: --I can't remember the name right now.  They--oh, she had one sister only.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She had one sister and one brother [John Betsch, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The--is she known now as the "Beach Lady"?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Johnnetta, Johnnetta, and--
Speaker 1: Lady McVey [sic.], I want to say.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but she, she was--they were very middle class, I suppose.  And the mother [Mary Lewis Betsch] was, you know, president of an insurance company.  Her father [John Betsch] and mother finally had the Afro-American [Life] Insurance Company [Jacksonville, Florida].  And Johnnetta--anyway, she had a beautiful voice.  And they all played tennis, and did all these things that, you know, that I thought that rich people did (laughter), at that time.  But the great thing about the school was that everybody was on the same field, on the same level, because everybody has to work, you know.  And there were no privileged people as far as the work, you know, and discipline.  You were not allowed to go out, too much out, or maybe, maybe once a month when you find a chaperone to take you to town.  But it was really great.  And they will recognize--it doesn't exist today, which is unfortunate.  It was more--it was a prep school.
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: I had some trouble, but I made it, because at that time, immigration required that you have a B average to have a student visa.  And my student visa had to be renewed every other, you know, every six months.  And just the, the--you had to turn in to the immigration, you had to turn in your grades.  So, I think--no, I was not, you know, high up, but I made, I made the grade.  And when I came--remember, I didn't speak any English, and they didn't have any concessions for me.  There was only one teacher that, that was Mexican, was Miss, Mrs. Diaz [ph.] and so, when I came, she was the only person I could communicate with.
Story_ID: 268315
Speaker 1: What were you like, in terms of your personality, when you were young?  How would you describe yourself?
Speaker 2: I think I was kind of shy and withdrawn, you know, but I tried to--having to be with so many boys [brothers], you know, that had, that kind of--just speak when you're spoken, or when you get the chance, you know.  So, you don't have--I think I've never been aggressive, but cooperative.  I was, I had to play ball when they say play ball, or climb the tree when they say, you know.  But, I had a happy childhood at any, and I was in--I liked to knit and crochet, and do things with my hands, and that kind of, you know, kept my--kept me busy.
Speaker 1: Did you have any dreams or aspirations as you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I wanted to be a doctor, I wanted to be a doctor, always.  And I think, may have been one of the reasons why I ended up being a nurse, but not one, not one--I didn't have the money, really, or the energy and, you know, the opportunity to become what I wanted to.  But the closest thing was a nurse.  And I'm glad, I'm glad, 'cause I enjoyed, I did enjoy my career.
Story_ID: 268316
Speaker 1: So, you were describing earlier that your family went to a Catholic church, but that you ended up at a Methodist church.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me the names of those two churches, the name of the family Catholic church (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The church, the Catholic church was [Catedral de] San Isidoro [Holguin, Oriente Province, Cuba].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the Methodist church was just a Methodist church.  It was a church that was about two blocks from my house.  And the minister was Mr. Evers [ph.].  He was from Florida, and his wife were very nice people.  And they, you know, they came to my house and kept up with my--me and my brothers.  Well, actually, my--[Alfredo Fernando] Americo [ph.], older brother, started going to church first, and then I went.  And so, we got involved in work in the Sunday school, and the youth fellowship, and things like that, and got, you know, interested in the church.
Speaker 1: Describe your experiences once you arrive in America with the church.  Was it a place where you were doing a lot of extracurricular activities, or more just worship?
Speaker 2: No, it was heartbreaking, very heartbreaking, because I was very involved in the church, with the youth in Holguin [Oriente Province, Cuba; Holguin, Holguin Province, Cuba].  I was attending seminars, and conventions and meetings with the youth.  And when I came here, I brought a letter.  My pastor gave me membership transfer to the First [United] Methodist Church in Jacksonville [Florida], and also a letter to a couple that he knew in Jacksonville.  And this couple was very nice and, but I don't know that they didn't understand the situation.  I didn't know the church was separate, and probably, they didn't even think about it, because the first Sunday that I was in this country, they took me to the church.  But when we got there, they say, "It's fine that you visit today.  But next Sunday, you go with the girls from the church, from the [Boylan-Haven] School [Jacksonville, Florida], that they go to Ebenezer [United Methodist Church, Jacksonville, Florida]," which is the black church, Methodist church.  And they drove me around to show me where the place was.  And that was--I was just stunned, you know, but I thought that was so horrible.  How could you be separate on Sunday, you know?  And but, you know, eventually, you--I said, "Well, if I'm, I didn't come here to stay, for one thing, so I guess this is just a temporary situation.  And I just, I came here to get an education.  That's what I'm going to concentrate on."  And I did, and that was the only way to survive, I suppose.  But, anyway, this couple continued to visit the school and--
Speaker 1: Is it safe to assume that this was a white couple?
Speaker 2: The couple, yes--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --it was a white couple.  They were awfully nice, just very, very nice and helpful.  They would--and bring, they always brought some gifts, things like toothpaste or, you know, stuff like that--the necessities, something like that.  And it was helpful, too, because at that time, money was very, very tight.  And they would come every Saturday.  And some of the girls resented that.  They didn't like that this couple visited us so much.  There was another girl from Cuba there, and so that kind of created some discomfort.  But, you know, I just didn't worry about it.  And I kept in touch with this couple for years and years.  They was awfully nice to me.  And I think, I just think they were angels that God puts on your way, you know, to help you in your time of need--that's all, really.  And then, the fact that it was a temporary thing, you know, it--all I need to do is concentrate, and make the grade, and get out of here, and I did.
Speaker 1: So, at this time, can you describe what your first experiences were like being in Ebenezer?
Speaker 2: Ebenezer was okay.  You know, it's just like any typical black church, in that you can adjustment--there was an adjustment, because I came, you know.  It was a Methodist church, but it was kind of then in the other side's style, you know, quiet, and you enter quiet, and you speak softly, and this kind of thing.  And my girlfriend, who had been there before, before me, told me, "Don't get upset when you hear and see the people in black robes, shouting and clapping and, you know, doing all these things.  Don't--just control yourself.  This is going to happen."  But even there, that, I was not prepared when I experienced it.  And it was kind of, you know, shocking.  And then, you know, you get adjusted to these things.  I think, young people, you know, you get adjusted quickly.
Story_ID: 268317
Speaker 1: So, what were some of the influences in your life as you were maturing through these years in high school?
Speaker 2: I don't understand the question.
Speaker 1: I was asking what, what--who was influencing you, as you were maturing and going through high school?  Because your family was still back in Cuba, and so, your minister wrote the letter, and you came over, and you were at the school, butwere there any other people that were influential?
Speaker 2: No people.  It took me a good while.  As I said, there was only one person I could communicate.  That was Ms. Diaz [ph.] who was from Mexico.  There was nobody else.  And, at one point, there was discomfort, because--there were different things, you know, how it is with young people; children can be kind of cruel.  They made fun of my accent.  They--I don't know whether they, they--just sometimes, you have felt like I was not liked, because they said that, you think you're cute, 'cause you had long hair, or, you know, things like that that are just offensive.  And there was a girl that was my roommate that gave me a hard time.  And it was interested that three years later, when I came to Atlanta [Georgia], she called me.  She was from Atlanta, and invited me to her house, and I thought that was so interesting (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: We were roommates.  And I had--I guess, at church, had got, had, had a great influence in my life.  And I read the little book--it was 'The Upper Room.'  And before, we had double deck.  She was on the top, and I was down.  When she woke up, and she figured that I was going to read my Bible--or she was kind of devilish--or read my 'Upper Room' or whatever, she would start rocking, and just devilish thing like that.  But, lucky for me, and it says, she did something that was--expelled.  And so, I had another roommate, and that kind of eased my life (laughter), somewhat.  But, a few years later, when she heard that I was here at Grady [Memorial Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia], she called me, and it kind of shocked me.  But I did visit her and, you know, that kind of cordial.
Speaker 1: So, you weren't playing any sports, or doing any extracurricular activities?
Speaker 2: Well, at Boylan-Haven [School, Jacksonville, Florida], the only thing they had was basketball.  And I had never been athletic.  It's the worst grade I ever had was P.E. [physical education].
Story_ID: 268318
Speaker 1: What were you thinking at this time that you wanted to be?  You mentioned earlier--well, you aspired to be a doctor, was that primarily it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  By that time, I had decided to go into nursing school.  And some of my counselors thought that I should study religious education, education or religion, religions--religion education.  I get them mixed up--religion education.  And they brought me to Paine College [Augusta, Georgia].  And they offered me a scholarship.  It must have been about eleventh grade or so.  And Paine College and what other school, they brought me, there was Methodists, around Georgia.  And, but then, I took the entrance exam to Brewster Hospital [School of Nursing, Jacksonville, Florida].  They had a battery of tests that you had to take before entering nursing school.  And in addition to that--I know--I had an offer to Bethune-Cookman College [Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida].  And so, I went to Bethune-Cookman that summer of '51 [1951], and had some difficulty there because, here again, I had problem with the money for books.  And there was a woman who gave me a hard time about not having the books, and she embarrassed me in class.  And so, I went to the president [Dr. Richard Vernon Moore].  And, but then, I had made friends with the young man who exchange--I taught, I helped him with math, because I was good in numbers, so I helped him with math.  And he helped, helped me with English.  And there was a workbook that was required.  And he typed the whole notebook--I mean, workbook for me, but still the teacher didn't want to accept it.  So, I went to the principal--to the president, and told him she was going to flunk me.  And if I had flunked, I would had to go back home because, remember, I have to have a B.  And I had--I was taking, I was taking English, math, and biology.  And math and biology was real good, 'cause I was good in science and math, but English was a problem.  So, I went to her, and I said, "I'm so sorry that I can't stay here," you know, dealing with the language, dealing with the, you know, the subjects, and then having this other distraction from this teacher.  "I can't, I can't do it, and she said she's going to flunk me."  So, he said, "You're going and do your work, and she's not going to flunk you."  But she did give me a C, so I had a C, a B, and an A, and that gave me the B average.  But at, even at then--even at that, at the end of the semester, I just told him, I can't do it.  It's too nerve-wracking, you know, to have to deal with these kind of situation.  So, then, I talked to my pastor, who was my advisor, and he had heard of Grady [Memorial] Hospital [Atlanta, Georgia].  Grady Hospital had a program that you could work and study for $350, $350 for the entire course [at Grady Memorial Hospital School of Nursing, Atlanta, Georgia].  There was thirty-six months straight, including uniforms, but you had to work eight hours.  So, I took it, and so I came to Atlanta [Georgia], to Grady Hospital.  And I already had taken the exams at Brewster Hospital.  Brewster had lost their accreditation, so that's why he suggested Grady.
Story_ID: 268319
Speaker 1: So I came to Grady [Memorial Hospital School of Nursing, Atlanta, Georgia] and made great friends.  And, I mean, a lot of good things happened here, and I met my husband [Jesse Hill].  And now--
Speaker 2: Where did you meet your husband?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Met my husband in--right here, Big Bethel [A.M.E. Church, Atlanta, Georgia] Sunday school.  And finished the course, and graduated in 1954, took the state board exam, and went home [to Holguin, Oriente Province, Cuba; Holguin, Holguin Province, Cuba].
Speaker 2: How old were you at that point?
Speaker 1: At that point, I am about twenty-five.
Speaker 2: And was there any specialized training or college between the transition of the high schools to the actual hospital?
Speaker 1: None other than the Cookman [Bethune-Cookman College; Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida] experience, and then at that time, Grady Hospital had affiliation with Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: How long were at Bethune-Cookman?
Speaker 1: Just one semester.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And you went on to become a nurse?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And what was that experience like?
Speaker 1: Bethune-Cookman?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It was fun, because, you know, it's a beach, and there are a lot of--I don't know--it's just nice people.  And we could go back to Jacksonville [Florida] and, and visit some of my old teachers [at Boylan-Haven School, Jacksonville, Florida], and things like that.  And it was nice and warm, you know, that's one thing that the temperature is great.  And in here was cooler, you know--cold in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: So, at that time, were you disappointed, perhaps, that you didn't go on to stay at the college for four years?
Speaker 1: Not really, not really, because that, I, you know, I believe that you, you try something, it doesn't work, you know, don't--just find some kind of solution.  You don't stay with misery, you know.  I didn't think I could deal with that, 'cause what I had originally wanted to do was to go to medical school.  And I knew it was going to be a hard, long road, you know, and there's no help from anywhere, you know.  So, you do the best, the best you can, and keep going.
Story_ID: 268320
Speaker 1: So, what was next?  You've now entered the hospital--
Speaker 2: Now, I'm here (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and you're working.
Speaker 2: --at Grady [Memorial] Hospital [Atlanta, Georgia] and--
Speaker 1: You've met your husband?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And a wonderful friend that and we're still friends today--my first roommate is my dear best friend today at fifty, fifty-plus years.  We start--and she kind of was the--she kind of encouraged me to pay attention to [Jesse] Hill, you know, because at first, I didn't think I could do it.
Speaker 1: So, in moving forward, what was next for you professionally?  You're at the hospital.  How long were you--did, did you end up staying there?
Speaker 2: Well, it was thirty-six months without, I think, we have one month vacation.  And I did go home in '52 [1952].  That's when my grandmother died.  And I didn't go because she died, you know, because at that time, it was different situation.  But anyway, I went home--while I was there, my grandmother died.  But I lost my passport, so I had to stay a month to get a new one.  And so, I had to make up the time when I came back here.  And it was a good thing, because it gave me the opportunity to review for the state board.  You know, the state board exam is pretty tough.  And so, I had that month to review for the exam.  And it was great to just come home with the, you know, complete course.  So it, you know, it all worked very well.
Speaker 1: And what did you do next?
Speaker 2: Next, I went home [to Holguin, Oriente Province, Cuba; Holguin, Holguin Province, Cuba].  I went home in September after I took the exam.  And I worked there a few months in dispensary that they--was connected with the church.  And so, the next thing after then, my husband came--was to meet my husband at that time.  We--actually, before I left, we were kind of engaged.  And so, he came to Cuba with his mother [Nancy Dennis Martin], and he said he wanted to get married.  So, we did marry in my little church, my neighborhood, and that was 1955, May 1955.  And I came back to Atlanta [Georgia], May the 5th, 1955, five-five-five [sic. five-five-fifty-five].
Speaker 1: So this has actually been your twentieth [sic. fiftieth] year anniversary?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 268432
Speaker 1: You were saying that you'd gotten married.  So this year is actually your fiftieth year of marriage?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So, at that time, where did you meet your husband?
Speaker 2: We met--I can, I have to look up the date, because I should remember that time (laughter).  But it was my first Sunday in Atlanta [Georgia]--I went to church.  Remember, I had had this bad experience in Jacksonville [Florida].  I was Methodist, but we went--I think that was Baptist--is that Baptist?  I don't--no, Ebenezer [United Methodist Church, Jacksonville, Florida] is Methodist.  But, anyway, when I came to Atlanta, I went to--back--the, my dormitory was right there where Hughes Spalding [hospital, Atlanta, Georgia] is today, you know, was the nurses, freshmen nurses, right there.  There was a little house there.  And so, it was just a matter of coming to the corner to that Butler Street [CME] Church [Atlanta, Georgia].  I went in there, and I entered, and it was like Sunday school.  I didn't see anyone.  The church was open.  And there was, you know, I sat there for a while, and nobody came.  I didn't see anyone.  Say, I just go to the next corner, came to the next corner, and I saw Big Bethel A.M.E. Church [Atlanta, Georgia].  And when I asked somebody, what's A.M.E.?  They say African Methodist [Episcopal], so I said, "Oh, that's where I need to go."  Because despite, you know, this hue, and I'd had that experience with them--you know, at home [in Holguin, Oriente Province, Cuba; Holguin, Holguin Province, cuba], I didn't know, you know, that I was black or whatever but, so I need to go.  So, I went in there.  As I entered, when I entered, the first person I met was Jesse Hill.  And he came (laughter) and introduced himself.  He was superintendent of the Sunday school.  And so, he showed me what class to go.  So, I did and that was it.  I've been there ever since--this been, what, fifty-four years.
Speaker 1: Amazing.
Speaker 2: And so, he was living at Butler Street YMCA [Atlanta, Georgia].  And so, coming to church, or when at Butler--I mean, Auburn Avenue at that time was drive-in, and there were movies, and drugstore around the corner, bakery.  There was a skating rink, a lot, you know, a library, had to go to the library sometime.  And just, and you just come sometime just because.  And so, he was, you know, very, very, very nice.  So, you pass by the, back and forth, you know, by the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)].  And then, you, you know, see him at the church all the time.  So, I believe everything clicked right away--everything.  That was September, and February, he called.  I think he called, and I didn't want to be bothered really, 'cause I was saying, I just came here for one purpose, and that's school, period, and don't want to be bothered by anybody.  But my roommate would say, "Yes, she's not doing anything, you can come over, you can come," (laughter), you know how girls are.  And sometimes we'd be playing cards, or something.  And sometime, he would just walk up and, you know, and ask me to dinner, whatever.  So, I'd already eaten.  "Well, come and watch me eat."  And there were restaurants in here, you know, places.  And so, that was our first date.  Our first date, we, I went to watch him eat, because I had already eaten.  And we walked.  He didn't have a car and (laughter), so then another time, he invited me at the church to go to Paschal's [Restaurant, Atlanta, Georgia] and, you know, Paschal's, a fried chicken.  They were in the street--there was a street car, you know, fifteen cents, something.  That's fifteen cents, I believe.  And so, that's how we started, you know, kind of visiting each other.  Then, he had a friend, and he asked the friend, that's Rosa Brown [ph.], to invite me to dinner.  So, after church, we went to dinner, then visited awhile, and then she brought me to the dormitory.  So that's, that was the beginning, but that was after, that was '52 [1952].  But that was February '52 [1952], and in March, he went to Korea [Korean War] and stayed what--two years, so almost one and a half over there.  And, but we wrote to each other.  He wrote every day, every single day.  But then the girls used to say, "Oh, don't get excited, because, you know, and soldiers get free mail, so all he had to do is take the little time," (laughter).  So, I didn't get excited.  But when he came back in, came back in '50 [1950], September.  It's May '54 [1954], I guess, May, or something like that.  And May '54, yeah, May '54 [1954].  Then, you know, he asked me to marry him, so we got engaged in May the 30th.  And so, he wanted to get married right away.  I said, "No Jesse, I can't do that."  The school will put you out, you know.  At that time, you were not supposed to marry, be a student.
Speaker 1: How old were you at that time?
Speaker 2: I was about twenty-six, twenty-seven, because I married when I was twenty-eight.
Story_ID: 268433
Speaker 1: And what kind of school were you in?
Speaker 2: That was Grady [Memorial Hospital School of Nursing, Atlanta, Georgia]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that was Grady.  Grady, they were very strict, you have curfew.  You had to be in at ten o'clock, and to sign in and out.  It was strict, very.
Speaker 1: So, at this time, Grady had a nursing school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Grady had a nursing school, and the dormitories--what, you know, that they, there were two homes for the black girls, 'cause they had more blacks than white.  And the whites are in that--that building is still there.  That was a white dormitory, across the street from [Hughes] Spalding [hospital, Atlanta, Georgia].  And in the place where Spalding is, there was the Butler Street home that was for freshmen.  After the first year, then you move to the Armstrong home, which is, which is on Armstrong Street in the other, the other big building over there.  I don't know what it is now.  Yeah, but there was--they have a housemother.  And you had to sign in and out with her--wherever you went, whatever you did.  They were strict, and they did not allow married students.
Speaker 1: And the nursing school was a four-year school?
Speaker 2: It was four years packed in three.  It, it's really three--it, four years, I think, for thirty-six months, you know, straight.
Speaker 1: And you would end up with the bachelor's [degree] in nursing?
Speaker 2: No, you didn't get a bachelor's.  You just got a nursing degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You had to complete your bachelor later.
Story_ID: 268434
Speaker 1: So, upon graduation [from Grady Memorial Hospital School of Nursing, Atlanta, Georgia], there were many things in front of you.  You were recently married and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were--no, I was not married.  I mean, no, I went home [to Holguin, Oriente Province, Cuba; Holguin, Holguin Province, Cuba].
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: No, I went home September '54 [1954].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I married [Jesse Hill in] April '55 [1955].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So after getting married, is that when you began your career here?  Where was the first place that you were working?
Speaker 2: Actually, I came up--work.  I worked one month at a little clinic on Hunter Street.  There was--McLendon [Avenue], McLendon, but it was very, it was not adequate--anything.  I really didn't work long there, just a month, and then I started at Grady [Memorial Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia].  But about two months later, I got pregnant, and I stopped working.  I stopped working, 'cause that was the system in the operating room.  And you had to lift the patient from the operating table to the stretcher, and then lift again from the stretcher to the bed, and that was kind of strenuous.  And I wanted this baby so much, I stopped working almost immediately.  And, I was so sleepy, I just couldn't, I just couldn't work, so I didn't work.  And until later, let's see, that was '54 [1954], '55 [1955].  I did evening kind of duties, you know, from three to eleven [o'clock] at Grady, I think, in the children's ward.  But every time I heard a child cry, I thought it was mine, and I cried, too (laughter).  And then I had my--two years, two and a half years later, I had my second child.
Speaker 1: What was your first child's name?
Speaker 2: Nancy [Hill Cook].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was named for my mother-in-law [Nancy Dennis Martin] who was an angel.  She was very nice to me.  She's like a real mother.  And my second, when I had my second child [Azira Hill Kendall], I stayed home about two years.  And I was working at Grady part-time from seven in the morning till twelve noon, because when she started--they used to have kindergarten half a day.  And so, I had to get off to pick her up at twelve o'clock.  And they didn't want to--but this was not--this was the educational department.  I was supervising the young nurses, and when I asked, you know, to--for a day job, they would not, they--most of the white girls had the day jobs.  That was in '73 [1973].  So, I just applied to the public schools and started working as a school nurse.  And started at [Luther Judson] Price High School in southeast Atlanta [Georgia], and I was there for ten years.
Story_ID: 268435
Speaker 1: I worked until Nancy [Hill Cook] was in high school, and we lived--she was in Southwest High School [Atlanta, Georgia].  We lived in Lynn Circle [Atlanta, Georgia], which was like about two blocks from there.  And I would take her home--I mean, I would take her to school in the morning, drop her off, went to work.  When I got to work, you know, and so, my co-workers would say, "Why did you let Nancy go to school looking that way?"  And, you know, things like that.  And Nancy gave me a headache with--there were suddenly mini-skirts.  It was so unacceptable.  It was awful.  Nancy take off her shirt--I mean, there's, the hem on her--and I'll ask them back home.  And many days when I came home, I found the door open, the iron on, and just so many things, you know, there was (unclear), you know, and everything.  The revolution stuff in Cuba started, and it was just so much distraction.  And we had a conversation one day, and I said, "I can't continue this way."  And she said, "Mommy, if you stay home, nothing--this thing wouldn't happen," just apparently, she--I would drop her at school, and she would come back home, and do a lot of little things, even iron, and do other things.  And they come, and come with the other little gang, you know, and just say, if they don't--if you are at home, this wouldn't happen.  So, I say, "I'll tell you what?  I'll stop tomorrow."  So, I stopped working, and I sat home to babysit Nancy at fifteen or sixteen, whatever it is.  We laugh about it today, but it wasn't funny then, you know (laughter).  So, I stayed home, just--"Why did you work anyway?"  I said, "Because I want to work," you know.  So, I stopped, and I came home and stayed for five years.  Five years, I did not work.  Azira [Hill Kendall] was in school, and Nancy was--I mean, they both high, through high school, I just did not work.  When Nancy went to college, then I went back to work.  And I stayed eleven years this time at [Ralph J.] Bunche Middle School [Atlanta, Georgia].  But I really enjoyed, I really enjoyed.  I travelled a lot, 'cause I belong to professional groups.  And they had a lot of seminars out of the country, so I have been able to travel a great deal, places that I'd been dreaming, or to be able to go, 'cause I've been to Africa four times, been to Russia, China, Australia, Turkey.
Speaker 2: And what's taking you to these countries?  What types of things that led you there?
Speaker 1: Seminars--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --professional seminars.
Speaker 2: Hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Because I've been on, you know, you can belong to professional organizations.  They--you get these opportunities.  And my husband [Jesse Hill] was busy, couldn't travel, so I went by myself and had a wonderful time, so I've seen the world.
Speaker 2: And you were mentioning that Nancy was the firstborn?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And then, there was--
Speaker 1: Azira--
Speaker 2: Azira, that's the second born.
Speaker 1: --yeah, the second child.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But then, my mother-in-law [Nancy Dennis Martin] came to stay with us--not stayed, but she would come during the school year.  And she'd come in September and leave in June.  She'd have some Christmas--it's cheaper to go St. Louis [Missouri], 'cause she lives in St. Louis.  And, so, you know, that was an opportunity for me to work and travel.  And I really had a great, great time, I really did.
Speaker 2: Are there any stories that you want to share about your second daughter (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Well, my second daughter was the--we used to call her the bookworm, because she's always reading and studying and, you know, she's all quiet.  Nancy is a lot more bubbly.  She's people person, you know.  And she wanted to be a cheerleader, and do things that, you know, some things I had to restrict.  They'd say I was strict, but that's how I came up--I mean, I was brought up that way.
Story_ID: 268436
Speaker 1: If you could, share with me, maybe, the name of some of the associations that you belong to professionally.
Speaker 2: Oh, I've done so many things.  I, you know, during the Civil Rights Movement, you know, I didn't have any other choice but to join.  My husband, [Jesse] Hill, was chair of the All-Citizens Registration Committee, so I became a registrar, and, you know, could register people to vote.  And so, we used to go to churches, and mass meetings, and places like that, and register to vote people.  Then, when [HistoryMaker] Charlayne [Hunter-Gault] and Hamilton [Holmes]'s application, and all the turmoil and went through that, you know, I was there, you know, fixing foods, and just being there.  You had to support your husband.  Political rallies, and mass meetings, and all that.  The only thing I didn't do was to--I didn't march.  Only one time, and that was the demonstration on the [Boisfeuillet Jones Atlanta] Civic Center [Atlanta, Georgia] at something about they tried to integrate the dentists' professional meeting that they were having there.  And other than that, I would--did sit-ins, Mrs. [Otelia Hackney] Russell and I, you know, went to, used to be, store across the street from The Ritz-Carlton [Atlanta, Georgia]--I can't remember the name now, but they had a restaurant and Macy's--
Speaker 1: Which is--
Speaker 2: --but anyway, they--we just went inside in their dining room.  And when we got there, they didn't serve us--they just closed.  They closed the dining room, so we just got up and left.  And then, there was in Lenox Square [Atlanta, Georgia], there was another restaurant, and we did that, too.  And the third one was (unclear) that was in Locust Street, and that was the only one that I really got upset and frightened (laughter), because we were--it was a delicatessen.  And so, we were trying to get in to order--it was sandwiches and things--and the police came.  And the minute police came, I have to go--I couldn't, I just could not.  Well, [Jesse] Hill and I had made the promise to each other that we would not get arrested, because--well, I'm a foreigner, you know, I could be deported.  At that time, I don't think I was even a citizen.  And then, too, the girls [Nancy Hill Cook and Azira Hill Kendall] were small, and we didn't have any relatives in town, so somebody had to be, you know, there to--over them.  In addition to that, he was the contact person to bail out those that were arrested.  So, he couldn't be arrested himself.  So, that was one of the arrangements that, you know, that were made beforehand.
Story_ID: 268437
Speaker 1: Coming from Cuba, I'm sure it was quite an adjustment to this new identity with blackness?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How did that work, and how was your passion stimulated to become an activist?
Speaker 2: Well, see, when I married--remember, I was about twenty-eight when I got married.  And you are mature by then, you know, and you had, and plus we had known each other for five years.  I had finally decided that this was what I was going to do for the rest of my life.  So, you know, you had no other, no other--you don't need any more stimulant, you know.  You--that's you mate, you have to be there to support, and to do all you can to see that things go well.
Speaker 1: What do you think was one of the most challenging encounters that you had as an activist for civil rights?
Speaker 2: Well, the most distressing thing were telephone calls.  And, in fact, even today, when you call my house, my husband [Jesse Hill] always answers, because there have been so many threats and ugly calls.  So, and, you know, I remember one, one time when one of my daughters answered the phone.  And this person, you know, talking about, "Tell your dad to stop doing what he's doing--he's gonna," you know, "we kill [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.], we want to get him, too," and all that kind of stuff, which got the child crying and all that.  So, that's why nobody answer the phone at my house.  If Hill is there, he's going to answer, yeah.
Speaker 1: What do you think were some of the most rewarding times, or rewarding experiences that you've had?
Speaker 2: Well, the rewarding experience is to see [HistoryMaker] Charlayne [Hunter-Gault] graduate from University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], Mary Frances Early, you know, Hamilton [Holmes], and some of the other things.  And it has been rewarding and magnificent, you know, it's great, you know, you never tell--then to see that people that you believe in had been elected and had done the right thing.  So, those are encouraging things.  And there are a lot of, there are a lot of people had been improved, you know, because you gave a little bit, 'cause there are people who gave more than we have, you know, some people gave their lives.
Speaker 1: In what ways do you think women were on the forefront of the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: In which way?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in which ways?  There are some that argue that women were not--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes--
Speaker 1: --very important.
Speaker 2: --oh, absolutely, no, that's--absolutely not.  They--
Speaker 1: In what ways did you see them involved and what ways--
Speaker 2: Well, many were arrested, you know.  Some of us stayed behind and did the cooking and supporting and, you know, a lot of other things, in just a lot of, you know, a number of ways.  And there are some even, you know, physically, you know, were there with the planning and the--they just supported, but in the fair forefront.
Speaker 1: Did you ever have a sense that you were pulled into the movement, or did you always have the sense that you wanted to actively participate?
Speaker 2: I always wanted to be there; I will always want to be there.
Story_ID: 268438
Speaker 1: Were you ever torn by your identity as a Cuban, as distinguished from identity as an African American?
Speaker 2: No, not really, because you come to realize that it really doesn't matter.  What matter is what's inside of the person, you know.  And, in fact, that I have somebody to say, "Oh, you're not going to marry that guy [Jesse Hill], because he's too dark," you know.  There are people who still hope, you know, even at that time, you know, that was the thing.  You just didn't do that, especially, but even when I look back and I see my own family, you know, I see some very light skin, some people are white, some people are brown, some people are Indian [Native American], so my family is very mixed, very, very mixed.
Speaker 1: And for the duration of time that you were here, perhaps even fighting for civil rights in this country, there were major transitions going on in Cuba.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Could you talk a little bit about that, and maybe how that impacted you or your relationship with your family?
Speaker 2: Well, it was--there were difficult times, because the political situation was changed, you know, tremendously there.  And that, you know, affected me a great deal, too.  It was very emotional.  You couldn't, you know, like you have, but you had--the only thing you could depend on was the letter, and it would take like a month to know about your mother, you know, was dead or alive, or whatever happened, what kind of situation are they having, who, you know, what's going on there.  There was, even today, telephone is limited, you know, it's not--now at least you have a computer that you can communicate with some--the younger people.  The older people still don't have that communication.  So, it was kind of difficult and very emotional, very, very emotional.  But mother [Dominga Sanchez Gonzalez] was older, and she--I think her mind was changing and so, she would write, and tell me things that were happening that it was not--they were not real, so all of that affected me a lot.  And so, your faith kind of hold, you know, help you to hold on to these, and to sort things out, yeah.
Speaker 1: You mentioned now that you have family that's here, what has that been like for you?
Speaker 2: Wonderful.  My sister [Mercedes Gonzalez], you know, I'm just so happy I was able to make it possible for her and her family to come.  And that was a blessing, and but I tried for years and years.  She was not allowed to come out.  Some people were.  I have my older brother that I brought without much difficulty.  It was back in 1967, but after then, they, you know, it was very difficult to get any relatives out.  And now, with this embargo, and all these things--just, just terrible.  But I was able to get my sister.  It was kind of expensive to get, you know, so get her out.  But I was able to get her and her husband, two children, and their children, and they're all here and doing well.
Speaker 1: What do you think the strengths and the weaknesses are at the embargo?
Speaker 2: Well, I wouldn't know that there's any strength.  I don't know.  The weakness is that the little people are the ones that suffer, you know.  Government come and go, and they, you know, they had the good life.  But the ones that suffer are the, you know, the people, the poor people, you know.  They have a shortage of things.  Everything is backwards.  The lack of up-to-date medications, things like that.
Story_ID: 268439
Speaker 1: How did you feel, or what were your experiences like, also having the identity of being an immigrant?  Sounds to me as if there were many communities that you, you know, were dealing with.  You came initially, and there was the white community, and then you were dealing with the African American community.  How, how did you feel about being or--
Speaker 2: Well, at some point, you felt kind of left out from everywhere, 'cause you're not accepted from the whites, not accepted from the blacks, and so, you are in kind of a limbo, you know.  And so, as I said, your faith carries you through, and that's all there is.  I tell you, it's rough.
Speaker 1: When you think now about the trials and tribulations of the Latino community, are there any particular thoughts that you have?
Speaker 2: Well, they don't have, they--I mean, they are more accepted now.  And because I think the number helps a lot, too.  And then, the people are better educated, too, 'cause a lot of it is ignorance, you know.  And so, they--I think they are in better shape today, even though there's not an equal footing, you know.  But, but they are further, you know, ahead and be probably, you know, even from blacks, you know.  I don't know the story, but I started a program [Black Talent Development Program; Talent Development Program] at the [Atlanta] Symphony [Orchestra] for blacks and Latinos.  Started as black, first, because, well, I was in the--I am on the board of the symphony for many years.
Story_ID: 268329
Speaker 1: So you were discussing your work on the board for the [Atlanta] Symphony [Orchestra].
Speaker 2: Well, this, this is my most recent project.  I had done some other things, but the most significant--I think that, that, that helped both the Latino, now, community, and the blacks.  Originally started as blacks, because there are--but we did a study.  Shortly, after I started at the symphony, I was in a group called audience development.  And so, we note, noted that, number one, the audience was mainly black--I mean, white, all white people, very few blacks.  And so, we wanted to know why.  So, we thought, we had our taskforce that I chaired for a couple of years.  And so we did a research and see what's happening on the symphonies.  And we found that, number one, there are--almost every symphony in the country only have one or two blacks, players.  It's not just Atlanta [Georgia].  And so, we started finding, trying to find out why.  Mainly, it's that blacks don't go to conservatories, don't graduate from conservatories, and there's the--couldn't do it, you know.  That's the route, the route to it.  And so, we decided that we grow our own.  So, we started this program, mainly (unclear), with the hope that we could use students from the public school system, so we could give a chance to those that make, you know, the list of this, so to speak.  But it didn't turn out that way.  The public schools had cut back on their budget for music.  And so, we had to reach out to public--to private schools.  And so, anyway, we started this program that we had to solve the (unclear) to the board, because no one understood what really we wanted to start our own program, so that one day, we had enough black, really, you know, prepared musicians.  And so, we started with two hundred, auditioned two hundred students.  And out of two hundred, we got ten.  And for about three years, it was completely, it was all black, from the ten students, doing very well.  After then, there was a very wealthy Latino in town that offered, you know, a sizeable contribution if we brought some Latinos.  So, they did open it up to the Latinos.  And so now, there is black and Latinos.  And from ten, it has increased to twenty-five.  The students are taught once a week.  They get free lessons once a week from the musicians and the symphony.  And in the summer, they are offered the opportunity to go up to a summer camp where they concentrate, and nothing but music all day for four to six weeks.  The program only pays about half of it.  And the parents have to find the other part of the monies.  It's called the Talent Development [Program], and it's going very well.  I'm very proud of this program, and this is going on, on the twelfth year.  And as I said, we have twenty-five students.  And we have seven students who had graduated from high schools and had been, in fact, they are studying at conservatories, major conservatories in the country with full scholarship.  So, this is one of my crowning glories, so very proud of that.
Speaker 1: Are there any other organizations that you've worked with as of recent that--
Speaker 2: Yes, recent, their work with the [Center for] Puppetry Arts [Atlanta, Georgia], and also the Southeastern Flower Show, which is support group to the [Atlanta] Botanical Garden [Atlanta, Georgia].  But before then, I had worked with, you know, with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  I've been in the board of NAACP, the Urban League, and because I sat on the voter registration committee [All-Citizens Registration Committee].  The [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Center [for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia], I was in, on the board of the King Center for a number of years.  And I'm always busy, and I enjoy it.
Story_ID: 268330
Speaker 1: What was it like to be the wife of Mr. Jesse Hill?
Speaker 2: Challenging (laughter), challenging, but he's a wonderful person.  He is unreal.  He's--there's nobody like him, I tell you--very kind and very nice.
Speaker 1: Of the contributions that he has made, which ones are you personally the most proud of?
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, that's kind of hard.  But I think one of the things that he really gave his heart to was the integration of the schools, but also the voter registration.  He spent lots and lots of time with that, but he's always busy.  It's all he has, a helping hand.  He had to help a lot of people in this town [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: And as it relates to service, what do you think has been the greatest service that he's extended to African Americans?
Speaker 2: Greatest service--that's kind of hard to pin down--
Speaker 1: Do you think it would be his work in business, or his work in civil rights or--
Speaker 2: As far as service--business is business.  I think he had made a contribution there, but he's going to be for civil rights as being great, you know.  From the time [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], he was one of his advisors, and he was on the original board of the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], and just, it's just that he's not a flashy, in front of the camera person.  But he does a lot, and he's very positive and very powerful, and he's able to work miracles.
Story_ID: 268331
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you'd like to share that I haven't asked you about?  You've had such a rich and meaningful life (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--thank you.  I have had a good life.  I have a wonderful husband [Jesse Hill], two fabulous children [Nancy Hill Cook and Azira Hill Kendall], and six grandchildren, and I'm very proud of all of them.  My youngest--my oldest granddaughter is in law school.  This is coming up in the second year.  My oldest grandson is a freshman at the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia].  And the next one just graduated from Woodward--no, Westminster [Upper School, Atlanta, Georgia], I'm sorry, Westminster, and he's headed for Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois].  And the other three are in Woodward [Academy, College Park, Georgia].  And I've been blessed that they are--have been all wonderful children, very smart and studious, and just decent people.  And I just thank God for them all.
Story_ID: 268332
Speaker 1: What suggestions would you have for a young person wanting to go into the profession of nursing?
Speaker 2: Nursing is very rewarding profession.  It has been--they have been a number of changes.  But basic nursing is just indescribable.  And there, the--I think the greatest thing is that you have such a basic education that you can branch off to so many other things from there, you know.  Many nurses have become anesthesiologists or, you know, have grown into other professions that can spring--it's kind of a springboard, you know, to many, many other things, other significant professions.
Speaker 1: Do you think if you had to do it all over again that you would have chosen another career path?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I've been very happy with I had been able to do.  It's all rewarding to see--to meet people that you had touched.  In fact, yesterday, I was coming back, I was in the airport [Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport], coming back to Atlanta [Georgia], and a young lady came and said, "Weren't you the school nurse at [Ralph J.] Bunche Middle School [Atlanta, Georgia]?" (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And that's so nice, you know, that people don't forget you.  Somehow, I touched her.  Otherwise, she would have never, you know, stopped to speak and to remind me of whatever I was able to do to help her carry on.  Counseling is one of those things that, you know, a nurse does so well, 'cause you'll, and nurses are teachers, counselors, healers--just so many, many things.
Speaker 1: How did you feel about the changes that were occurring in education?  Although you were a nurse, I'm sure that, you know, there has been--
Speaker 2: Well, big, some changes are good, because now, they have so many women, and so many other, you know, things, new things that had made the work of the nurses--liking the work, but as far as--I think it's some of the change had been, had to do with the changing philosophy, I guess, you know.  And that's another story; that's, you know, so there has been some good and some bad.
Story_ID: 268333
Speaker 1: What do you still want to do that you haven't done yet?
Speaker 2: I've done a lot.  There's still few parts of the world I haven't seen (laughter).  But I have had quite a complete life, as I said, and grateful and happy.  And I'm hoping that I'm here to see my grandchildren, you know, continue to progress.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would have done differently--any regrets or reflections?
Speaker 2: The only regret is, that I had really, is not to have been able to be there in my mother's [Dominga Sanchez Gonzalez] later years, you know.  That responsibility went to my sister [Mercedes Gonzalez], and but because of political situations, I was not able to travel as much.  It's difficult now.  I had, had some very uncomfortable trips to Cuba, and I don't know.  I'd like to go back, but I'm almost afraid to go, frankly.
Speaker 1: When you say uncomfortable trips to Cuba, could you explain just a little bit more?
Speaker 2: Well, I--they had--I felt that I was--had not been treated, you know, cordially.  I've been, not arrested, but detained and searched and, you know, made feel frightened.  So, but the--I know that I had--I know that all of these had to do with, you know, politics.  I had been gone for many, many years, and I don't know what the reason is that--they just make it uncomfortable for you, you know, when you go there.
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for Cuba for the future?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I pray that there is some relief for the people down below, you know, and that--I don't know.  It's just so political.  They just, just don't know.
Story_ID: 268334
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: Well, I think--excuse me--I have seen the changes. I just, my hope is that the families become a little stronger.  I think some of the problems that we had--we have today in the African American community is weakness in the families.  And that's why the schools had gone down, and everything seems so down.  The boys are not, you know, don't stay in school. You--everywhere--and my grandchildren tell me, you know, wherever they go, you see a majority female.  You go to church, it's majority female.  And part of this is that the family has disintegrated and has weakened, you know, 'cause when I was a child, and I even, when I had my child--my children [Nancy Hill Cook and Azira Hill Kendall], you know, there was no such a thing as making them go to school, to church, or making them go to school, you know.  You go, you do what's right.  But today, there is so much difference.  You cannot, you know, you're afraid to correct the child, you know.  And then, when I was working, especially at [Luther Judson] Price High School [Atlanta, Georgia] that if there was commotion or disturbance in the hall, all you had to do, you just go to the hall, go to the door, and everything, everybody, you know, stopped 'cause, you see, that's respect for the person.  But today is not like that, and when you correct the child, they even, you know, call you names, and they're just not--their lack of respect is not there.  And I think that has started deteriorated a family.
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the broader Latino community?
Speaker 2: Broader Latino is the problem of dropouts.  It's one of the really, really--education is a serious thing.  Some of them had come here and stayed in their own little communities, don't speak the language, and don't try to integrate, and to, you know.  But there are a few that are coming out and getting into, you know, politics and making progress.  A great deal of them are making progress.
Story_ID: 268335
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, what stands out the most?
Speaker 2: It's hard to say.  There's so much.  It's--I have had a rich, rich life, really have.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: What, what values do you consider to be the most important?
Speaker 2: Respect, respect.  When you respect yourself, you respect others, and that is a good thing.
Story_ID: 268336
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?  What would you want for people to say about you?
Speaker 2: Well, I want them to say I did what I could, and I do every day--not just for me, for the, any, any opportunity that I have for service.
Speaker 1: What message or lessons do you have for your children [Nancy Hill Cook and Azira Hill Kendall], grandchildren, and perhaps even the world?
Speaker 2: Be honest, be loving, be kind--to yourself and others.  Sometimes we abuse ourselves.
Story_ID: 268337
Speaker 1: Why do you think that history is important?
Speaker 2: History is important because we can learn, and our life can be enriched by what you hear about other people, or you read or see.  Examples is important.
Story_ID: 268338
Speaker 1: And within the context of the contributions that you've made to the history of this city [Atlanta, Georgia], who would you consider to be your dearest friends, or some of your most special relationships?
Speaker 2: My dearest friend is Beulah Brown [ph.], who was my first roommate in nursing school [Grady Memorial Hospital School of Nursing, Atlanta, Georgia], and she took me in like a real sister.  She was there when I had my first baby [Nancy Hill Cook], and she is there today.  If I have a stomachache, it's the first person my children would call.  That is truly wonderful, after fifty some years.
Speaker 1: Are there any relationships that were established over time through your political affiliations or relationships that are very near and dear to you?
Speaker 2: Oh, there are many, there are many relationships.  The Russells [Otelia Hackney Russell and HistoryMaker Herman Russell] are very close, for years.  The Hendersons, there was, Dr. [Vivian Wilson] Henderson was president of Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and his wife [Anna Powell Henderson] and his, remain faithful friends.  There are others, you know, like the Agres [ph.] in Peachtree City [Georgia] today, that we travel last week together, had a great time together.  So, we had time, great friend, both sides.  I have, I belong to a support group of the [Atlanta] Symphony [Orchestra] that's called the ensemble.  And we meet, and eat, and listen to music, and it's just great.  And there's some great people there, too.
Story_ID: 268339
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Service, you know, it's just what you do, what you do for others with your time, what you do with your time especially when it affects other people.
Story_ID: 268340
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Azira Gonzalez Sanchez] Hill, you have been a member of Big Bethel A.M.E. [Church, Atlanta, Georgia] for over fifty years at this point?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What has that been like?
Speaker 2: Well, it's been a wonderful experience and that really sustained me, because when I came without friends or money (laughter), I found wonderful friends there.  It was Rosa Brown [ph.] that used to take me to her house every Sunday after church for dinner, and spend the rest of the evening.  And that was great, because there was nothing else to do around here, but had Western movie, but it was five cents or something, but that was expensive.  And the bowling alley was twenty cents.  And sometime, I didn't have the twenty cents.  And my roommate, Beulah [Brown (ph.)], who I mentioned before, would say, c'mon, let's go, let's go bowling, or doing something.  And so, I said, "No, I have to study."  And she said, "No, you don't, you are not going, 'cause you don't have any money, right?  I'm going to loan you twenty cents."  And we have a joke about the twenty cents that I owe her so many times.  But back to Bethel, Bethel is very significant in my life, our lives, my family's life, 'cause that's where I met my husband [Jesse Hill].  I taught Sunday school for many years.  And I then, also taught the acolytes' class for at least twenty or thirty years.  Then, my daughters [Nancy Hill Cook and Azira Hill Kendall] were baptized there, and they both get married there.  Then, when the question of the naming the street [Butler Street, Atlanta, Georgia] came up.  That was the most--one, you know, one of the significant things, 'cause that was our church where we met.  Also, above the street was the place where he lived, and was my first dormitory when I came to this country, so that's why Jesse Hill [Jr Drive]-Auburn Avenue is significant.  But, Bethel, at one time, was--still is a thriving church.  When I joined, we had a very dynamic pastor, Reverend [Harold I.] Bearden, who was very political.  And the press used to come over almost every Sunday to hear what he had to say, because, you know, he was a very active activist, and there was great ministers in down Auburn Avenue at that time.  Reverend [William Holmes] Borders was one of them, and [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.].  And so they had, they've had these little group, you know, that did many, many great things in this town.  Bethel had, at that time, had the largest auditorium.  So, anything significant, like any large funeral, or any large gathering, like a mass meeting or whatever, always took place at Bethel.  And when Mr. [Nelson] Mandela came to Atlanta [Georgia], that was the place where he wanted to go.  And so, it's, it's very important.  It's the 157 years congregation, and we are very proud and happy to have been able to labor there for all these many years.
Speaker 1: Within the community now, what are some of the projects that Bethel is doing that are really, really progressive?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, as you know, the avenue, Sweet Auburn [Atlanta, Georgia] (unclear) for many years, was down.  All the buildings were dilapidated, and there was a lot of problem with drugs.  And the homeless used to hang around, and just to mean not so good things.  So, the church started buying some of the property, and with the hope to develop, but develop it one day soon, I hope.  But the main interest was to connect the area, and I think they had done that.  They also had this Trinity [United Methodist] Church [Atlanta, Georgia] partnership, where they are providing homes--I mean, shelter for forty-some men, I think.  And so, they are working together to help these men that want a head-up, they call it, not a hand-out.
Speaker 1: Amazing.  Are, is there any work being done with women that you are particularly proud of?
Speaker 2: With the church?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, the [Laura L. Turner Women's] Missionary Society had always--I had always been a missionary and, yes, we have projects with the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], and there are other things that they do.
Story_ID: 268341
Speaker 1: How do you feel the church [Big Bethel A.M.E. Church, Atlanta, Georgia] is doing with its recruitment of young people back into the congregation?
Speaker 2: I think the church is doing very well.  We have a transition now.  We have a new minister and, usually, you have a little, you know, different there.  But he's doing very well, and he's putting a lot of emphasis in the young people.  So, I think it's coming along.  It's not a megachurch, because, you know, it's a downtown church.  People come from distance to come here, but I think we are proud of what's going on at this point.
Speaker 1: What are some of the strategies that you think could be used to pull young people back to the church?
Speaker 2: Well, the church had changed a lot because, well, it used to be quiet and sophisticated, you know.  Now, they have a little more, you know, different type of music.  There's an orchestra and, you know, there are a lot of the attractions, other things.  They have other groups, like Girl Scouts [of the U.S.A.], and they have a basketball team, and other things like that.  And they had--erect one of the buildings that had been dedicated to the youth, and it is a recreational center.  And at one point, they were doing tutoring for the children in the community of the Capitol Homes [Atlanta, Georgia].  So, they used to pick them up and bring them to church and help them with their homework.  And they also have a computer lab.
