Story_ID: 343980
Speaker 1: Good morning.
Speaker 2: Good morning (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm Shawn Wilson with The HistoryMakers, I will be the interviewer today and we have Matthew Hickey as the videographer.  And I will just start by having you introduce yourself to me by giving me your name and spelling it out for me.
Speaker 2: Okay, my name is, my name is [HistoryMaker] David Holliman H-O-L-L-I-M-A-N, that's the last name.
Speaker 1: What's your middle name Mr. Holliman?
Speaker 2: Leroy (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, your date of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is September the 13th, 1929.
Speaker 1: Your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Denver, Colorado.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is April 22nd, 2006.
Speaker 1: The location of this interview?
Speaker 2: It's 2030 East 11th Avenue, Denver, Colorado and the zip is 80206.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm retired.
Speaker 1: But before you retired what was your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well before I retired I was a self-employed I had my own maintenance service.  I had several employments I, I used to work with the City County of Denver [City and County of Denver, Colorado] as an engineering survey aide.  Worked at the post office and then I retired with Continental Airlines as a passenger service agent in 1985.  And then we established a business, business called Queen City Services [Queen City Services, Inc., Denver, Colorado].  Which we did customer service for six airlines, wheelchairs, skycap services, electric cart and, and we did baggage delivery to certain--
Speaker 1: So overall you would describe yourself as an entrepreneur?
Speaker 2: Right, entrepreneur.
Story_ID: 343981
Speaker 1: I'm gonna start with five People magazine type questions, just very short answers, these short answers will appear on our website.  Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well I guess salmon is one, vegetable green, mustard green is another, sweet potatoes, corn bread or hot water bread the wife [Mildred Holliman] makes, steak, prime rib, fish any, any types, pretty much any type of fish.  I like Chinese food.
Speaker 1: So if those which is your one favorite food?
Speaker 2: I, I--the soul food category is the best.
Speaker 1: Soul food, okay.
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: In the fall.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I, I like Las Vegas [Nevada], I like the Caribbean you know.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess my favorite, favorite saying is, to be able to wake up in the morning and say that I'm blessed.  Bless you Lord for another day, that's the key one.
Story_ID: 343982
Speaker 1: So we're gonna start with your family tree Mr. Holliman [HistoryMaker David Holliman].
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And I want as much as you can tell me about your family tree but we'll do it in sections.  So we will start with your mother and your mother's side of the family.  So if you can give me your mother's name, your mother's date of birth and place of birth?  Let's just start with your mother's name?
Speaker 2: Where's that form, 'cause a lot of this stuff is--
Speaker 1: Okay, a lot of it's on the form (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: If I, I can't have that form, I, I can I can do better.
Speaker 1: Okay if it's on the form there's no real need to repeat it all.
Speaker 2: Okay, it's all on the form.
Speaker 1: So your mother, mother's name?
Speaker 2: Was Adele Banks.
Speaker 1: Okay so let's talk about Ms. Banks, your mother, what are your earliest memories of your mother?
Speaker 2: She, she, she passed, I was, (unclear) as an early age, I think I was two years old when she passed, so I don't have any.  Don't have any, don't have anything I can tell you.
Speaker 1: Okay, but your mother was born Pueblo, Colorado (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pueblo, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, March 16, 1911?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, but she passed away when you were two years old?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you know of what?
Speaker 2: Tuberculosis.
Speaker 1: Tuberculosis.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, TB.
Speaker 1: TB.
Speaker 2: That was quite prevalent in those days.
Speaker 1: So you then, your--did you, your grandmother, did you know your mother's mother [Elizabeth Banks]?
Speaker 2: Well, no, my paternal grandmother [Rhoda Holliman] raised me, in Pueblo.  And I didn't know too much about the maternal family.
Story_ID: 343983
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father's side, your father.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What was your father's name?
Speaker 2: Ernest William Holliman [Ernest Holliman, Jr.].
Speaker 1: And when was, your father born?
Speaker 2: He was born in September, 1909.
Speaker 1: And what are your earliest memories of your father?
Speaker 2: Well, I again, I, I was, I was raised by my grandparents.  But I remembered he, he you know as a young man he, he was active, you know.  He went to high school, he did some coaching.  Then, he, he retired from the Santa Fe CS Railroad [sic. Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway].  Tremendous handy man, good with his hands, very supportive, just true a father, yeah.  More, he was, he was a father, brother and a friend, all in, all in one.
Speaker 1: So do you remember any stories people told you about what your father was like when he was a little boy?
Speaker 2: No, not, not too much, during my day, back in those days those, those old folks were very closed mouthed.  So really didn't you know, they didn't share too much, like we, like we do today.
Speaker 1: Well let's talk about your father's mother, what was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Rhoda Holliman.
Speaker 1: And, how do you spell that Rhoda?
Speaker 2: R-H-O-D-A.
Speaker 1: Rhoda Holliman.
Speaker 2: Rhoda Neal [ph.] Holliman.
Speaker 1: And do you perhaps know her date of birth?
Speaker 2: That?
Speaker 1: No that's not on there.
Speaker 2: No that's not on there, I, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was the one that raised that you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about her and about your Grandmother Holliman?
Speaker 2: Very, she was strict, she was a good dis- disciplinarian, but a true grandmother, you know.  She knew how to disperse love, but she, she also knew that, any--she never neglected you with love, you pretty much, I pretty much was able to, had a nice childhood with her.  But, grandparents in those days were to the point whereas they, could more of less could just look at you, and then and you knew then, you've done something wrong.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: But, but the true child, you know I, I got spankings like anybody else, you know.
Speaker 1: Well let's talk about your grandmother, do you know what she did for a living, when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: She was a housewife, she didn't work.
Speaker 1: So let's talk about what she did in the house?  What type of a cook was she?  What was her specialty?
Speaker 2: Well very good cook, she, she was good at all boiled foods.  The same foods that I mentioned to you a little while ago.  That is what I grew up on.  And, and she, she was good far as, we, we grew pretty much our own meat.  Pueblo [Colorado] was kind of like a little town, kind of we had a little half acre site down there.  So we grew our on corn, we grew our own vegetables, we grew rabbits, we had chickens.  We, we she, we would butcher our meat like, if we have a car--a hog or something like that.  So, she, they--she pretty much you know, more or less like living on a farm.
Story_ID: 343984
Speaker 1: What were your chores on the farm?
Speaker 2: Well I, at that age, see, I, I was only with them [Holliman's paternal grandparents, Rhoda Holliman and Ernest Holliman, Sr.] until I was twelve years old.  So whatever, whatever I (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well let's just talk about you know from two or three to twelve, what were, what did you do on the farm?  I mean did you help skin rabbits or like (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah you know I, you know I whatever (unclear) chores that had me do, you know.  If I, if I had to go out and you know I learned how to feed.  I learned how to pick the vegetables and just pretty much what, what any, you know what and child between, what I'd say between eight and twelve.  Because the, the younger years, it was just too young to do anything, to do anything.  But I you know, I would be told, exp- you know, I'd they, they would give the due process how to do things.  So then when I did, was able to do whatever I could do, I knew how to go ahead and I you know, how to do the process (unclear).
Story_ID: 343985
Speaker 1: Who were your neighbors when you lived on that farm?
Speaker 2: There was a, there was a, we had a, we our, our home was from, from there, to half--let's see the house was here and then from there to the corner, was all our property.  The neighbors to our left was named Boyers, B-O-Y-E-R-S.  And they, they pretty much had, had the same life style as, as my grandmother [Rhoda Holliman].  And the across the alley was another family, who, I think he was a, he was an entrepreneur I, I don't if he was a medical doctor or not but he had seven kids and we all grew up together.  And so the, those was to the back.  Across the street, later in life is where my dad [Ernest Holliman, Jr.] and, and my stepmom [Dorothy Holliman] grew up, you know where they lived.  So it pretty close knit little block.
Speaker 1: Now was it, was it, the black community in Pueblo [Colorado] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, there we, we were intermixed you know.  We had what we called the south side of Pueblo which everyone lived.  And then we had the Bessemer [Pueblo, Colorado] area, over where most of the, most of the blacks lived, but it, it wasn't a more or less black section per se.  So we pretty much lived you know, spottily everywhere.
Speaker 1: So you said that neighbors across lived sort of the same life style that you lived?
Speaker 2: Next door yes.
Speaker 1: Next door, what, what do you consider that life style?  How would you describe the life style?
Speaker 2: Well they didn't have, they didn't have the, the property per say that we had.  So they more or less was a single residence.  So they would, they would just have the usual garden, that sort of thing.  But on a smaller scale, scale than what we would have.  But their lifestyle was pretty much the same, they were the same age, you know.  And as far as attending churches and this sort of thing, they would, the two were unique in uniform in that manner.
Story_ID: 343986
Speaker 1: Where did you attend church?
Speaker 2: I, I attended Bethlehem Baptist Church in Pueblo [Colorado].
Speaker 1: So you were, the family, you were Baptist?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What can you tell me about the Baptist Church that you went to?
Speaker 2: It was a church that most of the kids my age went to.  We started off in Sunday school and then naturally I went to the age of twelve.  And then I, then when I came back up here [Denver, Colorado], I changed to A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] see.  So but it was, a typical Baptist Church.  The minister, was, was I guess at that particular time he was around pretty much my dad's [Ernest Holliman, Jr.] age, you know.  And, and was had Sunday school and BYPU [Baptist Young People's Union of America] that's the evening where we go to the little evening classes.
Speaker 1: What is BYPU?
Speaker 2: That's Baptist Youth, BY Baptist Youth [sic.], I don't remember now, I don't know what, what they, they call it.
Speaker 1: Well, what was BYPU?
Speaker 2: It was, it was a sort a like the, the youth group functioning of the, of the church.
Speaker 1: Now did that youth group, take you on any missions?  Did you travel with the --?
Speaker 2: No, it was more or less locally.  We did things together you know.  Far as the neighborhood and, and in the area.  But we never left the area.
Speaker 1: Now, were, was the church a black church, was the church (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: It's a black church.
Speaker 1: Okay, so on Sundays were the days that you, that you saw that the town was segregated, because you attend a black church as opposed to (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  And that was, it was now when I say black intermixed, that pretty much was the predominant black area over there.  But not like you know it was smaller so it's not like we would categorize us today, see.  But everybody lived everywhere.
Story_ID: 343987
Speaker 1: So when you dec- started to go to school, where did you go to first grade. Were you still in Pueblo [Colorado] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes still in Pueblo.  I did my elementary school at Columbia, Columbian Elementary School [Pueblo, Colorado] which was over in, in south Pueblo my part of town.
Speaker 1: What was first grade like for you?
Speaker 2: I started kindergarten and, and through first through the sixth grade was a good experience.  I walked to school every day.  Education was, it was just small enough, so that we had, we had good teachers.  It was, it was a mixed school and you, you know from what I could, from what I could remember you had the opportunity, opportunity was there for you, if you didn't get it, it was, it was your own, your own because, it was your own reasoning.  The kids during those days, were more disciplined than what the elementary kids are today.  So it wasn't, it wasn't a lot of disciplinary, I think you know they had the little safety patrol and I--that had, that you were put on that due to your performance and your qualifications, your requirements, your scholastic status, so I served on that and that's pretty much it for the, for the elementary.
Speaker 1: Well how many siblings did you grow up with?
Speaker 2: Just Jo and myself.
Speaker 1: And is he your younger or older brother?
Speaker 2: Jo Katherine, that's Joe Katherine [Jo Katherine Holliman-Page].
Speaker 1: Oh, she's your--Jo Katherine's your sister?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so she's nine years, you know, she's nine years younger than I am.
Speaker 1: So during the time that you were in kindergarten and first grade were there any teachers that made impressions on you or that, that you saw as role models?
Speaker 2: Not really because during that, during that time my, and I you know I can't remember, anyone in particular, anybody specific.  But they all seemed like they were, they were concerned.  I, I don't remember any obstacles or any negative situations in particular that I experienced.  It seemed like just a normal school day, go in the morning and you got out in the afternoon.  And the classrooms were you know, were pleasant.
Story_ID: 343988
Speaker 1: What were holidays like at home?
Speaker 2: We, we, were very holiday prone then.  As the holidays came, we celebrated Easter, was Easter, Mother's Day, Mother's Day.  I don't remember too much we doing anything on Father's Day, but we knew that it was there.  Thanksgiving was the big dinner when the family came together and then naturally Christmas was the--so those were the prime days.  Fourth of July, we you know, we did the firecracker thing you know.  Just typical, typical youth activities, kids.
Story_ID: 343989
Speaker 1: So did you have any idea, before you entered secondary school what you thought you might want to be, during kindergarten and early elementary school [at Columbian Elementary School, Pueblo, Colorado]?
Speaker 2: I, not really, 'cause during, during those, those was the, those was the radio days you didn't have to much TV and this sort of thing.  So I, I no that, that never, I never considered that you know.
Speaker 1: What were you listening to on the radio?
Speaker 2: Oh those were the days, you don't remember 'Jack Armstrong, the All American Boy,' I guess you heard of that.  Jack Benny ['The Jack Benny Program'] was there during those days.  Let's see, who, who, 'The Green Hornet,' (laughter).  A lot of these kids now a days, they don't, but, those, those was the stories that, during those days like their looking for soup operas now.
Speaker 1: Well when would you listen to the radio, was it predominately Saturdays?  When would these shows come on and how would you gather around the radio to listen to it?
Speaker 2: They would come on in the evening after school they would start maybe four or five o'clock in the evening.  And they would probably go to six or seven o'clock.  It wasn't any more than a couple hours in the evening.  Because like I said some of 'em, you know I, I didn't particularly care, too young, you know.  But I'd, I'd say from the time I out of school say from five, did my little chores and I say from five to six o'clock in the evening till about time to--to about eight you know.
Story_ID: 343990
Speaker 1: So before I move away from your early years, were there ever any times when you had to do any like farming chores to like to clean rabbits, or, or skin the chickens or any of those were you responsible for doing any of that?
Speaker 2: No, was only just to, to be attentive, attentive to the fact that you know.  Instead of you know kids be off playing their somewhere doing, doing their little relaxation or doing whatever they was to do, they, they would have me there to view, you know.  We had apple trees in the back and so as the apples would fall off the trees, it would be my, to pick 'em up off the ground.  I'd be able, I'd be able to sort them the good from the bad.  Just little minimal things that a, that a eight to twelve year would ordinarily do.  I had a little job, but, no that wasn't down there that was up here.  But that, that was about it.
Story_ID: 343991
Speaker 1: What year did you enter into junior high school?
Speaker 2: I went into junior high school [Morey Junior High School; Morey Middle School, Denver, Colorado] in 1941.  That was here in Denver [Colorado].
Speaker 1: And how, why did the family move from Pueblo [Colorado] to Denver?
Speaker 2: My, my dad [Ernest Holliman, Jr.] was transferred from the railroad [Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway], so instead of being headquartered in La Junta [Colorado], which was thirty miles [sic.] from Pueblo.  He was, he was, his, his job took him to Denver.  And he, he was promoted from a porter to a porter brakeman.
Speaker 1: Was he in the porters union do you know?  Was it, was it the--?
Speaker 2: They did have, they did have a (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Pullman porters union [Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a Pullman porters union, he was in it yes.
Speaker 1: Did your father ever, did your father ever talk to you about a, about his job?  About what he was responsible for doing or, what the day to day activities on the job were?
Speaker 2: I, I was able to go down and, and more or less observe.  He would take me from the time, time to time.  As I was saying the headquarters was in La Junta and sometimes he would have to go there for any, anything had to do far as pertaining to his job, either whether or not it was monetary or day to day work performance and I'd ride with him.  And then you know sometimes, when he, when he'd have to go to the union station or some, something like that, then I had an opportunity to go down and take a look and see what he did, load the passengers and--so I was able to get a fairly visible you know outlook of what he did and yeah.
Speaker 1: When you entered into junior high school in 1941, and were you aware that there's World War II [WWII] was brewing and were did any of your family members go off to war?
Speaker 2: No, well I had a, I had a uncle that went.  But my, my dad didn't have to because the job that he had was military preferred.  And so he, he, that eliminated him from going to World War II.  So, didn't have too many relatives that, that, participated in World War II.
Story_ID: 343992
Speaker 1: So the junior high school that you went to, was that junior high school also mixed?
Speaker 2: Yes very much, Morey [Morey Junior High School; Morey Middle School, Denver, Colorado], right, I went to junior high school here in Denver [Colorado].
Speaker 1: So once you moved to Denver was this more of a city atmosphere than what you've lived in, in Pueblo [Colorado] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh very much so, because you're very, there we, you know, like I say you had, you had the, the more or less the farm status up here it was, it was all city you know, yeah.
Speaker 1: So by the time you entered junior high school, well during the time you're in junior high school were there any teachers, male or female that were role models for you?
Speaker 2: No, not really, I, I remember one who was, was gym teacher at, a physical ed [physical education] teacher, and of course they doubled up during those day.  And he taught something and then he later became the basketball coach at Manual [Manual High School, Denver, Colorado], which is a high school here.  And I, I more or less looked you know, kind of patterned after him, as, a sort of a little role model you know.  But again, no one in particular that I can really just visibly that was outstanding.  They were, they were again they were good.
Story_ID: 343993
Speaker 1: Did you have any idea at that time to what you might want to do with your life, as far as a man in a career?
Speaker 2: Well I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: --what a turned, I, I, wanted to be my own, you know be an entrepreneur and I ended up doing that, having my own business, you know.
Speaker 1: Well had you seen any other African Americans during that time owning their own businesses?  Did you see any black owned businesses, in Denver [Colorado] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, there was quite a few then, yeah.
Speaker 1: What were they?
Speaker 2: Well the--like the Caldwell [Elvin R. Caldwell], who's got the Caldwell, the library [Blair-Caldwell African American Research Library, Denver Colorado] is named after him.  He was, he was, his parents was instrumental, they were entre [entrepreneurs]- they were real estate people and I went to school with his younger brother and, and he had a younger brother not the sisters.  So there was, he was there and then there was other--now let me see who else was?  But during that time there was, then there was Dr. Holmes [Clarence Holmes, Jr.], he was a dentist, we had, we had a gentleman that owned a drugstore.  So it was minimal and then we had some that had their own restaurants and had their own clubs on the Five Points [Denver, Colorado] area, like the Rossonian [Rossonian Hotel, Denver, Colorado] and, and I guess you've heard of that.
Speaker 1: No I haven't actually (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Have you?  Yeah okay.
Speaker 1: Tell me about tell me about the Rossonian?
Speaker 2: Well Rossonian was a club that was, it was, it was nationally known all your top band leaders and musicians was come to Rossonian.  And it has a history of being able, who of, of them playing in the Rossonian, your Count Basies, your Duke Ellingtons, your James Browns, all them came to the Rossonian, yeah.
Speaker 1: Were you, did you ever go to the Rossonian?
Speaker 2: No, I was too young then, as I grew older I did, see but during those days that, that's when it was prevalent.  During World War II [WWII], we had a servicemen's club down on the point also that was, Five Points was thriving at that time.  That's, that's our area, that we live, we, live, we now at that time, we called Five Point, and it's still there this time in fact that's where the library is, it's down in the Five Points area.
Speaker 1: So Five Points was thriving, can you give me some examples of it thriving?
Speaker 2: Well we had, like I say, we had our dentist was down there.  We had a drugstore down there, we've got--we have a park down there that's called 23rd Street park.  That's where all the, where all of the, the, we played our softball, they played the softball.  There, there was a mortuary down there.  Well you know pretty much a black business.  Had a service club we had, we had what we called the voters club where a lot of the people came from the Rossonian and went across the street, voters club.
Speaker 1: What was the voters club?
Speaker 2: It was, it was just a social club that people would go and, and you know after hours.  And they, there was a Chinese restaurant down there that was very, you know.  And they had a, had a stand, a pig ear stand, I don't know you'd probably haven't had a sandwich, you ought to get one before you leave, but, but it, but they?
Speaker 1: What kind of sandwich is it?
Speaker 2: Pig ears, they, they take pig ear, they boil 'em and they're real tender, it's just like boiling a piece of a tongue or piece of beef that's real tender.  And they put it on a bun and use relish, onion and what a name.  And it, it was a delicacy and, and they're down there, there still there now.
Speaker 1: What's the name of the place that sold the pig ears?
Speaker 2: Just the pig ear stand I, I you know, I don't you know I don't know what, I don't think you really have a name, but, it, it sits right there on the corner.  And then there was two clubs right around it was, it was it sit in the middle of the there was two clubs around the corners kind of like and, the voters club was cross the street, the American Legion was down there.  Elks had their rest down--it was just a, more or less our social area that everybody went to.
Story_ID: 343754
Speaker 1: Now we're going into your high school years.  Where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Went to high school at East High School [Denver, Colorado], right up here.
Speaker 1: And what year did you enter high school?
Speaker 2: Entered in 1946, graduated in 1948.  Again, good--
Speaker 1: Were you athletic?
Speaker 2: Yeah I did, I did basketball and track.
Speaker 1: Was the school segregated or integrated?
Speaker 2: It was integrated, there was only, there was only, there wasn't that, there wasn't that many Afro Americans, many blacks there.  I think in my graduating class there was six or seven of us.  So I don't know whether or not--you remember Jerome Bethel [ph.]?  He set the broad jump record years ago, he, he was there in 1946.  So the, the year that I went in was the year that he graduated, see.  So, but again good experience I enjoyed the school, good teachers.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the teachers, you had in high school?
Speaker 2: Names?
Speaker 1: And impressions they made they made on you,
Speaker 2: Well we--
Speaker 1: Names and impressions.
Speaker 2: Well, we had like I say, we had Clarence Whipple, who was at that time basketball coach.  Older type, stereotype gentlemen, do anything for you.  Then we had Lamson [Willis Lamson], who was the track coach, who later went to the basketball coach.  Then we had the, I had the lawyer who was, more or less my history teacher, he was good.
Story_ID: 343755
Speaker 1: Do you remember Black History Month during this time?  How did you, how did the schools celebrate Black History Month (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We, we didn't, we didn't overly participate like they do now, see.
Speaker 1: It was only a week back then wasn't it, Black History Week [Negro History Week; Black History Month]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah and at that time we, we didn't do it for the week.  Like I say it, it was we predominately, but, but we as the black kids that went to East [East High School, Denver, Colorado], more or less socialized you know with the kids that went to Manual [Manual High School, Denver, Colorado], which is, which is the school that most of the black kids went to.  And they did, they were a little more prevalent with it there than they did here.  History week was more or less a community wide thing, not too much high school not too much in the school system, like it is now.
Speaker 1: What did, what did the community do?
Speaker 2: The community would have the local participation such as the choirs and the, and the ministers would have something during that week, more or less what they do now.  But it wasn't a month, I think it was just, just the week, even then it was just the week.  And then we have an opportunity at Sunday school or at, or at church to talk about the different things that inventors or what black people, what they invented or what they you know a lot of things that we, we would get.  For instance, Pueblo [Colorado] lot of people they don't use it now but Pueblo was, was founded, was found by a black man, see.  So there's a lot of things that.
Speaker 1: What was that gentlemen's name?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, I'm not sure unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay, a lot of people don't know you were saying.
Speaker 2: No because like I say, at one time I've, I've got it written here, and then that's just what I'm saying I have not read that, but that's what I've been told, see so.
Story_ID: 343756
Speaker 1: What type of a student were you?
Speaker 2: High school [East High School, Denver, Colorado] I was pretty much between high C and, and a B student.
Speaker 1: So before we talk about your college years, can you tell me what the sights, and sounds and smells, reminds you of growing up in Denver [Colorado] and Pueblo [Colorado]?  The sight of what, the smell of what and the sounds of what takes you right back to your youth, in those places?
Speaker 2: Sights, sounds and.
Speaker 1: Smells.
Speaker 2: And smells, well on the sights, I was, I was, able to, be able to, o determine the difference between the lifestyle of what it was in Pueblo, than it was in Denver.  Pueblo more or less was an atmosphere, a slower atmosphere type of a life.  The, the farming I mean you know the urban, real urban, real county type.  Nothing like what they experienced in the South.  Denver was like the big city, you know.  The, the when you say the smells Pueblo had a steel mill [Colorado Fuel and Iron, Pueblo, Colorado] down there where everybody worked in, in the steel mill.  And, and, they would naturally you would get the smoke and the odor coming from the in, the (unclear).  Denver more or less city type, the--Denver more or less like I said the entertainment world, the entertainment situation had escalated, it was just more of a city type.  Major League Baseball [MLB] was prevalent in Denver, where as Minor Leagues [Minor League Baseball] was Pueblo as far as athletic sports was concerned, Denver, Denver was well, by it being the top city.  Smells were--
Speaker 1: Might be those pig ears?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, yeah not only that too is that, the food, that, that we had in Denver, was different than what you had in Pueblo, you pretty much were was on a set diet there, the country type, the country folks.  Because of the age differences between the grandmother and the mother and the father, so it was a different.  The, the--
Speaker 1: Smells?
Speaker 2: Smells, when you say smells what are we, what are we?
Speaker 1: Maybe the smells like the dirt on the roads.  Maybe the smell of your [paternal] grandma [Rhoda Holliman] cooking inside.  Maybe the, you know the scents coming out of those night clubs, when you were walking down. What was the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was the main street in Five Points [Denver, Colorado]?
Speaker 2: Main street was Welton.  Welton Street was a main street, where as main street Mel in, in, Five Points.  And then that's another thing--Colorado Boulevard.  Denver had several main streets.  The, the difference Pueblo had streetcars.  Denver had buses and streetcars, and trolleys.  The Pueblo had the country state fair where you go down, Denver had the amusement parks like the Elitch [Elitch Gardens; Elitch Garden Theme and Water Park, Denver, Colorado] the smell would be different there.  We had a, we had a stock show complex [National Western Complex, Denver, Colorado] here, the food, the aroma of food would be different.  Now pig ears, the pig ear doesn't, doesn't have an aroma, just has the taste, so there wouldn't be aroma there.  But we did more barbequing up here, than what, what we did there.  More or less down there was boiled and fried, so that's the difference of food concerned.  The air was, the smell of air down there you didn't have the traffic that, that you have up here.  So just the, just the and then we had the mountains that close, closed in so.  The smell of the air was different up here than what it was down there.  That's the taste and the smell, and what was the other one?
Speaker 1: Well those, those were pretty good examples.
Story_ID: 343757
Speaker 1: Can you remember when you were young were there places that you couldn't go because, how, how did you know about racism, during that time?  How did you know that you were black that there were white people and that black people were being discriminated against, because of their color?  How did that play itself out for you?
Speaker 2: Pueblo [Colorado], I was too young to be able to experience, to actually experience to the point where I can actually, I, I knew it was there, but I, but I couldn't determine.  Denver [Colorado] in middle school--oh let me go back to Pueblo.  I knew there difference because on we used to go the show on Saturday, never could sit on the level, had to go upstairs, sit on the balcony.  That, that particular situation followed me all my life.  Now we didn't have the drinking fountains where the, like you do down south where it has colored and it has white, it wasn't to that extent.  But I knew, but I knew it was there. During those days even the early days of Denver, the, well there was, there was a, difference far as we had our on mortuaries, we had our own, we had our own different services during that, during those days you just you it was very rare to do to a white mortuary.  Here and that came up to the year, years, now although we're back in Colorado, Pueblo and Denver both have a history of the Ku Klux Klan [KKK].  We had mayors in Denver that was a member of the Ku Klux Klan.  Colorado Springs [Colorado] which sits between Pueblo and Denver so you could tell that the racism was there, but at our age, you know we, we more or less followed suit based on what our parents would say, well you have to do this, you can't do this, you can't do that.  So even in high school, we didn't experience that much, we knew it was here and even in our theatres here that, that remained the top focal point.  We didn't have such thing as riding the back of the bus, it just wasn't extreme as it was but it, but, but there was, there was a taste of it here.  Here you can get on the street car or the bus or whatever sit where you want, it's just that when you went to the theatres, and to me I got to the point that I didn't like sitting on the main floor I like to sit up so I could look down at the movie.  And I guess that's the way that we were trained.  Other than that--it was, it was, racism was here.  I, I lived across the street from a school for boys, it's called Clayton College for Boys [Denver, Colorado], that there was, that in, in their set deed, in the deed of the owner, Clayton [George W. Clayton], he had in there that is, that there would never be, there was a covenant in there that no black kids could ever go to that school.  And it was in, the, then as it, as the black folks migrated out from, from down different areas they moved out east they, they would try to enter that school and in time that covenant was broken.  But it was, it was way years later.  And so once it was broken as so one of our mayors was a Ben Stapleton [Benjamin F. Stapleton], the Stapleton International Airport [Denver, Colorado], he was one of the.  And, and I know for a fact that Denver used to have undergrounds where that they used to go below the streets from, yeah, from one building to another.  So there's a history there that, that I don't have the complete knowledge of it, but I know, but I know they now--maybe, maybe Rachel [HistoryMaker Rachel Noel] can tell you more about that, then, then, you know cause she's a little older and she experience some of the things that you know that, that, I probably didn't.
Speaker 1: Well Mayor Stapleton what were, what, what were you saying about him, you didn't complete that thought (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh well Ben Stapleton was, was at one point the mayor of Denver and he had from what I can understand looking back on the history.  He had ties with the Ku Klux Klan.  And a lot of, lot of, there's records down there now that have been sealed that you can't really actually know for fact that's can be, you know that, that you can be substantiated with what I'm saying.  Now like I say Rachel might have some more well--she was more or less of a public figure than what I, what I was, see.
Story_ID: 343758
Speaker 1: When you were entering Regis College [Regis University, Denver, Colorado] in 1948 or '9 [1949]?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, I didn't go into Regis College until see when I, when I graduated from high school [East High School, Denver, Colorado]--
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: In 1948, then I received during those days, the deferment wasn't--the draft, the draft was very prevalent.  So I gotta, I had received a draft notice to go into the [U.S.] Army.  See in which would have been right after World War II [WWII] I guess.  Well I was no army person and so what I did, I there was a, we all received.  I had just enrolled in, in Colorado State College [Colorado State College of Education; University of Northern Colorado] in Greeley [Colorado], which is a teachers college.  Which I'm glad I didn't go because now, of course I probably would have been retired now.  But that, but at that particular point in time I wanted to be a teacher.  But I joined the [U.S.] Coast Guard to keep from fulfilling the draft notice of going to the Army.  And at that time I put in my, put my application in which went through Omaha, Nebraska.  There was not a recruit, recruiting office here.  But by the time that I started the process, got close to, to go into the Coast Guard a recruiting office opened up here.  And, and then I was the third black person out of well it was two of us went together.  It was one other black person that, that was ahead of us that that went into the Coast Guard and then I think we were the second or third to leave from that recruiting office here.  When I came out of when, when I got discharged I was due to get discharged (cough) excuse me, on October of 1951.  In April, 1950 the Korean War broke out, so I'm packed up ready to come home, and got extended another year.  So I spent another year in, in, in the Coast Guard.  In the interim I entered the petty officer school in Groton, Connecticut.  And then I came back and all the guys that was in that class that graduated all came, they retired as chief warrant officers.  But, but before I was able to come out of the Coast Guard, I had married, had a family and so then I had a family to support, so I didn't, I didn't complete, I didn't retire that, I came out after four years and half years of active duty.  Spent three years of active reserve and three years of in inactive reserve, but that time, see I had support a family.  So I went periodically to, to, dif- to you know school like Community College of Denver [Denver, Colorado], like--just piecemealing my college.  Until and then as my kids [Rhoda Holliman and Lisa Holliman] grew up and I got them through college and that sort of thing, then I went back at the age of fifty, and that's were Regis comes in.  And so I went, I went to Regis in 1988, I think or nineteen, let me, let me think here.  I graduated in 1990, so I had to go there, I spent three years, two years at Regis finishing up.  And I put down there that, the it was, it was a Catholic school and it says whether or not it was private, public, and I, I didn't list that but it's a--it's a Jesuit school, so it would have been a Catholic School, so that I didn't put that on there.
Story_ID: 343759
Speaker 1: When you were in the [U.S.] Coast Guard the,the [U.S.] Army in the 1940s was still legally segregated, was the Coast Guard also segregated?
Speaker 2: Yes, to a point, but, not so much as the regular services like the Army, [U.S.] Navy and, and the [U.S.] Marine Corps.  Because we were only thirty thousand, their compliment was only thirty thousand and so they were more of less like a big family (unclear) rather than.  In the war, in peace time they went under the treasury department [U.S. Department of the Treasury] but in war time they went, they went under the Navy, you know they came under the Navy.  So it was a separate, it was a separate military group.  But, but the, the advantages I found, as long as you qualified you can make it just like anybody else, so that's another reason why I on my research of going into the Coast Guard that was one of the prime alternatives that I had to just make sure that I wouldn't be subjected to that.  And so I took my basic training, training, in I left here [Denver, Colorado] to my basic training in Alameda which is Alameda, California, Government Island.  And from that point forward I, you know went back and forth to sea.  And whereas the Army and Navy I would have been subjected to going to maybe camps or bases down south in that sort of thing which is where I would have been open to that.  But I never experienced that in the Coast Guard.
Story_ID: 343760
Speaker 1: How aware were you of the Civil Rights Movement that was taking place in the South?  I'll give you some examples, the bus boycott in Montgomery [Alabama] in 1955 when Rosa Parks refuses to give up her seat, where were you?
Speaker 2: Fifty-five [1955], I, I was out of the [U.S. military] service myself, I'm. I'm remember that very vividly, I was here [Denver, Colorado], very supportive of the, of the movement.  I have some, I have some pictures down there that taken--I attended an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] with, that--that had Rosa Parks, then Ben Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] put on a seminar.  Ben was there, Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] was there, and I have a picture of Rosa, Rosa and I sitting next together at the table.  And but grand lady I--you know, I remember that, very, very supportive, she, she definitely was a--well we all know.  Whatever she, she was justly accommodated for it and recognized for it and very well so.  But yeah I remember that, I remember that, and, and the, I remember them- the garbage workers when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], they went on strike.  We all participated back here in our own little way, you know.
Speaker 1: What was your way of participating?
Speaker 2: Well anyway--
Speaker 1: Let's just put (unclear) jacket, okay, I'm sorry go ahead.  What was your way of participating?
Speaker 2: Well anyway that we could do to be supportive for as our local participating whatever the community ask of supporting, writing letters, calling that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Were you a member of the local NAACP?
Speaker 2: I was, was, I was at one time, yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: When did you, you do you remember when you joined and how active you were?
Speaker 2: Just a member.
Story_ID: 343761
Speaker 1: Because see the, the, during those times, that's in 1953, I went into the Masonry and I more or less--that was more or less my support factor then.  And so through, through Masonic relationship and affiliation a lot of that work through them, as as part of the, of our, our requirements you know, part of what the organ--fraternity's about.
Speaker 2: How did you get into the Masonry?
Speaker 1: Through my dad [Ernest Holliman, Jr.], I you know, you, you during those days, you couldn't solicit to go, you couldn't ask to go, well I mean they couldn't ask you to go, you had of your own premonition ask say I would like to be a part.  And so he was from the old school of Masonry, Masons and so when I ask him, say, "I'd like to be a Mason," he said, "Well I don't know do you think you're ready?"  That sort of thing.  You know how the old folks do, so, "Well yeah, I think so."  He said, "Well okay, if you think you're ready, go ahead."  And I almost joined the wrong, see there were at that time there was two types of Mason, there was a non, there was a Prince Hall [Prince Hall Freemasonry] and there was what we call non, non-Prince Hall.  I almost joined the non-Prince Hall, see but he, you know and then so the reason I didn't and I came back and told him I said, "I decided to go I got a partition, I got an application, I'm ready to go."  He said, "No you don't wanna go there."  And then so I said well what, what, what, he says, "Well I'm tell you where to go if you're ready."  And then that's how I started, but he was my inspiration to go, through him.
Speaker 2: Had you seen him participating in the Masons as a young child or as a young adult?
Speaker 1: As, as--the lodge that we was a member of is the lodge that I joined see at that time there was four lodges and, and so I had more or less experienced it that way and then so, you know being a, being a young man, you know I was quite vocal, you know and so I'd go into the lodge and those old guys you know, when you were a young brother during those days you came to sit and to listen, not to talk.  And so when, when, when I, I would into reading and then a question would come up on the floor a question would come up and I'd get up and I'd respond and then so they asked, "Who's that, who's that boy?"  "That's Holliman's boy."  "Well he needs to sit down and shut up you know."  So as we went along and so it was that's the old school Masonry, yeah so but that's how I started.
Story_ID: 343762
Speaker 1: Why did you feel that it was important for you to affiliate yourself with the Masonics, the Masons?
Speaker 2: Well I like the work that they did you know, they, they were it was it was beyond--one, it was beyond the social club level you know, you, you just social club you just go and say I want to be a member of this club, you join.  Masonry had some principles to it, you had, you had first of all you had to be a member of a church you had to be a you know you had to be familiar with the Bible you know, it was based on, on the works of the Bible which, which the two of them tied in again church and, and Masonry the, and then the things that they did.  They were visible in the community they did certain things, they did charitable work and you had a chance to be visible and exposure yourself to doing certain types of things that they did.  So I felt well this is a good way, of, of not wasting my life that well fit in with my lifestyle, and that's what.  And then and then I liked the way that, that you could qualify yourself to work, through the difference offices and to be a part.  Now you, you had two status two statuses.  Some are some are leaders and some are followers.  And I went in to be a follower but as we went along you know I was impressed with it, that's what, went that way.
Speaker 1: And what were the differences between the--you said the--that you were going to join like a non-Prince Hall group and your grandfather [sic. father, Ernest Holliman, Jr.] says, "Oh no you don't want that one you want this?"
Speaker 2: Non, because you see the work of Masonry doesn't change it's just like the Bible.  You may have a St. James [sic. King James Version] and a New International Version different types of verses of the Bible, but the actual precept or concept of the Bible doesn't change.  It may read different and I may, I may, I may look at it my, my version my opinion might be different.  Masonry is the same thing, regardless of what way that you look at it, which way do you practice it, the works never changed.  But it was that, but it was that particular group the Prince Hall [Prince Hall Freemasonry] group more or less they, they had a charter.  The historical background from Prince Hall Masonry you could trace back and find out when they originated came, come from, the Grand Lodge of England [United Grand Lodge of England].  The non-Prince Hall didn't have that, see, so as you went into and then so that was something that, that I had to find out all myself that's something that he, you know they wouldn't tell me.  In other words your concerns, you would, you would more or less have to look and find out for yourself.  And they weren't viewed in as the community as, as being on the same level, community wise.  But the work wise was still the same, no difference.
Story_ID: 343763
Speaker 1: Were you registered and voting at the time?
Speaker 2: Yes, I've always been a registered voter, ever since eighteen, yeah.  To me that's, that's very prioritized.  I think that the age, at the age you know you should, you should practice your right of being a voting, a voting, a voter, a voter member.
Speaker 1: Who instilled that principle in you?
Speaker 2: My father [Ernest Holliman, Jr.], I, I still look to him although we grew up, I grew up as child being, under the impression that he was my brother, more or less my than my father.  Because you see I was raised by my [paternal] grandparents [Rhoda Holliman and Ernest Holliman, Sr.].  And so during those days, you know, they didn't, they didn't, I could say they didn't communicated to the point were as and then 'til after I got older then I, then I found out.  When I moved to Denver [Colorado], I couldn't understand why do I have to leave my mom and my, 'cause I called the mama and papa, "Why do I have leave you to go to live with Dub?"  That's what I called my, my dad and, and so, it was a little confusion there, never would tell me, see.  And so I left growing up, coming up everything and I was living with, you know staying with my, my--with my brother and his wife [Holliman's stepmother, Dorothy Holliman].  And I you know they wouldn't tell me and although we, you know.  I would ask and, and they say well I'll tell you someday or you know.  That's they were during those days.
Speaker 1: Was that painful for you when you found out (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh very painful, very painful and especially, see I really did know who my mother was.  You know I didn't, I lost my uncle which was on the Banks side.  And which was on the maternal side my mother's [Adele Banks], my mother's brother.  And he just passed oh maybe bout within the last month, ninety-three years old.  Well again they was a, there was a silent side to that part of the family.  Because the two the maternal and the paternal didn't see eye to eye.  Well you know they're not going to explain to me why.  So in all these years, see I'm seventy-seven years old, I'm finding all this thing out in the next, in the past ten years, sixty something years I went through this.  So couple of days ago, you know so when, when he passed see, in Pueblo [Colorado], I never had any, and and then and he never really shared with me you know.  But because during those, I--and I come to think of it I don't think he even knew.  Because they were, they were just so closed.  It's kind of hard for you to understand I know because you've never been through that type of thing.  But during those days it was, they were very, very tight lipped.  So I just got my mother's birth certificate here I went down to the birth certificate that is how I was able to get that information this was just last week.
Story_ID: 343764
Speaker 1: Okay, we're just gonna go back in time a little bit, because I didn't ask but I'd be interested to know how your family got to Colorado?
Speaker 2: Well my grandfather and grandmother came, came to Pueblo [Colorado] has to be back in the 1800s and he worked at the steel mill, CF and I [Colorado Fuel and Iron, Pueblo, Colorado], that I was telling you about.  And, and so it has to be 1800 because in, in or 1900 because 1941 he retired after forty-one years working in this mill.  And they, they came from, I think one came--I think they came from Marietta, Georgia to, to Pueblo.  So they would, they, he would be a pioneer actually by the, you know.  And then, then my dad [Ernest Holliman, Jr.] was born and my mom [Adele Banks] born there.
Speaker 1: Do you know why they choose to come out west and opposed like going north to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Have don't have any idea, don't have any idea, but that's (unclear) you know they did do that and.
Speaker 1: Did they know people in Colorado?
Speaker 2: Not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I now we did, now I had an uncle and now the, and now the paternal family again I'm, I'm trying to piece this together they came from Alabama.  But I don't know who was there first.  And then, then I have, I have an uncle on, on the paternal side who was next door neighbor to my grandparents [Elizabeth Banks and James Banks] on the maternal side.  But I don't know date-wise when they all, they, they got like I, like I say that never was shared.  And I don't know Jo [Jo Katherine Holliman-Page] knows either, that, that never was shared with us but us I do they know, we do have a plaque were they presented him with his gold watch after forty-one years in 1941.  So that takes us back to 1900, yeah I think.
Story_ID: 343765
Speaker 1: So let's talk about your professional career.  Are you--after you came back or after the [U.S.] Coast Guard, after you left the Coast Guard you, you what was your first professional job?
Speaker 2: I, it was, it was--I did two things I worked at the, I worked for the federal government?
Speaker 1: What did you do for the federal government?
Speaker 2: I was a in, in the mail room a mail clerk out at the at the Federal Center [Denver Federal Center, Denver, Colorado] for the VA [Veterans Administration; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs].  And then I started a little janitorial business [United Maintenance Incorporated].  Where I think I started off doing, I went in different phases.  I went to start off doing restaurants and bars and then I did the new construction and I just down you know complete 'til, until I got to the office buildings status.  And after that--
Speaker 1: Well let's stick with this for a little while.  So how did you get the government, was that--were you--was (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Applied.
Speaker 1: You applied in and now can you, had to--tell me about the process, you had to take a test or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did.
Speaker 1: Did it come from being in the, in the Coast Guard?
Speaker 2: During those days I guess they do now you, you you know, you had eligibility of certain points that you had which always which, which added to of the difference between being a veteran and a non-veteran.  So you had to take an examination I took the exam with the points, and so I, I was able to get that job.  And from there I went to I think post office.  Again exam, again points and then now wait back up then I went to the U.S. Custom House [Denver, Colorado] down here as a maintenance per, person.  Same thing guess--test, so and so, so and then, then I went to engineering and surveying with the City and County Building [Denver City and County Building, Denver, Colorado], test, no points, but just test, qualifications.  And then from there then I left I went to Continental Airlines it was in nineteen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, what.
Speaker 2: That was in 1966 okay, that's the, that's the, status that I went.
Story_ID: 343766
Speaker 1: How active were you during these, this time you were building your own business--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --when you were working with the government--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --how active were you in civil rights and the local community here in Denver [Colorado], what was happening were you fighting to make changes in, in the systems in Denver?
Speaker 2: During that time no, only, only through the fraternity, and that.
Speaker 1: What was the fraternity doing?
Speaker 2: Well you know when you would have a scholarships for schools, we, the National Jewish Hospital [National Jewish Health, Denver, Colorado] is the National Jewish Hospital; we would contribute to that.  We would do lot of lot of the members of the lodge were member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the Urban League and this sort of thing.  So naturally we would focus there.  The social clubs we would when we put on fundraisers and that sort of thing, and it all--and then too our churches naturally.  We would, we would, you know, anywhere that we could help the kids if we could we had a, we organized a little drum and bugle corps, and so that was community wise.  And every time we'd do or little parades, the little marches they would perform.  So community wise--and the rest of it was pretty much, time consuming they didn't have too much time left to do too much of that, see.
Speaker 1: So in the nation I know, let's just say the 1960s Mississippi was heating up I mean or even back before in '55 [1955] we had Emmett Till.  Was that a pivotal moment?  Can you tell me where you were in your personal life when Emmett Till happened?
Speaker 2: That's nineteen, let me see when, when was Emmett Till--that was?
Speaker 1: Fifty-five [1955] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifty-five [1955] I, I pretty much was just getting started in my, in my own right I would have been maybe twenties in my twenties, yeah.
Speaker 1: What about in like the 1960s when you had CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] and SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and those student organizations sitting in Mississippi, or sit in's and trying to change the policies in the South.  What--where were you in the West in Colorado?  What were you working on?
Speaker 2: Again not more or less if, if, it would have been more or less in a supporting factor.  Just like we, we would do now using it in, in the modern times of Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] and Rita [Hurricane Rita] supporting being able to send, you know, maybe contributions of funds.  But actually physically working not, not that much.  It, it unless the unit, unless we were asked to participate for, for actually going into the area and, and playing a part I never, we never did, you know.  We were supportive in our own right only to the point whereas if these, if,  if the ministers or the pastors through the congregations of the churches, all the congr- all the membership of our lodges asked that we be supportive in a collective group, that that's the way we do.  But me as an individual I didn't, I didn't participate that much.
Story_ID: 343767
Speaker 1: So tell me what happens in '66 [1966] with Continental Airlines and there's a, an issue with African American men and facial hair and--?
Speaker 2: We had a, we had a, we had a supervisor that was a, that was a--was a directive to that came down from the corporate level, saying that all people must be clean shaven.  And so at that time you know you, you get someone who, who gets this brain (unclear) that says, okay where everybody's gonna be clean shaven.  And so and, and I guess you, you people had beards and mustaches and this sort of thing, to the point where as that, that it, it they had, they had abused it.  And so when they came down with it when that directive came down naturally it affected us as an Afro American.  Because a lot of our manhood is based on our, you know, our mustaches and wasn't too much--we didn't wear beards, but our mustaches, was, was a type you know that's how we were characterized during those, during those days.  So when it came down, the directive came down and so you know we kind of went to this supervisor said, "Look that's okay for you, but there's a history behind the, the Afro American- and the black man and his mustache.  And so what when you, you do that to us I said what we would like for you to do is to consider us if, if we if we if we're too much in abuse to let us trim it up.  But you can't put us on the same category as you as, as the white Caucasian because it's different.  We don't wear side burns, we don't wear a beard and, and we when we will be willing if, if even that does to shave our side burn and, and not wear a beards.  The mustaches you--."  And so he he couldn't understand.  "So I gotta, I gotta, a directive that I've gotta follow."  "But see your directive does not completely give the true picture.  See you're dealing with, with the descendants of, of an individual that that's gone through years of conflict our--from generation, to generation."  I couldn't get him to, we couldn't get him to listen.  So we the, the skycaps at that time the ones we, we went and obtained an attorney.  And the attorney said, "Well you, you got a point there. I'm, I'm going to pursue this, I'll be glad to take the case, but you're gonna have to cut them off.  Because see you will be in direct violation and, and they can get you for insubordination."  We, we did, we cut them off.  And so I got up that morning my youngest daughter [Lisa Holliman], I guess the youngster daughter, well both of the kids I guess the youngest.  She had to be maybe four or five years old, so that morning I got up and shaved my mustache she wasn't up yet, so I went to work and come back home.  And I was clean across here and it goes to show you how it affected her, she said "You're not my daddy," see.  Because, you left here you know I, I don't know you like this.  So that more or less inspired us that much more.  Eventually down the road we won the case.
Speaker 1: Right. Don't jump ahead 'cause this is an interesting story.  So I, I mean I just want the steps of it.  So you come back home and you're clean shaven (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: Your daughter says I don't know you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You're not my dad.
Speaker 2: Cried, cried.
Speaker 1: How did that make you feel?
Speaker 2: Heartbreaking I'll, I'll never forget it.  And more determined to make sure that this thing gets clean, cleared away.  The next day next couple of days it, it she was like that for about a week.  And then after about a week she got over it.
Story_ID: 343768
Speaker 1: Just to take it back, so you, so that's, let's just take it back a step?
Speaker 2: She [Williams' daughter, Lisa Holliman], she after about a week or so she got, got used to it me not having it.  And, and so but in the meantime that inspirited me that much more to go, to follow through with thing.
Speaker 1: Now let me (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now they cut it off.
Speaker 1: You cut it off.  Did everyone else cut theirs off?
Speaker 2: Everybody, everybody.
Speaker 1: So what was the conversation amongst the group of men having to cut their mustaches off?  I mean and, and talk to me about the link of, of you feeling that their taking away the, your African American manhood?
Speaker 2: Because you know during our years as we were, as we, we were taught up we were all brought up to that we we, we allowed to have a mustache that that reflected the manhood in, in a black man.  If you didn't care to have a mustache then you cut it off, of your own--of your own good will and accord.  But tell somebody that they you that you had to cut it off on account of some law or something, it, it just wasn't in.  So we tried to explain that to them to the fact, but they naturally they were appraised of that they weren't used to it.  And they didn't want to hear it and so they were following the law.  And if they would just taking a little longer to, to more or less research the situation.  So that's, that's the rest of the, the rest of the fellows I can't explain to them the type of situation, but I know that it was heartbreaking to 'em.  Now as far as their personal experience once they got home with their kids what, I just shared you, shared with you with mine.  But I do know that, that that there was some con, very much dis-concern about of the manner that the way it was--it had to be done, it, it had to be done.  And it and it was it was thirteen of us and all thirteen was, was unanimous about the about the process.
Story_ID: 343769
Speaker 1: So the thirteen men you, what did the attorney say, he said you gotta shave it off, but he says here's what I'm going to do, what, what did he say?  What was the completion of here's what I'm gonna do?
Speaker 2: Okay he, he said he was gonna pursue it, which meant that he was going to, research it then get back to Continental Airlines, and follow through the reason why, it, it that, that it was it was it the manner of type thing, and he was gonna back and research the history of, of mustaches as far as, as the male black man was concerned.  He did that.
Speaker 1: Now had they violated your constitutional rights?
Speaker 2: He thought that they had.
Speaker 1: That, they--
Speaker 2: He thought, he thought that they had.
Speaker 1: And also the courts must have thought (unclear) go ahead.
Speaker 2: Right but because you see it was general, it was it was a general directive, based on all of the employees white and black and whatever, see.  And there was no consideration of why some should and why some shouldn't.  And, and I don't think it got to that point, it never got passed the local, in other words the, the individual here who, who followed through the directive, the directive he was only interested in one thing, as following his orders that was given to him.  He didn't care what happen to the right or to the left of whatever and that was stupid and he should have taken it beyond that and that's what the attorney felt.
Speaker 1: So how did it play out in the courts, what happened?
Speaker 2: Oh, we started going to bat right away.  See once we had to cut it off for that day, but he got in touch with them the next day.  And we started growing them back.  See and some decided not to grow 'em back at all, because it just devastated them so.  And then in my case which my daughter [Lisa Holliman], I started growing my back.  But he said you had to cut it off now because you would be, see.  But the very next day he, he the attorney got, got in touch with Continental Air he didn't, he didn't, I don't think it, it got passed this local, this local office here, never got to the corporate.  They settled it right here.  Just goes to show you that this individual had over step.  He came back and apologized, which didn't set to good with us, 'cause see we, we tried, we said tried to tell you in the first place.  Now, now we had to go through all this, you know to do--it was and expensive to us.  And, and it was a it was a mark on, on your record for not listening just for not listening.
Speaker 1: What was the, what did the local organizations the Masons think about what was happening?
Speaker 2: They, they they're not aware of it.
Speaker 1: They were not aware of it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not aware it never left Continental Airlines 'cause it wasn't that long.  We're talking about week, we talking about a week or ten days here.  When we went to that attorney he had this thing solved within the next two days.  It's just the point was that we had it--cut it--'em off, that was the key issue.  We were trying to do it to the point that we--and some of the guys, see it had to be cut off by eight o'clock, or nine o'clock the next morning.  Some of the guys that came in at the, the shift started at six o'clock, came to the job with their razors and 'em off just before they went to work.  But you see I just went home and cut mine off, see the night before or I mean when I, when I showered the next morning.  But that just goes to show you how the feeling of 'em.
Speaker 1: Can you help me understand the legacy of it being connected to your manhood in the African American community (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no it's just it's something that, it was just the fact that we felt it was our own--our, our rights was taken away from us.  To research I, I at that particular point and time I think went back and researched and looked and did, did you know because you know see a lot, lot of, a lot of black Africans or black people some didn't have mustaches.  But the point is, was that if, if they wanted to they could or if they didn't want to it was a choice and individual choice.  But to tell you that you have, it's just like you, you don't, you may not care to wear a mustached.  But, but your employer comes and says well okay about two weeks I want you to wear a mustache, with no reason what so ever just because it I tell you to.  Now if it's because your job dictates you have to do it, you know that in front you don't have to take the job, because see I'm not--I don't, I don't wear a mustache and I'm not gonna grow one.  And that's, that's what was our main thing, it wasn't so much this thing.  We just used that particular part to, to get the lawyer the attorney to understand why we didn't want, based on past history and he just went back and researched it.
Speaker 1: And you won the case?
Speaker 2: We won the case.  But it wasn't a case he I, I he, he we went one day and I think he called this particular, he called this man, supervisor, see this guy was just a supervisor.
Speaker 1: Well was the attorney black?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No, he wasn't and, and so what but what he did, and I can't remember the, what the attorney, I think he was a Jewish fellow but, but what he did, he didn't even bother to contact his fellow.  He called his superiors never went any further, flowed down from that point.  But the damage was we'd already done it, see.  Whereas if he could have said, "Well, look you go ahead wear it for now and I'll get to them and we'll get it squared away."  But the point was that we had to cut 'em to be to keep from being insubordinate.
Story_ID: 343770
Speaker 1: Was the airline industry in itself a racist place to work in the '60s [1960s] for African Americans (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well every, every company had corporate factions had, had some racial overtones to it, far as promotion, qualifications and requirement.  You know the good old boy systems, been in for, for years and years and years.  If you don't know somebody and so and so, it works that way.  There wasn't any during my day, there wasn't any sales managers, one that I know of, all the sales manager in, in con- in hist- but by being subjected to this particular individual, I was able to do some sales managers work.  But I never actually became a bona fide sales manager.  But I can't use it far as, as a being able to perform as a sales manager and to use it on, as, as a qualifications part for as if I wanted to, to go up with the company [Continental Airlines].  But so there's always that particular status and that goes on today, that's, that's now, see.  Qualified, qualified people regardless to who they are, white, black whatever if you don't, if you, if you're not part of the good old boys system, you're not going to go anywhere.  That's, that's in our federal government right going today, we're going through it right with Bush [President George Walker Bush] and his cabinet see.  So race and this sort of thing doesn't have anything to do with it, it's just it, if you don't have that inside contact you just not going to make it and that's the way it was then.
Story_ID: 343771
Speaker 1: So where did you fall along the lines of, of sort of being in active civil rights nonviolent or, or in the King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] camp or were you more in the Malcolm X camp?
Speaker 2: The King camp, but as, as I, as we went on we found out that the two were cohesive to the point the point that they work together.  But then I had find that out through reading and, and though the (unclear) it was because one particular point and time, the, the media and, and the day to day activities kept, kept the two separated.  But in their own way they were, they, they both practice and projected peace you know a peace among (unclear) but they just different, did it in different ways.
Speaker 1: How did the Masons see them both, your organization specifically?
Speaker 2: Most mostly we were always, always nonviolent we were always on the King side whether then the Malcom, the Muslim side.  And, and but, but as we, we get into our upper houses like in the shrine, like in the shrine, we open up on the Holy Bible and the Holy Qur'an [Koran].  So we that's why I'm saying our--we're, we're Ancient Egyptian [Ancient Egyptian Arabic Order Nobles Mystic Shrine], were as, were as, the White Shrine is Ancient Arabic [Ancient Arabic Order of the Nobles of the Mystic Shrine], there's no Egyptian in there.  The Egyptian portion of ours tells you the Muhammad part of it.  So from that Muhammad status and that's always been since, since Shriner [Shriners International] has, has started.
Story_ID: 343772
Speaker 1: When did you become a Shriner?  Tell me how that develops from Mason to the Shrine?
Speaker 2: Well you start out as, as the, the basic part is the three degrees of Masonry goes from 3 to 33.  So you start off with the three basic degrees of Masonry and then from there you build up.  You go from three you from 4 to 14, you go from 15 to 18 then you go from 19 to 31, then you go to 32 which is the 32nd degree Mason.  The honorary degree is the 33rd that's, the highest degree in Masonry that you get.  It's hard to get that it took me took me 20 something years to be a 33rd.  But even with all that, if you do not stay proficient or financial in the first 3 degrees that's your, that's your foundation, that's your base, the rest of it crumbles.  It's just like if the foundation underneath this building crumbles all the rest of this goes, same way with that.  So and then from, from once you get up to the 32nd degree, then you can branch off what we have you can go either Scottish Rite [Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite] or new or, or York Rite it's two trees, it comes up from the tree and it branches out.  The Scottish Rite is on one side and the York right is on the other side.  The Scottish Rites takes you to the consistory and shrine. And the York Rites takes you to the Royal Arch Masons [Royal Arch Masonry] and the Knights Templar, you probably heard, heard of those.  And so but, but, but and that's, that's the steps that you take.
Speaker 1: So then you went through the, the shrine the (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went through the, I went through the consistory the 33rd degree and the shrine.  But I'm also a member of the other side, see which is the Royal Arch and and, and the Knights Templar so that I can be able to do a comparison and, and do them both.  That's fifty something years there, see.
Story_ID: 343773
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well in 1968 when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed, what was happening in your life?  Where were you that day?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 1: Well April 4th the day, where were you when you heard the news?
Speaker 2: I guess see I, I, when did I retire in '65 [1965]?  I'd just retired from Continental Airlines then and I more or less was, I guess in, in into my entrepreneurship.  And just like anybody else it was a shock.  I, I and, and he had been here and spoken.
Speaker 1: He had been to the club that your (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he had been, he no he had, he had been to Denver [Colorado].
Speaker 1: Where did he speak in Denver?
Speaker 2: He spoke at one of the black churches (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Let's see New Hope [New Hope Baptist Church, Denver, Colorado] wasn't built then.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (unclear).
Speaker 2: It was on Macedonia; okay I guess it was Macedonia, her church, at the Macedonia Baptist Church [Denver, Colorado].  So and then during my high during, during my first year of I guess I (unclear) '64 [1964], '63 [1963], he wasn't able to come but David Abernathy [Ralph Abernathy], I was able to get Abernathy to come and he spoke at one of our, our functions at East High School [Denver, Colorado] over here.  So you know Abernathy and King were very close, they were, they were like brothers.  And so what we weren't able to get Martin Luther King so he was so tied up.  So we've always been an active supportive force of Martin Luther King, more so than Malcolm, Mel, Malcolm X.  And anytime we had an opportunity to do work or, or in that behalf we did, but '68 [1968] that's when he passed.
Speaker 1: Was there any civil unrest in Colorado (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh very much so, yes.
Speaker 1: What tell--
Story_ID: 342010
Speaker 1: At the time you left, '65 [1965] when you left Continental Airlines when you retired from them and you started your own business, were you a member of any, were there any black associations outside of the Masons that you were a member of, any black business associations?
Speaker 2: Some point in there I was a member of the black chamber, [U.S.] Junior Chamber of Commerce, I never was a member of the chamber of commerce.
Speaker 1: Because you started a political track that got you to the mayor's office, how did that happen?
Speaker 2: Okay.  That started, I guess Federico Pena, the mayor before [HistoryMaker] Wellington Webb.
Speaker 1: Now just help me get the history of Colorado: the first gentleman was Hispanic?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, first gentle was, is his, Hispanic.  And, and the next mayor that succeeded him was Mayor, Mayor Wellington Webb.  He's the black mayor who became.
Speaker 1: And he was the first black mayor, was he?
Speaker 2: Yeah, first black mayor, right, and also the first president of the mayor's conference [U.S. Conference of Mayors], all of the--you know of the, of the, you know of the United States.  But they had these boards and I guess, I guess these boards are here, nineteen--of course this goes back, this is '86 [1986], but anyhow, I was recommended by two city councilmen.
Speaker 1: Who were they?
Speaker 2: One was William Roberts [Bill Roberts] who is deceased now.  And the other one is [HistoryMaker] Allegra "Happy" Haynes, who is now on the school board former councilman, councilwoman and councilwoman president.  That my name was submitted through those two.  And you know naturally the mayor's takes, she, they, they were very active with the sitting council at that time.  And so at that time she thought that it would be good that--could consider him appointing me to some board.  And that's when I appointed to the Board of Appeals, which was at that time was a board that oversees over the building permits he had all the building inspectors or anything that had to do with building.  You would, you would listen to all the complaints, make discussions and opinions, city attorney would be in attendance.  And so I stayed on that board through his tenure his first tenure was just three years '86 [1986] to '89 [1989].  Then he was reelected for another three or four years and I stayed another three or four and became the chairman, vice chairman and chairman of the Board of Appeals.
Story_ID: 342011
Speaker 1: Now was the mayor's [HistoryMaker Wellington Webb], was the Board of Appeals different from the Mayor's Black Advisory Committee (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, different that was another, that was a, that was another board that, that we had, we had, the mayor's board of commission, that, that was made up of three different types of nationalities we had the Asian, we had the Hispanic, you had the black and you had the Indian [Native American].  And each one of the--these were, were commission, their purpose was to get, he, to give him feedback of what was going on in the, individual committees.  And worked as a, as a resource team to him to make sure that the city [Denver, Colorado] ran smooth.  That we didn't have any uprises or this sort of thing, to let him know what the status was.
Speaker 1: Can you remember some of the things that you reported to him, back to him that at the advisory commission that seen as an issue that he, that should be addressed, that should be taken to him?
Speaker 2: At that particular time it was pretty much an ongoing thing.  If, if he didn't have a concern of a question which, which I can't actually remember that he did.  Because we, we such as controlled group through these two council people that we had.  This advisory board more or less what feed to them, he would just have a periodic meeting maybe once every three or four months just to sit down and, and you know pose any questions or answers that we had, and we didn't have any too much.  It just depend on what at that particular time and I and I can't remember any.  But it was be in the basis of, were going to an immigration situation now as far at the kids are concerned and what would be the status of the output at that time.  I think the state, this Clayton College [Clayton College for Boys, Denver, Colorado] that I was telling you about was an issue at that, (unclear) to determine what we, what he was going do with that.
Speaker 1: What was the Clayton College?
Speaker 2: You remember I was telling you about the Clayton, the Clayton College where that the, that there was a covenant and agreement that there will no kids and and--
Speaker 1: So you worked with him that was an issued that came about when you were on that commission?
Speaker 2: It--it was at the point where as, they were going to determine, they were--we, we you know they we wanted to get a closure of it.  It, it wasn't be because see the, the work had already been established and set what they were going to do.  It was just a matter of what progress where we make, and, and it might have been done then I don't, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: But just the people on the tape catches up the Clayton (unclear) was when the covenant Clayton had a covenant saying there will be no black students in this school.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So what was your, the commissions advice to the mayor about handling this covenant.
Speaker 2: We didn't deal with that, this, this the covenant and everything was going he I think at this particular time we would just, I we would talk about you see the, the see the agreement and covenant had already been broken.  So the kids could attend there, now I think that were the fact of what we, what we were gonna do the--with the property since the kids had opened up.  And it, and it came, came to play that the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] would use the gym fac- use different facilities over there, for their, for their--and we, we would give an update on how that was going, and how that was progressing.
Story_ID: 342012
Speaker 1: Well what was the Colorado Black Round Table?  How did you get to that organization?
Speaker 2: The Colorado Black, Black Round Table--
Speaker 1: I'll just take that.
Speaker 2: The Colorado Black Round Table was a, was it was, was a, that was a group of people that was made up of all walks of life.  Ministers, council people, you, you your civic representatives people in the community that would put--and, and we, we would discuss on these different weekend of what was going on in the community.  What could you do to improve, disapprove this sort of thing and they called it the Colorado Black Round Table.  And then and then, the, the they were more or less the councilwoman [HistoryMaker Allegra "Happy" Haynes] was there and she would more or less report to the mayor [HistoryMaker Wellington Webb] what we discussed at the round table, so that, that was just a makeup of, of community, community people.
Story_ID: 342013
Speaker 1: Well, you talk about community.  As an adult what community did you live in?  Who were your neighbors?  Were there any community leaders in the neighborhood, or were the ministers the leaders?
Speaker 2: Council our, our council people were a direct representative, broken down into districts.  They, they maintained that fact that that all the people in that particular district met the needs, paved alleys, neighborhood watch, this sort of thing.  That pretty much was, was left up to them.  The, the councilman of that district and then naturally the ministers.  They're always the key focal point, the, the community leaders like the Caldwells and the Blairs.
Story_ID: 342014
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well let me ask you what year did you marry and start a family?
Speaker 2: My, my--this is my second wife, my first marriage was in 1950--1950 and, and that, that marriage was two children [Rhoda Holliman and Lisa Holliman].  And, and then that, that marriage lasted for twenty-one years '50 [1950] to '71 [1971].  Then there was a break between '71 [1971] and '73 [1973] and then my second marriage which is to Mildred [Mildred Holliman] that was in '73 [1973] to now, so that's thirty something years, thirty or thirty-three years.  And at that, at that union was where Michael [ph.] is my stepson and we--he's forty-three now.  But he was five years old at the time we were married and I raised him from that point forward, so I guess he's considered as a, as a child.
Story_ID: 342015
Speaker 1: So why did the Denver Police Department make you an honorary captain?
Speaker 2: Again, through a recommendation and a request from the--I guess the--there was members that, that was part of the organization.  And, and then I think once I, I well became a member of the, the Masonic family based on the different things that works that I did with the committee, I mean with the community.
Speaker 1: Community, what, what contributions do you feel you've made to the African American Community in Denver [Colorado]?
Speaker 2: Well, we, we like I say we, we did the gang thing was a, was a prime, was a prime--I I think really think we initiated it was going on but I think we, we initiated a perspective for as the different gangs between the Bloods, the Crips and, and those groups.  And so what we did is and that again that had to do with the, the honorary commission.  We worked, we worked with the gangs to the point where as that we were able, when I had my office here, we were able to have a meeting that brought all three of 'em together, in, in our conference room.  And they were all sitting at the table.  And, and so it was, it was something that we were kind of hesitant from because they'd, they'd never been, they'd hadn't been brought together like that.  And so and so we, we have a gentleman here, a Reverend Leon Kelly, who more or less was the overseer of the group.  And he made the selection and he got the three leaders to come along with some kids.  And so we had a, we had a, we had a open forum.  We brought those kids around they, they in a room around a conference table and we listen to them.  What is your concern?  What is your dis-concern?  What, what needs to be happen so and so, and so and so, and so that progress from that time forward.  And after that we spent that whole morning in there.  And at first it was cold atmosphere we, we didn't know what to expect.  But we had three representatives one from Cleveland [Ohio], who, who was one of the, who was a judge.  We had a police chief from Detroit, Michigan, assistant chief was there and then, and then Leon Kelly and the kids.  And we more or less let them know that they were in a comfortable environment, didn't have to worry about.  'Cause see I, I don't know what they went before but I guess they had been involved in a lot of dialogue which, wasn't they didn't follow through.  They were told they were gonna do one thing and they were gonna do another.  So we had this and once we got done then we took 'em to a restaurant, Black-eyed Pea restaurant [Black-eyed Pea, Denver, Colorado] and we fed 'em and it kind of open the door.  So that led on to that.  Then a little later once we once, once we found out that the, you know, we had made some head way then, I invited them to come to the Imperial Sessions.  It was in Miami [Florida].  And so the three groups the Bloods, the, the Crips and there was one other, I'll think of them.  They called a truce, while the three leaders, while the three leaders went we took these three.  And we brought them to the convention, all expenses paid.  And, and you so you know we wore the red vests, well naturally the, the Crips wore, they didn't like that because they figured, "Geez these old guys.  They're in the gangs.  Look at these red hats," you know.  And so we brought then there and, and it was environment that they had never experienced before.  And while we were there, Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] who is a member spoke to them that morning.  And that afternoon we had an open session of all both the nobles and the daughters, it was two thousand people in there.  And, and so the--it was, it was something phenomenal for the kids.  We, we put in a room, and they had access to the convention, they had access to the parades we took everything that we involved in, they involved in and it was a new environment for them.  So they did that, then we brought them back home.
Story_ID: 342016
Speaker 1: And then we, we got invited, and I can't think of the judge's name, when we got back here, then we start working on their particular situation.  There was one individual and so between Cleveland [Ohio] and Denver [Colorado] they worked out a situation whereas that the kids we would change their environment so it we had a kid here, he could go to Cleveland and start his life all over again.  And Cleveland the, the Cleveland's city officials would work with the Denver city, and so that, that projected.  And it, and it and so what happened we had we had we had one of the Crips that just couldn't get his self together.  So what we did his, his trial was coming up so they, they on the day of his trial just so they put him out of the county jail and so we monitored him while he was out at the county jail.  And the day of his trail, he was just two days before his trial, he, he got, he received a call from one of his, his immediate family which, which upset him and he threatened them over the phone which, which made it a difference with his case.  So when we went back, he was to be you know he was be clean from the time that we put him out into the time he was supposed to have his case.  So the next when we went to court before the judge we had this police chief, we had this judge from Cleveland.  Again, see what I'm saying how who you know, and how it works?  They were (unclear).  So when we got to the court session that this incident came up about the telephone call.  And they see he was gonna be ready be relocated to Cleveland, Ohio to start his life all over again.  Now this is a, this was a real tough gang member, but this call did not allow him.  So they, they incarcerated him for--on account of the call because he broke the what's it named?  But the judge, the two judges the one in Cleveland and the one here still worked together.  And so I think he spent, he did a little time and before his time was out, he just he just couldn't keep a clear review, just, just hard nose.  But it changed him, it changed his life and he later lived here and as he got older he, he just see the progress.  But he never forgot what we did for him, mentally it stayed with him.  So we feel that we, we accomplished something, and the rest of them.  And during the days that that they were in the convention they were, there we we took 'em there for four days, they were able to see the parade, they rode in the parade, they were at the public day program.  They enjoyed everything and for those four days that they were gone there was a truce declared back here in Colorado.  No colors were worn they wore yellow a neutral color until they came back.  So that's pretty much the story there.
Speaker 2: So what are your hopes today for the African American community?
Speaker 1: It's--its let me back up a little bit, we were doing fine with the gangs here in Colorado.  We had them controlled from the ages of seven well, from, from twelve to maybe twenty-five.  But the hard core, the, the bases of the gangs came from Los Angeles [California].  As these gangs would come in they saw that they coming into a controlled area, to the far where the gangs just weren't like they were in Los Angeles.  So they would work on the smaller kids from seven to nine years up until they're twelve.  And so it got to the point that we could not control the, the guys from Los, the kids from Los Angeles that was kind of, that's after years after we had after, after the they had broke our base.  'Cause we didn't know them and they didn't know us.  So they would, they would circumvent what we had done here.  And, and so at that particular point in time the other people, that's where the ministers and other stuff came into to this to this day they, they.  Now, the gangs have gone during those days it was more or less they get in, now you got Hispanics you got the girls you got, we didn't have that then.  Now it's, it's progressed to the group now, you know this that, I, I just think it's uncontrollable and it's just our young people as a whole that are having a problem.  If we could have maintained that same situation when like I said, we had did have it under control but the outside the L.A. [Los Angeles, California] was the crux of the whole thing and they just we, we their leaders came in and just kind of took over.
Story_ID: 342017
Speaker 1: What would you like to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Oh I guess to, to be able to be supportive in, in daily activities of the people I come in contact with, especially the kids.  I've tried to pattern my life now to the point where as I've gone, I've kind of, of deviated from a Masonic and become more church prone to the point whereas I've become an officer of the church and also I've become a Sunday school teacher.  To me that gives me the opportunity to share with the young kids and give them some of, I guess some of the experiences that I had.  But to do it in such a way that I'm not looking down on them.  To the point where because see you have to be careful how you communicate with youngster nowadays.  If he gives, if he gives it, if he gets to the fact that you're, you're not disrespecting, you're not respecting his status of where he is, then he's gonna disrespect you as a result so you have to have the confidence to me of a--so it's more or less being a mentor rather an role model, see.  The guys like the basketball players they're, they're considered a role but, but when you can.  Now our, our athletes now a days are being to go into the mentor status.  Where they're not only being a role model as a ball player, but they're, but they're where they're actually activating the kids working with the kids.  And that's what I want to be. I more or less set the status not to be an old man who more or less, trying to diss the youngsters but to the point whereas to be respected to him, but yet maintain that discipline that he should have in a manner that is not looking, not looking negative toward him.
Story_ID: 342018
Speaker 1: Why do you feel telling your story is important?
Speaker 2: Hopefully, that it can be passed on and added onto.  I imagine when you go to other interviews, they're gonna give you another side of their--of their view of what their experience.  I feel mine is, is the experience that I had is, is something that somebody might want take and use, such as the mustache, such as the kids, such as the gangs, that they've not experienced.  Maybe some of the ministers might see them, I they may not have, they might have met with the gangs but they may not have met in the perspective that we did.  I know none of them took 'em out to dinner, because you see we weren't scared, but you, you didn't, we didn't know what the outcome was gonna be.  And to have three different gang leaders in a room, about the size of out there and sitting at a table and, and getting them to open up to speak, that, that was something I feel was phenomenal.
Story_ID: 342019
Speaker 1: What led you back to college [Regis College; Regis University, Denver, Colorado] at the age of fifty to get your degree?  Why did you feel it was important at that time?
Speaker 2: Because it's you know, after, after going in and out of it ever since the time from high school [East High School, Denver, Colorado] I felt that there needed to be closure there.  I would have went on and got a master's [degree] but the purpose to me of a degree is to be able to expand and expound at my age of fifty-eight, fifty-nine years old there, there wasn't too much more that was gonna help me in the future.  I felt that I needed the degree--the educational part to go with the experiential part--so putting the two of them what we call during those days the mother head, the mother wit, along with the education degree.  Because the books educational books are only gonna take you so far.  And I notice in my class when I went to my class I was in, in I was older than my instructors.  And to go into a class of, of college student in their twenties and twenty-five.  And to be able to share lot, lot of those kids knew of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] but they didn't know they, they were only what they read.  And I was able to expound on some of the experience like you and I just talked about.  And, and when they, when they, when they would get some wronger views and say I would be able--and then it got the point where you had the respect of the professors the fact he would teach he, he would teach the scholastic part of it, but the education through the through the textbook.  But he didn't like--he didn't have the experience see he, he might have been thirty-five, forty years his self.  So he appreciated the fact that in his class he was able to get a, a--circumvent both sides of it, and, and through an older student.
Story_ID: 342020
Speaker 1: When you look back over your life thus far what stands out most for you?
Speaker 2: Well I, I guess and, and to sum it up the fact that number one that, that I I've had a full life.  I was able to do certain things to involve myself both civic wise, socially wise, spiritual wise, and community wise.  And, and in fact that at my age now that I can look back and see I, I lived a full life.  If I go tomorrow see I can always look back I think I, I've left a legacy for my wife [Mildred Holliman] and for my kids [Rhoda Holliman and Lisa Holliman] that they can go anywhere look.  That's why I took this stuff down to the--to the library [Blair-Caldwell African American Research Library, Denver, Colorado].  There is a full boat down there.  See of everything that I've done from the time.  And so you try to leave something for somebody to follow or somebody to add on to.  And that's what I've tried to do, I tried to leave set my life up as an example so that what I have done, see I don't have to look over my shoulder and say, say.   Well of course we all makes do things that we wish that we had not done, but overall I, I think we this, this status is set there, that you can go down and look and see.  I could have kept all that stuff upstairs and it took a while to do but, but they say you know Jo Katherine [Jo Katherine Holliman-Page] I have to give her that.  She say you need to, you need to take this down and so they can see.  'Cause I had all that stuff in boxes in the storage room.
Speaker 1: What was the, what was some of the things you took to the library?
Speaker 2: Well like magazines and stuff that you know where in 19- where I was part of the 100 most influential men, now everybody cannot say that.  I've had there's stuff down there showed clippings that stuff showing where I've visited Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] grave.  There's stuff my testimonial here with Ben Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] was, was my, was my principal speaker where Stokes attended.  And just different things that--trophies, Continental Airlines presented me with a--I don't know whether you remember the L-1011 airplane [Lockheed L-1011 TriStar] they don't make them make 'em any more, there's that's down there.  And certain things and stuff the magazines are down there, the clippings are down there--
Story_ID: 342021
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What do you think you legacy will be?
Speaker 2: I don't know. That he tried to do what he could do, that what, what you know that someone can follow and not, not be embarrassed.  And not you know, he left, left a trail that, that would--would not be, when we reflect positiveness as much as you could.  Hopefully that, that was done, I don't know.
Story_ID: 342022
Speaker 1: Although you lost your mother [Adele Banks] at two years old, what do you think it is that she is most proud of with what you've done with your life?
Speaker 2: Well, that I would think like I, I that, that she can look back and say well you know that boy turned out pretty good after all.  He's not in prison, he's, he's contribute, he was contributor something he, he left a life that I would like for him to be proud to be, proud to know that if I was living now, I would be proud of what he did.  And, and I think both and my mom and my dad [Ernest Holliman, Jr.] would both feel that way.  I tried to do something that would not be discouraging or be embarrassing to them in other words, I tried to life as if they were living here now looking over my shoulder.  And hopefully, that what we did.  And not only her but when I leave here, what I plan to leave for wife [Mildred Holliman] and the kids [Rhoda Holliman and Lisa Holliman] you know.  So they don't have wake up with, they don't have wake up on morning and or one day go down the street and say, "Geez, I'm Dave Holliman's [HistoryMaker David Holliman] wife." "Oh you're Dave Holliman--that guy did he--he just didn't have it," you know.  So had to, had to live so that they don't have the shadow that they walk they, it'll be a positive one, a good one.
Story_ID: 342023
Speaker 1: Okay, that's when I was inaugurated as imperial potentate in Las Vegas [Nevada] in 1988.
Speaker 2: Okay, sir go ahead and tell us about this one?
Speaker 1: That's the reception at, at in Las Vegas after I was elected imperial potentate in Las Vegas and that's me and Jo Katherine [Jo Katherine Holliman-Page].
Speaker 2: What year is that?
Speaker 1: That, that would that would be 1988.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That is myself and Jo Katherine. I think I was--
Speaker 2: Thirteen years you told me?
Speaker 1: No, I think I was older than that she looks like she's about seven, I must have been about sixteen or seventeen then.
Speaker 2: So that would be roughly the nineteen--you were born in 19- that be the '40s [1940s], correct?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that would be the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Yeah we were, we--I think we were at, at a banquet that had to be nineteen, I'd, I'd say that's recent.  So I'd, I'd say--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, late '90s [1990s], 1998 I'd say.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was the occasion?
Speaker 2: I can just, I can't tell I just looking at the table but it had to be a banquet I just--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's my dad.  He has to be, looking at the hair cut I guess he has to be in his thirties or forties.
Speaker 2: Can you give us your dad's name again?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Ernest that's Ernest Holliman, Ernest William Holliman, Jr. [Ernest Holliman, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Now what year do you think this is?
Speaker 1: I'll just take a guess, looking at the picture I'd say 19- well this, the '40s [1940s] again, I'm guessing.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right and this one.
Speaker 1: That's Ernest Holliman, Sr. and Jo Katherine and, and again she looks like she's bout six years old.  So that has to be, that's taken here in Denver [Colorado], that has to be right around 1940 again the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's my grandmother, that's Rhoda Neal [ph.] Holliman [Rhoda Holliman].  That's taken in Pueblo, Colorado that has to be 19- in the, in the '30s [1930s].
Speaker 2: Okay that's Ernest William Holliman, Jr. and Dorothy Holliman, that's taken in the looking at that brick wall that was taken in the '40s [1940s], here in Denver.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay that's taken in the '40s [1940s].  That's the old resident at 1660 Lafayette [Street, Denver, Colorado].  That was in the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Oh Lord, that's Jo Katherine again we had to take
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear) had to be about two or three years old (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, two or three years.  That's Ernest Holliman, Jr. and Dorothy and that's Jo Katherine.  I don't know how Jo how old she would've been, and where that taken.  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: This that's a family picture of myself and Jo, Jo Katherine, my dad, Ernest William Holliman and my Aunt Frances Richardson [Frances Holliman Richardson (ph.)], his sister.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Is that me? Well, where it's taken I don't know.  I don't know where she got this stuff.  What but, but that, that's twelve so I that that in the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear) in the background.
Speaker 1: Garden of the Gods [Garden of the Gods Park] in Colorado Springs [Colorado] (unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: You ready?
Speaker 2: Is that Jason or Hank?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's Jason [Jason Page].
Speaker 2: Okay, okay that's, that's my dad and my mother that's no, no that's me, that's me and my mother, Dorothy, and Jason the youngest, Jo's youngest son.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Who's that lady?
Speaker 2: That's Frances and me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Really?
Speaker 2: That's, that's the Aunt Francis Richardson and myself.
Speaker 1: Okay, is this you in the [U.S.] Coast Guard?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's, that's me in as a, as a in my boot training aboard the Coast Guard cutter Tenele [ph.] in Alameda, California.
Speaker 1: Here come high school picture?
Speaker 2: That's my graduation picture, 1948 [from East High School, Denver, Colorado].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's you?
Speaker 1: That's me as the, as the grand master of all Masons for the jurisdiction on Colorado, Wyoming and Utah.  That would be in 1976, (unclear) tenure year.
Speaker 2: Well coming up to the close to the end.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay that's me, Jo Katherine and her and her deceased older daughter Leslie [ph.].  And that was taken that's--that's here in Denver, I don't what year that was taken.
Speaker 1: Remember I was telling you about the Boyers, the next door neighbor in Pueblo?  That's Mrs. Boyer, Pueblo, Colorado.
Speaker 2: And that's, what's the neighborhood?  Is that the next is was that what the neighborhood was?
Speaker 1: Yes that's what the neigh- that's, that's, that's neighborhood right there.
Speaker 2: Although this isn't that clear, I just want to get the image of those two men (unclear), (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's, that's my grandfather, Ernest Holliman, Sr. and--
Speaker 2: And that's your grandfather but he was your father?  Isn't that the one that raised you?
Speaker 1: No, well yes and the other one is (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was that?
Speaker 1: And the other one is the Uncle Neal [ph.].
Speaker 2: Is that his brother?
Speaker 1: No my, my.
Speaker 2: Grandfather's brother?
Speaker 1: My, my grandmother's brother.
Speaker 2: Grandmother's brother.  Is there anything else in this (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Let me see, that's was at my testimonial banquet when Ben Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] was a principal speaker.
Speaker 2: When was it taken?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Nineteen ninety [1990], it says 1990 on the banner.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, we move on.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's me as the imperial potentate and the lady to the side, is the, titular head of the auxiliary which is the Daughters of Isis.  And we're entering church service.  That would be nineteen--1988.
Speaker 1: Okay this will be the last one, it's not that clear, but it, I just want to get one of that banquet, and (unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay, that's myself, the deputy, the deputy imperial potentate here and that's--
Speaker 1: Now can you go from can from left to right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah that's, that's Morey Wells [sic.] the father of I think Maurice [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.] wasn't it.
Speaker 1: Let me just start with can you start here and go from left to right?
Speaker 2: I can't see that lady in the background, but that's.
Speaker 1: I mean just this gentleman here?
Speaker 2: That's Morey Wells.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Hines, Morey Hines [Maurice Hines, Sr.] and, and, and that's Roy Moore who was more successor the deputy imperial potentate and me and, and what's, what's the, the dancer he past, that's (unclear) was it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Gregory Hines.
Speaker 2: Gregory, that's, that's Gregory Hines there and the--I can't see who that noble is on the end.
Speaker 1: Okay and this will be the last one.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's the deputy imperial potentate the one who succeeded me, that's Gregory Hines at the mike, that's Morey Hines his dad next and me.
