Story_ID: 239335
Speaker 1: This HistoryMaker interview is being conducted by [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden as the interviewer.  And the videographer is Scott Stearns.  The date of this interview is October 15th, 2004.  And the site of the interview New England Conservatory of Music [Boston, Massachusetts].  Mr. HistoryMaker, would you give me, state your full name, including your middle name, and spell your name for me?
Speaker 2: Calvin Louis Hicks, C-A-L-V-I-N, L-O-U-I-S, H-I-C-K-S.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: August 18, 1933.
Speaker 1: And the location of your birth?
Speaker 2: Boston, Massachusetts, Boston City Hospital [Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts] (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  Would you state your occupation or profession today, the title that you hold here, and the name of the institution where you are presently employed?
Speaker 2: I'm a member of the liberal arts department faculty [at New England Conservatory of Music, Boston, Massachusetts].  And I, administratively, I am the director of community collaborations and program development.
Story_ID: 239336
Speaker 1: Before we move on from slate data, as we call it, we have a few People magazine type questions to add a little human interest and glimpses of your personality kind of up front to warm up for the interview.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Specific food or type of food?  Probably my favorite type of food is probably Indian.
Speaker 1: Indian?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Early to mid-May.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue, green, red.
Speaker 1: When you kind of want to get away and escape, where do you like to get away to?
Speaker 2: The ocean.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite saying or a favorite phrase that you use--
Speaker 2: Lord have mercy (laughter).
Speaker 1: Lord have mercy, okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Amen.
Story_ID: 239337
Speaker 1: We're going to continue by looking at your family background, your, your family history.  Would you start by telling us about your mother, giving us her name, and where she was born, and where she grew up, and a little bit about her background?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother's name is, maiden name is Marguerite Calvin.
Speaker 1: Calvin?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Would you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: C-A-L-V-I-N.  She's born in Florida in Daytona Beach [Florida] and came to Boston [Massachusetts] with her parents [Lenora Calvin and Thomas Calvin], my grandparents, when she was fourteen.  The family had originated in South Carolina and then went to Florida.  And during a period of one of the Great Migrations, you know, they made a way-stop in Detroit [Michigan] and then ended up here.
Speaker 1: Do you know why they left, why your grandparents and your mother left, why did, any specific incident or situ--
Speaker 2: No, I don't have, I didn't get, you know, the real specific reason other than the flow of, general flow of history.  But the specific reason--although I can, I can guess, I can guess, you know, that they were, like so many other families, very ambitious for their children, even though her parents didn't even get to what we now consider to be middle school, they were very ambitious, and industrious, and full of energy and all that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: Did your mother or her parents, your grandparents, share stories with you about their life in Daytona Beach, in Florida that--
Speaker 2: No, I tried on several or made several attempts to get that, you know.  I probably started as early as the late 1960s trying to get that for a variety of reasons.  My moving around the country, in terms of my own aspirations, certain were not designed to be manifest in Boston, that's for sure, and then my own family development.  For a variety of reasons I never got it.  I think probably my sister [Marjorie Hicks] has a better handle on that than I do 'cause she, you know, was--I left Boston at a fairly young age, and she remained here in closer day-to-day contact than, than I did.  I was, after a certain age, mine was much more episodic.  So, the answer to your question is no.
Story_ID: 239338
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  What can you tell us about your mother's [Marguerite Calvin Hicks] growing up years here in Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she, she went to BU [Boston University, Boston Massachusetts] for a short period of time.  She was a crackling, crackling intellect, which was never fulfilled.  You know, she was a wonderful writer.  She had some things published, not, certainly didn't meet her talent.
Speaker 1: Where did she live when she, your grandparents [Lenora Calvin and Thomas Calvin] and--(unclear)--where did they first settle when they came to Boston, what street and what neighborhood?
Speaker 2: South End [Boston, Massachusetts].  And I don't know the house where we grew up.  It's the first place they lived, but it certainly was there for a number of years, in which would be 7 Wellington Street, which is a very interesting street.  I think we were the only non-Barbasian [sic. non-Barbadian] family on the street I think.  And then my contemporaries, at least, teased me that I was puttin' on airs when I said I wasn't West Indian (laughter).  But anyways, they were there for--that was where I came when I was born, straight from the hospital [Boston City Hospital; Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts] to Wellington Street on the--
Speaker 1: What number Wellington was that?
Speaker 2: Seven.
Speaker 1: Seven?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, Malcolm [X] for a short time was at number five, you know.  Anyways--
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you what your grandfather did for--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a--
Speaker 1: --for--
Speaker 2: --day laborer.  My grandmother took care of other people's cooking and cleaning.
Speaker 1: Did either one of your grandparents tell you stories about their past or about their family history at all?
Speaker 2: Not in the way that, at a very young age, that I could hook it up.  When, when I got to the age where it mattered to me for my own reasons, generational reasons, is at the same point when I was moving around so much I didn't really focus on it.  But there was a big family that remained in Florida, and many of them would come.  And during the summer, we would get these huge cartons of, of mangos and oranges from Florida.  Then they would come up and occasionally they were pictures--I don't remember any of this--of my grandmother taking me to Florida to, to be with, with them.  There's a lot of going back and forth.  And then there were some other members who came up from Florida who left Boston and went to New York [New York], lived on St. Nicholas [Avenue], and occasionally we'd go to New York to see them.  And there was another wing that also came up.  They went to Los Angeles [California], and they're still there now, who was--(unclear)--the, next generation of course, are, are there now.  There's another wing that went to the Bronx [New York, New York].  You know, there was a lot of going back and forth and back and forth and back and forth.  But the, of course, one of the, you could anticipate that one of the big regrets is that you never got that specific information.  And it's, and it's particularly regretful for me because I was much more attune to that than most people I think are.  And I was, you know, kind of busy collecting other people's stuff (laughter), didn't get my own.
Story_ID: 239339
Speaker 1: --Before we leave this little history of your mother [Marguerite Calvin Hicks] and her parents [Lenora Calvin and Thomas Calvin], how do you remember your mother's personality?  What was she like as a, as a mother, as a lady?  What, what was she--
Speaker 2: Very quick wit, a voracious reader, very impressive, the way she carried herself and her--(unclear)--processes, and sensitivity, and the breadth of her interests, not only very much in the area, the literary stuff, and music, and politics.  And one of the great mockers, I guess, would be that she was one of the leading members of the American Communist Party [Communist Party USA] and in the 1950s, you now, black--(unclear)--you know, in a very conservative Boston [Massachusetts], at the height of McCarthyism, at a, in a very conservative would-be black bourgeois section of town, you know, good Lord (laughter).
Speaker 1: You were about seventeen years old then, right--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --nineteen fifty [1950]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you remember her, her--
Speaker 2: I was--
Speaker 1: --activities and meetings?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.  Our house was like--
Speaker 1: Can you tell me a little bit about--
Speaker 2: --Grand Central Station [sic. Grand Central Terminal, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Well, one of the great things about it, it's almost like a play or a novel, is that when my parent, well, we were all living Wellington Street [Boston, Massachusetts], and my grandparents owned the house.  My grandparents were on the ground floor.  My mother and father and I, then later my sister, were on the second floor.  The third and fourth floor were rented out to roomers.  And then my mother and father got this house on Wabon Street in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts].  And then later my grandparents left the Wellington Street house and moved to the first floor of my parents' house on Waybon Street, okay.  We were all connected to the Ebenezer Baptist Church on West Springfield Street in the South End [Boston, Massachusetts], where the pastor thought he was running the church, but it was really my grandmother who was running the show (laughter), Reverend Ravenout [ph.].  And this point that I'm trying to get to is that on a Sunday morning, for example, my grandmother, who was head of several church organizations, like the Morning Star [Baptist Church, Mattapan, Massachusetts] club is one that comes to mind that she started, and so there would have to be notes that would have to be put together that she would have to read at the church service.  And so every Sunday morning there'd be a knock on the second floor door.  It would be my grandmother with a pan of biscuits, and she was a wonderful cook--a pan of biscuits.  And the exchange was that my mother had to come downstairs and write out the notes, right, for the Ebenezer Baptist Morning Star club rendering of activities to the congregation.  And then once that's done, then the house would fill up with all these communists.  And I, I just think that's so ironic, you know (laughter).
Story_ID: 239340
Speaker 1: Did you sit in on any of these--
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I--
Speaker 1: --sessions, meetings?
Speaker 2: --oh, oh sure.  Yeah, and my father [Louis Hicks] was very upset 'cause he didn't like that.  But when Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] was married to--what's the pianist [Hazel] Scott, what's her last--
Speaker 1: Hazel Scott.
Speaker 2: Hazel Scott.  And they'd visited Boston [Massachusetts] at one point.  The Goodrum [ph.] family lives right next door to us on one side, and the Ellises [ph.] on the other side.  And this one year when Powell came, Freddie Goodrum [ph.], who is Powell's Goodrum family, was my peer.
Speaker 1: You said Goodwin?
Speaker 2: Good, Goodrum.
Speaker 1: Would you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: G-O-O-D-R-U-M.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: Right--had a broken leg.  And through my parents, the, the, the, Adam Clayton Powell was in our house.  I don't know why.  And next door, went next door and signed Freddie Goodrum's cast, you know.  That was not unusual for me to, to see.  William [L.] Patterson, who was an ex, extraordinary member of the national Communist Party [Communist Party USA], and had started the Civil Rights Congress, and was the author of the book 'We Charge Genocide[: The Crime of Government Against the Negro People,' William L. Patterson], was at our house all the time.  When Paul Robeson came to Boston, he was at our house all the time and was, and then there was all, all the time there would be meetings.  The bell was forever ringing.  We used to subscribe to The Daily Worker, a newspaper which come in the mail wrapped in brown paper so nobody would know that you were getting this communist journal in the mail, you know, pick up the telephone and talk in code, you know.  All of that was always going on.  And in the midst of all of that, there was this, here's this woman [Hicks' mother, Marguerite Calvin Hicks] who's reading and writing all the time as very menial work, very menial work, maybe a half a step up from what her mother is doing, and maintaining a certain kind of dignity.  But if you were around enough and you had a certain kind of sensitivity you could pick up on things, you could see that she really was very frustrated, you know, and it was a certain kind of, at least for her son, there was a certain kind of anguish to that, you know.  So I think it was a difficult life for her.  And she died at a very early age.  I was not in Boston when she died.  I was working in a summer job at the time in Gloucester [Massachusetts] as a dishwasher at a restaurant on the Rocky Neck section of Gloucester and no, that was, that was my uncle.  No, I was in New York, Upstate New York, in Wingdale, New York, a camp called Camp Unity, which my mother had arranged for me to go to because I was very much of a loner during those years.
Speaker 1: How old was she when she passed?
Speaker 2: She was in her early forties.  You know, I was very much into athletics.  You know, but once the games were over and my peers went wherever they went with the young ladies, I went home and read a book or listened (laughter) to some music or something.  And I think my mother at a certain point was saying, hm, something wrong with this boy, you know, so she sent me to Camp Unity, which was a resort in Wingdale, New York, for, it was, it was very much on the left politically.  It was very interracial and very political.  And I was a dishwasher there.  And a friend came up and to tell me my mother had died and drove me back.  And you probably know the person who was a good friend of my mother's.  It was a guy named Owen Brooks, who later left Boston to Mississi--went to Mississippi and became the director of the Delta Ministry in Greenville [Mississippi].  Maybe you want to come back to this at another point, but the Camp Unity was a very important era at a point.
Story_ID: 239341
Speaker 1: Did your mother's [Marguerite Calvin Hicks] political activities with the Communist Party [USA] affect your thinking and philosophy or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it sure did--
Speaker 1: --impact upon you?  How did it--
Speaker 2: --it sure did, yeah--
Speaker 1: --how did it affect you?
Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you're now a late teenager, young adult.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did it affect you?
Speaker 2: Well, on the negative side, it broaden my perspective enormously.  I mean, one of the people who was always at our house was William Harrison, you know, who at that time was the editor of the Boston Chronicle newspaper, which I wrote for when I was in high school [English High School, Boston, Massachusetts].   And that was a profoundly wonderful experience, to, to know this man who was just an incredible intellect and wit, you know, and a man of just broad learning.  And, and I think it's a drag, you know, look, I, every time I pass Northampton Street [Boston, Massachusetts] now I think of the Boston Chronicle, which, who know that he ever existed for goodness sakes?
Speaker 1: Tell us about that paper, and tell us what you wrote.  What was your--
Speaker 2: Well, it was a weekly.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It did predated the Bay State Banner by many years, you know.  It's right on the corner of Tremont [Street] and Northampton Street.  It was a, it's in a, a regular residential building, and but the whole building was given over to not only the editorial aspect of putting this weekly out, but on the first floor was the machinery, the typesetting machines to, to do it.  And it was virtually a one-man operation.  William Harrison was one of the first black people to get a doctorate from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and very--if you passed him on the street, you wouldn't think much about him one way or another.  But he was a, in my mind, he was a giant, and I thought it was a great opportunity for me to be around him.
Speaker 1: And you say you wrote for the paper?
Speaker 2: Yes, one--
Speaker 1: What did--
Speaker 2: --of the first articles, stories he sent me to was--(unclear)--see, the Indian ambassador to the United Nations [UN] was speaking at Harvard, [V.K.] Krishna Menon.  And I went there and wrote a story on that meeting with [V.K.] Krishna Menon.  It's anoth--
Speaker 1: Were you still in high school when you were doing this writing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in high school, yeah.
Speaker 1: You were?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna get to your schooling in a bit.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But this is interesting.
Speaker 2: There was the doctor [Dr. T.R.M. Howard] who was very well known at the time, who was from Mound Bayou, Mississippi.  And I cannot think of his name now, but he came to Boston [Massachusetts] on a visit, and I did a story on, on him.
Speaker 1: Do you still have those articles?
Speaker 2: I have them somewhere (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah.  And I'm trying to think offhand what some of the art, other articles were.  There were--oh, Cynthia Belgrave Jones, who was an actress, an African American actress from Boston.  She used to have these soirees at 58 Nassau Avenue on Sundays.
Speaker 1: And you would cover those?
Speaker 2: And I would cover those, yeah.  She year later went to New York [New York] and had some success.  But she was a big star here in the black community (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you in--
Story_ID: 239342
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you inherited this--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --writing from your mother's [Marguerite Calvin Hicks] interest--
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: --I guess.
Speaker 2: I think so.  I think so, yeah.  And then when I went to New York [New York], when I, some years later when I went to New York, one of the first people that I went to see was Louis Burnham, who at that time on the Lower East Side [Manhattan, New York, New York] was the editor of, of a left-wing newspaper called the [National] Guardian.  It's Margaret Burnham's father (laughter).  And he was one of the first people that I met.  Then when I got heavily involved in politics in New York, the person who was really--mentor doesn't really cover it, but I guess that'll do--was William [L.] Patterson.  And both of these people I'd met sat-(unclear)--on Wabon Street [Boston, Massachusetts], you know, through my mother's activities when I was obviously much younger, you know.  You may remember Eddie Teixeira [Edward Teixeira], who just died.  When he first came to Boston [Massachusetts] from New Bedford [Massachusetts], he lived in my mother's house.  Edna Pezzolesi do you know her?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: When she first came to Boston, she lived in my mother's house.  It was, it was all of that activity.  And then, on this, on this political stuff and downstairs, it's onward Christian soldiers, you know (laughter).  And both of those folks were looking to capture the son and the grandson, you know, like, you know, you can come this way, or you come that way, you know.  But, I mean, looking back on it, I can see that neither one of them were really acting in a grossly out of place way.
Speaker 1: Just to close a loop on your mother--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --coming here at fourteen, did she finish the Boston Public Schools [BPS]--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: She did--
Speaker 2: --yeah, Boston Public Schools, yeah.
Speaker 1: She did?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: What high school did she--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Girls, Girls' High [School, Boston, Massachusetts], I think is the name of it at that--
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Then she went to BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] after that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but only for a short time.  I don't think she did more than a year and a half.
Story_ID: 239343
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father, his name.
Speaker 2: Louis, L-O-U-I-S, Hicks.
Speaker 1: And when would--
Speaker 2: He was from Litchfield, Litchfield, yeah, [Litchfield] Connecticut, was an orphan.
Speaker 1: How old, how old, when was he born?
Speaker 2: Geez, I don't even remember when he was born.
Speaker 1: That's all right.  We can come back to it.
Speaker 2: He had some cousins in Boston [Massachusetts].  And after his parents died he was, he, in a home in New Haven [Connecticut].  What's the famous high school in New Haven [Connecticut]?
Speaker 1: Wilbur Cross [High School, New Haven, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: No.  Well, and his brother came to Boston.  That's the one you saw with the boxing stuff.  And then my father, who was younger, followed his brother and came here, very smart guy, but a different sort of intelligence than my mother's [Marguerite Calvin Hicks].  His was more tactical--
Speaker 1: More like--
Speaker 2: --tactical.  My mother's was just, you know, sparks, you know--was a very smart guy, and very giving, and hardworking, went to [Benjamin] Franklin Institute [of Technology, Boston, Massachusetts], did not have the same level of, of confidence in himself that my mother had, didn't have the same level of internal security that my mother had.  And I think that when he and my mother got together that my grandparents [Lenora Calvin and Thomas Calvin] sort of thought that he wasn't the right choice, you know, and he wasn't, I guess the gross way of putting it would be he wasn't good enough.
Speaker 1: Did he tell you anything about his growing up years in New Haven?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he told, I got more from him about the difficulty of being a young black guy, though he didn't talk about it in political terms but in just survival terms and the disappointments when he came to Boston with his family, who didn't nurture him the way that he wanted to be nurtured, needed to be nurtured.
Speaker 1: What, do you know what he did when he first arrived here?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he tried some boxing himself, and that didn't work too well (laughter).  His brother went into the post office, and he worked in the post office.
Story_ID: 239344
Speaker 1: You mentioned that your father [Louis Hicks] attended [Benjamin] Franklin Institute [of Technology, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was his work as you were growing up?  What jobs did he have and occupations?
Speaker 2: Well, mostly I remember him always struggling to become.  He had a business of his own for a while, cleaning business.  At times I helped him go to Travelers Insurance, when it existed here in Boston [Massachusetts], at night to clean up the place that he had a contract with, Travelers; had a contract with Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], one of the Boston University libraries.  They were moving lots of books from one place to another, and he hired, he, my father, hired a bunch of people, including me, to dust off all these books and pile 'em up, take 'em somewhere.  And I think actually he had a subcontract.  That was one of the moments in a father/son relationship that is, I think is somewhat telling.  You don't always know why it occurs, 'cause it's not planned.  But the person who he was subcontracting from to do this stupid work came to look and see how the job was being performed and was not satisfied and cursed out my father, you know, in a very embarrassing way in front of all the people that my father had hired, including me.  And my parents had never heard me curse, and I didn't even curse that much, but certainly they had never heard it (laughter).  But man, I jumped on that man something fierce and essentially told him to get out (laughter), out his job (laughter).  But even at that young age I could tell, looking at the other black men that my father had hired, that look of, of pride on their face that somebody was telling this white man he can't treat us like that.  Now, I had the freedom to do it 'cause I was so young and ignorant, I didn't know no better, and I wasn't feedin' nobody, and paying no rent to nobody.  And I remember when my father and I came home, we didn't say anything on the way home, but we got home, and my mother [Marguerite Calvin Hicks] was in the room.  And the used to call me Callie [ph.], and my father said to my mother, soon as he got in: you know what Callie did today?  And he told the story with such pride.  You know, that was--and my, our relationship was different after that.  My relationship with my father up to that time was really one of being responsible, correct and all that, but it was much more of a, it was much closer with my mother, you know.  So I remember those kinds of jobs.  And even when I was in college [Drake University, Des Moines, Iowa] and the couple of times I came home during vacation or something from college, I would help him with those kinds of things.  But the main job that I remember him having for years and years was at an MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] fraternity on Bay State Road [Cambridge, Massachusetts], which was also insulting to me.  But I would leave high school [English High School, Boston, Massachusetts] when I, at the end of a day, and I'd go over there and help him.  He was the house man.  And there was a black cook, black house man, who was my father, and a couple of waiters, all black men, all black men.  And it's these white guys in the fraternity.  And I would help him serve the dinner meal, you know, when I went over from, after high school.  The cook would send up the meals from the kitchen in a dumbwaiter, which would come up to the, a room on the dining floor.  We'd have these white jackets on, and we would serve these guys.  And it was so hard.
Story_ID: 239345
Speaker 1: Tell me what elementary school did you enter and what are your earliest memories of your elementary school life here in Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: C. C. Perkins [Charles C. Perkins School, Boston Massachusetts] on, right down the street here--
Speaker 1: What street was--
Speaker 2: --which is now a condominium.
Speaker 1: What street was that on?
Speaker 2: St. Botolph Street--it's a condominium now--and the Dwight School on West Springfield Street.  And, and then when my parents [Louis Hicks and Marguerite Calvin Hicks] moved to Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], I went to the Henry Higgins [sic. Henry L. Higginson Elementary School, Boston, Massachusetts] and then to the [David A.] Ellis [Elementary School, Boston, Massachusetts] (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you were in four different elementary schools then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess so, and then to English High School [Boston, Massachusetts], when it was in the South End [Boston, Massachusetts], not where it is now.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about your elementary school years?  What kind of a student were you as a, as a youngster?
Speaker 2: I think I was probably no student at all.  I don't remember anything happening that really grabbed me until I had a particular teacher in the sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Who was that?
Speaker 2: I used to know her name.  I don't know her name now.
Speaker 1: Well, you can tell me about her.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, she was just interested.  She was just interested, that's all, she was interested.  There was a, a reason to trust that there might be something there that you could invest in, all right.  The English High School a, for me was more about maintaining some equilibrium than it was ever about learning.  English High School at that time was almost ethnically competitive with [Boston] Latin [School, Boston, Massachusetts], you know, and athletically competitive with Latin and historically competitive.  They both at the beginning of the American public school system, you know, both of them, both of them followed the English model, except English was not exam, but it prided itself on its academics.  Latin obviously was the route to the elite schools, the Ivy League.  English was the route for the Irish working class to Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts].  That's where most of its graduates went, to Boston College.  Most of the black kids, my peers in Boston went to trade school or Boston Tech [Boston Technical High School; John D. O'Bryant School of Mathematics and Science, Boston, Massachusetts], all right.  There were more blacks at English than there were at Latin, but there weren't that many, all right.  And it was all-male, and the teachers were all Irish teachers.  And it was really a matter--the word equilibrium may not be the right word, but it kind of suffices.  There wasn't much going on there that was, I can point to and say that it was a particularly useful endeavor for me.  On the other hand, I was learning a lot that I was teaching myself.  You know, I was constantly in the library.  I spent more time in the Boston Public Library [Boston, Massachusetts] than anywhere else.  But, and I was learning, but it wasn't in school, I'll tell you that.
Speaker 1: Working on your schoolwork or working on things you were interested in?
Speaker 2: Well, if I did it on a scale of one to ten, probably somewhere between one and four was schoolwork, and one and six was me.
Story_ID: 239346
Speaker 1: Before we continue with the high school, as you went through the elementary school grades and into the first two years of high school [English High School, Boston, Massachusetts], what kind of activities were you involved in in your neighbor--in your community outside of school in addition to church.  I mean what, what did young people do during your generation of growing up--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --in the community here in the South End [Boston, Massachusetts], Lower Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was available to you?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not the best example because a lot of my stuff was conditioned by my grandmother [Lenora Calvin] setting very, very strict boundaries, you know, I mean really (laughter).  And then by the openness of my mother [Marguerite Calvin Hicks], but that was very much towards intellectual pursuits.  You know, the thing that I shared with my contemporaries was athletics.  Even my taste in music was different.  I mean I was very much involved in classical.  You know, there wasn't a Charlie Parker solo that I didn't know (laughter).  And rhythm and blues was not what I was listening to.  You know, I wasn't even hardly listening to blues, much less rhythm and blues and the pop stuff, you know, like [The] Platters and people like that of the day was not what I was into.  And the social stuff, you know, house parties and things like that, you know, I'd be standing in the corner trying to figure out how to do this dance.  By the time I got up nerve to go ask the girl for a dance, the record's over, you know, and I'd end up going home, you know.  So I wasn't, so I'm, my pursuits were quite, were not in the general trend, you know.  So what I shared with my contemporaries was the, the sports.  And then later when I was in high school, I became the head of the Boston NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] youth chapter for a hot minute before the--(unclear)--from the national office came to Boston [Massachusetts] and told the head of the Boston chapter, who was Colonel [Larkland F.] Hewitt--
Speaker 1: Hewitt.
Speaker 2: --that you gotta get this kid out of here.  His mother is communist any.  Get him out of here.  But, so the political stuff I shared with a certain segment of my contemporaries in the sports.
Speaker 1: How did you feel about the push away from the NAACP interest?  I mean how did you handle that?
Speaker 2: I think I remember writing a letter to Colonel Hewitt, and I even had a meeting with him to let him know essentially that (laughter) I wasn't trying to turn the youth chapter into a, you know, a segment of the Soviet Union.  You know, I was just trying to be a good member of the NAACP.  I didn't take it too seriously, frankly, yeah.  It didn't, it didn't, didn't deter me for anything.  It didn't, I didn't spend a whole lot of time thinking about it.
Story_ID: 239347
Speaker 1: Tell me about your church life, Ebenezer [Baptist Church, Boston, Massachusetts].  Were you active in the church as a youngster or a teenager?
Speaker 2: Well, as a youngster, it was, it was pretty unconditional.  You know, you'd, you'd get up, and you'd have breakfast, and you go to church.  Wasn't nothing to discuss.  I joined the church when I was fourteen, not at anybody's urging.  I remember being there, and I, I really felt something, and I joined.  As I got older, you know, I found myself on occasion going to a movie on Sunday, which I wasn't supposed to do.  I remember one year I tried out for the baseball team, high school baseball team.  And they were having practice on a Sunday, and I had to figure out how I was gon' (laughter), how I was gonna do that one, boy.  'Cause I remember going to church with an out of season heavy coat on (laughter) with some of my baseball paraphernalia under the (laughter), oh God.  And I showed up at the practice, you know.  So I was in church with the wrong stuff, and I went to practice with the wrong stuff, you know, 'cause I, I didn't have the right shoes on.  And it happened to be muddy that day in the field and all of that.
Story_ID: 239348
Speaker 1: When you were at English High School [Boston, Massachusetts]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you're midway through your graduating, did you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --have a notion or thoughts about what you wanted to be and do after high school?  Did you have any career--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I--
Speaker 1: --notions that were clear at that one--
Speaker 2: --I was very keen on some kind of intellectual pursuit.  I wasn't exactly clear what.  You know, I didn't, it wasn't that I would, I want to be a X.  You know, I didn't know exactly what it was.  But probably the closest thing that I came to think about, to be specific, was, as a journalist, probably.
Speaker 1: As a what?
Speaker 2: Journalist.
Speaker 1: Journalist.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, probably.
Speaker 1: So you graduated English High School--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in what year?
Speaker 2: Fifty-two [1952].
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-two [1952].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what happened after graduation?  Where did you go?
Speaker 2: I got out of dodge, man (laughter), 'cause I knew Boston [Massachusetts] was not the place for me.  I didn't have, I didn't have the, an idea about why.  I mean I, I didn't have a political analysis.  I didn't have a social analysis, but I did know that I was, had survived up to that point by my own, in my own head creations.  I was living in my own head, you know.  And a lot of that was as a defense mechanism.  And even though, you know, my family stuff was, was very nurturing in many ways, there was a lot of stuff going on there that I didn't want to continue being a part of, you know.  So anyways, I, I had made a choice to, for not very good academic reasons, or almost probably delusional reasons, but nonetheless, I'd made a choice to go to Drake University [Des Moines, Iowa].
Speaker 1: Drake University [Des Moines, Iowa]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Des Moines, Iowa.
Speaker 1: Why Drake?
Speaker 2: Why?  Well, I said it was probably pretty delusional.  To get away, for one thing.  I didn't really, I didn't want to go next door.  I wanted to get away, and I certainly achieved that.  But what brought Drake to my consciousness was, there was, Drake had a very good football team during that time.  And they had a black player who was, had attained some national fame.  His name was Johnny Bright.  And there had been a game with Oklahoma State [Oklahoma Agricultural and Mechanical College; Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma] that attained national attention because there was a--and Bright was an All-American.  And so there was a play with Oklahoma State that Bright, who was a fullback, was not engaged in the play.  The ball went one way, and he went another way.  But somebody from Oklahoma State went after Bright and broke his jaw, and that attained national celebrity.  And that's how I found out about Drake University.  So it just interested me.  Let me get in touch with them and--I mean I'd applied to a number of other schools, but let me, hmm, something about that that just interest me.  I don't know what it is.  So, of course, they wrote back, and they had a lot interesting pictures (laughter) and a lot of interesting narrative, hmm, think I'll go to Drake University.  That's about what it was, all right.
Story_ID: 239349
Speaker 1: We've got you to college and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you went through Drake University [Des Moines, Iowa]?
Speaker 2: Well, I think part of what I left out in terms of high school [English High School, Boston, Massachusetts], which is important also, is that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I played ice hockey.  I was the only pigmentation floating around the (laughter) ice in all of New England (laughter), right across the street, Boston Arena [Matthews Arena, Boston, Massachusetts].  That's where we played our games.  That's where all the high school games were.  Also, Bruins had a minor league team.  They played there too.  Drake--I did not play football in high school, but I played sandlot football.  Drake did not have a hockey team, but there was a semipro team in Des Moines [Iowa], so I played for them.  And then I played, even though I had not played high school football, I went out for the Drake football team in the freshman year, and I was, and I was on the team, made the team.  So, I, I did that, and I carried on with my, tried to carry on, with my kind of political stuff, which at that time was at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] level.  My uncle, my mother's [Marguerite Calvin Hicks] brother, who I dearly loved, had gone to one of the southern schools and had been a Kappa [Alpha Psi Fraternity].  And so he instructed me I had to join Kappas.  So, when I went off there I joined the Kappas, but that lasted for about a minute too.
Speaker 1: Did you pledge or actually cross the sands?
Speaker 2: No, I did not cross.  During the time when you make the paddles and you line up and go on through there, and they swinging that thing and then asked me did I like it (laughter).  I said no, man, I don't like this at all (laughter); in fact, you can keep it (laughter).  So, that ended my Kappa days.  Des Moines was quite segregated, no signs, but it was quite segregated; five thousand students, fifteen other students, other than me, who were black, none of whom I particularly got on with.  I spent a great deal of time at a place on Center Street, which is Des Moines' version of--(unclear), had a little place on the weekends where you knock on the door, and somebody opens the thing and peeps out, lets you in, and these blue lights and people playing some real down home blues and dancing that's quite close, you know, smoke--(unclear)--so I'm there in a corner with a pad of paper and pencil and listening to the music, and it's, it was comfortable, it was comfortable.  And there were some, there were a couple of teachers that were quite good, and I really zeroed in--this is connected to the church thing--I really zeroed in on religion courses, you know, and that whole theological, almost Jesuit, pursuit of knowledge and philosophy, you know, and it just fascinated me, you know.  So it was that and journalism, you know, that really were good, were good for me.
Story_ID: 239350
Speaker 1: How long did you stay at Drake University [Des Moines, Iowa]?
Speaker 2: I stayed there through my first semester of my junior year.  I was working incredibly hard, both in terms of classroom stuff, I was taking like eighteen hours a semester.  I didn't come home [to Boston, Massachusetts] for Christmas or any of the holidays.  I had two or three jobs to try to support myself.  Tuition fees were a problem, and I was beginning to feel very guilty 'cause my parents [Marguerite Calvin Hicks and Louis Hicks] were not having an easy time here.  And they were on the verge of losing their house.  And I, again, you know, was, Drake was not the best decision, but there I was.  And, but I was, again, pretty much by myself, both as a matter of the situation but also as a matter of personality.  And I think I was feeling a combination of things.  But I have to go back a little bit--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --to make this clearer.  I did my first year, summer year, at Camp Unity [Wingdale, New York].  You know, I found that an extraordinary experience, you know, the people.  I, I was a dishwasher, but you know, the people I met.  And I mean there was a lot of hanky panky going on, but I, that didn't even register to me, you know (laughter), to everybody else, but not, not to me (laughter).  But they used to have all these lecture things going on, and it was just an extraordinary experience.  They had a cultural committee there, you know.  And on that cultural committee was a man, who later played the role of the principal on the TV show 'Room 222,' or 227, or whatever it was.  Do you remember that TV show?
Speaker 1: Vaguely.
Speaker 2: Okay, and a guy named Phil Rose [Philip Rose], who was a singer, who later became a Broadway producer.  Bill Tatum [Wilbert Tatum], it's where I met him, you know, you know, of the [New York] Amsterdam News, you know.  He was the athletic director.  Sarah [E.] Wright, who wrote this novel, 'This Child's Gonna Live,' which is now a classic, was on the cultural committee.  Lorraine Hansberry was writing 'A Raisin in the Sun.' She was on the cultural committee along with her husband Bob Nemiroff [Robert Nemiroff].  And they would have a concert or a theater production every week during the summer.  And other people would come in, and there'd be these lectures on the law and stuff.  It was just incredible.  Lorraine Hansberry at the time, in addition to writing 'A Raisin in the Sun,' was the editor of a magazine called New Challenge magazine.  And I was doing some writing and not for any particular thing, but she and I became friends.  And when I went back to school, she asked me to be a columnist for this magazine, New Challenge, which was--it was a monthly, and I was sending in some articles from Des Moines [Iowa].  And I was feeling kind of guilty about my parents 'cause they were struggling so much here, and I wasn't happy there.  The long and short of it is that I made a decision to leave.
Story_ID: 239351
Speaker 1: And so I started out hitchhiking from Des Moines [Iowa] to Chicago [Illinois], 'cause I had written a letter to Staglehart [sic. John Herman Henry Sengstacke], 'cause I wanted to see about getting a job at the Chicago Defender--(unclear).  And, and we, I got there, and we talked, and, but nothing happened.  And I moved on to Baltimore [Maryland], 'cause growing up, you know.  We got the New York Amsterdam News and the Baltimore Afro-American [Afro-American Newspapers] every week.  You know, I read those things like every word (laughter), especially the articles in the Baltimore Afro-American of Bill Worthy [William Worthy], you know.  And I actually did work there for a while.  Oh, dealing with the segregation that existed in Baltimore at the time was quite something.  And then I, you know, maybe that was maybe a couple of months, and I left and went to New York [New York].  But there was this dual thing going on with me, and that was the, this incredible pull that religion was having with me, not in terms of any kind of particular praise or any denomination adherence, and I'm not even sure it was about faith, frankly.  But it certainly was about inquiry and a certain kind of discipline, intellectual discipline.  And I'd be having these conversations with my grandmother [Lenora Calvin] about it, you know.  And I remember her saying to me: you done gone off to college [Drake University, Des Moines, Iowa], now you think you know something (laughter), 'cause I'd have these conversations about the church (laughter).  And this is important because it mirrors the 24 Wabon Street [Boston, Massachusetts] dichotomy between the first floor and the second floor, between--(unclear)--Christianity or religion and Marxism, you know, that's represented on these two floors, because that followed in terms of what I actually started doing.  You know, I started becoming very much involved with politics from a Marxist perspective and trying philosophically to integrate that into the, into a working theology, you know.  So, initially in New York I worked on 7th Avenue pushing those garnet things, rickshaws is what I call 'em, you know.  And then, of course, me with my, at that time, with my Jesus Christ mentality, I started talking to my coworkers about forming a union (laughter).  So I didn't work there very long (laughter).  You have to forgive me for laughing.  This is kind of funny.  I haven't thought about this stuff in a long time (laughter).  And I met a guy who became a great friend, who died a few years ago, unfortunately, but anyway, Tom Dent.
Story_ID: 239352
Speaker 1: I got some consultant work through him [Tom Dent], writing book reviews and then also through him, as a researcher--that's what they called it, really wasn't, but that's what they called it--at Time magazine.  And, and when the Montgomery Bus Boycott started and sit-ins started, I, through another friend, I got in touch with a film company, Ricky Leacock [Richard Leacock], to go south with a hidden microphone, briefcase, and go through six or seven different states getting oral history on what's going on.  You know, so I'd go into a, you know, a department store where black people could not change their clothes, or women could not try on stuff or whatever.  And I'd go into the store manager's office.  And I mean so it was--(unclear)--like this stupid little boy from who knows, from Mars, you know, asking ridiculous questions.  And I just put the briefcase down there.  And they talked (laughter), 'cause they just knew this was an idiot.  I'll say anything I wanna say, right.  And it was a wonderful experience, and it got made into a movie that [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou narrated and so on.  It was, it was quite--I took a leave of absence from Time to do that.  I went into my supervisor's office, who was a woman from Boston [Massachusetts], tall, willowy lady, with typically New England tweed suit.  And this is, was the whole interview.  Her name was Content Peckham [ph.].  You can't beat that then, you know.  And she said okay, you can do that.  But when I came back, it was a different story, you know.  And through my friend, Tom Dent, I got a job as a reporter with The New York Age on 125th Street.
Speaker 2: And you were all of twenty, at this point?
Speaker 1: No, no, no, early twenties.
Speaker 2: Early twenties.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 239353
Speaker 1: I worked for them [The New York Age] for a little over a year I guess, year and a half, something like that, did a lot of, a lot of stories for them, with them.  But I was still trying to find stuff, and I, through Sarah [L.] Wright, who I'd met at Camp Unity [Wingdale, New York], I became a member of the Harlem Writers Guild [HWG], which was organized and run by John O. Killens [John Oliver Killens].  And people met at his house in Brooklyn [New York, New York] every Monday night to read works in progress, you know.  John Henrik Clarke was part of it.  At the time, he was running an elevator at Macy's, believe it or not.  From some time [HistoryMaker] Maya [Angelou] was part of it; and Rosa Guy was part of it; Sarah Wright was part of it.  And it was through my activity, my involvement with the Harlem Writers Guild that I met members of the Congolese delegation to the United Nations [UN].  They were in the Unite- out of the Congo for the first time, didn't speak English.  Rosa Guy, as part of the Harlem Writers Guild, was fluent in French, and so we became their family.  And then when [Patrice] Lumumba was assassinated and so forth, members of the Harlem Writers Guild, were, became the cutting edge for organizing, along with the, the nationalists of 125th Street, around Michaux's Book Store [African National Memorial Booktore] and all that, because the leading edge in developing picket lines and so forth at the United Nations and then later, that big to-do at the United Nations where we went in and tore the place up, essentially.  So I think it's from that--now, all the time now I'm really, by my own study, I probably accumulated two degrees by now in terms of my own stuff.
Story_ID: 239354
Speaker 1: At what point did you reconnect back to attending a college or university?  Did that--
Speaker 2: Oh, it was quite some time later--
Speaker 1: How, how--
Speaker 2: --quite--
Speaker 1: --much later?
Speaker 2: Oh, years, years, yeah.  I, well, let's see--
Speaker 1: Did you stay--
Speaker 2: --I'm talking--hm?
Speaker 1: --were you staying in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Through the, through the '20s [1920s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm talking now--
Speaker 1: I mean through the '50s [1950s] rather; I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Now, from about '59 [1959], very heavy activity in cultural/political stuff through maybe '66 [1966], yeah, maybe '66 [1966], '67 [1967].  And then I started teaching, first at The New School [New York, New York], and then at Richmond College [College of Staten Island] in Staten Island [New York], which I think is a four-year school now, I think, but at the time, it was a two-year school; Long Island University [Brooklyn, New York, New York] on Flatbush Avenue; Brooklyn College [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Were you teaching at several of these place at the same time?
Speaker 2: These are part time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, part time, but--
Speaker 2: These, yeah, these are all part time.
Speaker 1: --overlapping, or were they sequential?
Speaker 2: No, overlapping.
Speaker 1: Overlapping.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: So you taught for how many years roughly then at these?
Speaker 2: Well, I did that from maybe '66 [1966] until I left New York, and I left New York in '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: And where did you go?
Speaker 2: I came back here.
Speaker 1: Back to Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  At the time when I left, I was working full time at a anti-poverty agency in Brooklyn [New York, New York].  Prior to that I had been at Mobilization for Youth [MFY] on the Lower East Side [Manhattan, New York, New York] when it first started.  It was the first anti-poverty organization in the country, and a number of other consultant things.  I mean the, there was never a time when I was just teaching.  But the guy named Singer [ph.], who was the chair of the sociology department at New School, asked me if I would be interested in a full-time teaching position at Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts].  And along about that time, the kind of intensive political stuff that I'd been doing was really coming to a close.  You know, there's, a new era was coming.  And I had to ask myself, you know, what was I gonna do, you know, and--(unclear)--got two young children at the time, by now.
Speaker 1: You had, you had two children?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: When were they born, when you had the children?
Speaker 2: About '67 [1967] and '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: And their names?
Speaker 2: Calvin J. Cinque Hicks (laughter).  It's a whole, that's a load, boy (laughter).
Speaker 1: How do you spell Cinque?
Speaker 2: C-I-N-Q-U-E.
Speaker 1: Oh, Q, okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: And your daughter?
Speaker 2: Marguerite [Hicks Gyewu], named after my mother [Marguerite Calvin Hicks].
Story_ID: 239355
Speaker 1: So anyways, I said to this guy, yeah, I'd be interested.  And the first thing that had occurred to me was by now I had been away from Boston [Massachusetts] for sixteen years.
Speaker 2: Sixteen?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Secondly, my grandmother [Lenora Calvin] was in a nursing home, and thirdly, even with all of the stuff I had been through, it's amazing that I was very naive, that Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts] as a primarily, as a Jewish institution, would be a great place to go because we would both understand that we come from the same place, and that there's overlapping Semitic relationships.  And there's just this vast of territory that we can mutually--I mean how dumb can you be, right (laughter)?  Oh God, anyways, so they invited me up, and everybody in Waltham [Massachusetts] interviewed me.  But you know, they, I got the position and of course--
Speaker 2: And what was the position you were appointed to?
Speaker 1: The sociology department, yeah.
Speaker 2: In sociology?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, and of course, they talked forever about this first black sociology professor.  You know, it was just like my name was [HistoryMaker] Calvin Hicks.  It was first negro (laughter).
Speaker 2: Where there other blacks teaching there when you arrived?
Speaker 1: Oh--(unclear)--where?
Speaker 2: At Brandeis.  No?
Speaker 1: (Shakes head) Black studies.  Ron Walters [HistoryMaker Ronald Walters] was running black studies department--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --at the time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Transitional year program, this guy named Golden Hawk [ph.], who was running that.  Yeah, there was an out-[Thomas] Sowell, who's now out at Stanford [University, Stanford, California], you know the--what's his first name?
Speaker 2: Tom?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Tom.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he had an office in the same--he was right across the hall from me.  He was teaching in the economics department.
Speaker 2: Did the Brandeis experience, was, did that help you?  Was it positive--
Speaker 1: It was terrible.
Speaker 2: --at that point--it was?
Speaker 1: It was terrible.
Speaker 2: What happened, briefly, briefly?
Speaker 1: It was cold, it was cold.  And the institution I thought was insincere.  When things were going rather well in Israel, then their focus was on be, becoming a little Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  When things were not going well in Israel, then it was a Jewish institution, and it was, it was, it was not a pleasant experience at all, not at all.
Speaker 2: So you stayed there how long?
Speaker 1: Oh, I, at the end of that year, I went to Mound Bayou [Mississippi] to do an oral history.
Story_ID: 239356
Speaker 1: When you came back to Boston [Massachusetts] and you're teaching at Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts], where did you reside?  Where did you move back to?
Speaker 2: Oh, because my grandmother [Lenora Calvin] was in a nursing home, and I had these two children [Calvin Hicks, Jr. and Marguerite Hicks Gyewu], and their mother and I was together at the time, I got a house in Auburndale [Massachusetts].  Turned out, my grandmother left all that, didn't want her--
Speaker 1: She what?
Speaker 2: She didn't want to stay out there, but, but that was the intent.
Speaker 1: Who didn't want to stay out there?
Speaker 2: My grandmother.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: The idea was--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --to get a, this big place, not only for my kids but for my grandmother's as well.  At that time, her husband had died.  And then at the end of the year, their mother chose to go back to New York, right, where, where she was from.  So I moved to Cambridge [Massachusetts], a smaller place on Hamilton Street in Cambridge.  At the end of the year I went to Mound Bayou [Mississippi] to do this oral history, but just before I left to go to Mound Bayou, somebody from Goddard College [Plainfield, Vermont] came to visit me and said that they had just got the board of trustees to approve the creation of a third world studies program.  Would I be interested in taking that over, actually creating it?  I said I don't know.  I'm going to Mississippi.  I'll get back with you when I return.  When I got to Mound Bayou, I was so thunderstruck that I literally felt I was walking on ancestral bones, I mean literally.  I think I could have stayed there and done several sermons.  I mean I, it was incredible.  So I said to myself, I'm gonna go up to Goddard.  I'm gonna talk to the president, and if he goes along with what I'm gonna propose, I'm gonna, not gonna go back to Brandeis.  And what I proposed was that this program is a, is a new thing, that you haven't gotten anything.  It's just been approved by the trustees, but there's, there's no entity there, so I have to create it.  I want you to know if you give me this job, that when I think the program is ready, we're moving to Mound Bayou.  And I expect you to continue to confer the degree, and I expect you to continue to financially support it, 'cause I'm chase--I said I don't have any great desire to live in Mississippi, but I'm chasing an idea here.  There's a concept here about how teaching and learning is done and what it, what teaching and learning for black people ought to be about.  I'm not sure he knew what I was talking about, but he said okay.  And so I went to the chair of the sociology department at Brandeis.  I said I, I want a leave of absence.  And I guess that's a lot of gall after being in a place one year, but that's what I said.  And he said okay, but I'd have to come back once a month and teach a course, and so that's what I did.
Story_ID: 239357
Speaker 1: I want to establish something if I can, because I see some similarities between the development of your intellectual pursuits, and your activism, and the teachings that you were doing, and John Henrik Clarke.  Maybe I'm on the wrong track, but you had, you had not achieved your undergraduate degree at this--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --okay.  And so your life was very much similar to, to--
Speaker 2: I mean I didn't, I didn't walk around with a sign--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --saying that.
Speaker 1: But, you know, but John Henrik Clarke had the same kind of development.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did he influence you in any way?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you know him well?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Did he influence you in any way?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, one of the, aside from both of us being members of the Harlem Writers Guild [HWG], when the initial stuff happened at the United Nations [UN] around [Patrice] Lumumba, there needed to be a follow-up and an organization--well first a newspaper was created called On Guard out of the Harlem Writers Guild, and I became the editor of that.  Then there was an organization that was called On Guard Committee for Freedom, and I was the head of that.  John Henrik Clarke was part of the On Guard Committee for Freedom.  Then when Robert [F.] Williams' stuff happened in Monroe [North Carolina] and North Carolina, the Socialist Workers Party, which had been, you know, after Robert for a long time around the whole business of negroes with guns and that kind of stuff.  And they were sponsoring lecture tours for him and so forth.  And so they came out with a committee called the Committee to Defend the Monroe [sic. Committee to Aid the Monroe Defendants], something--I've forgot the exact wording of it, but it was a committee to support Robert after he had to leave North Carolina.  And Mae Mallory was caught in Cleveland [Ohio] and arrested, and Robert, we ended up in Cuba.  And people like myself, and [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis, and John Henrik Clarke and a bunch of other people, we formed the Monroe Defense Committee, which was ideologically absolutely different than the Socialist Workers Party thing.  And, and John Henrik Clarke was very much active in, in that.  Yes, John, I was, John was, which I think a lot of people probably don't know, was he was extremely funny, had a helluva wit, laser-like.  And then your head would be on the floor, and you didn't even know it (laughter).
Story_ID: 239358
Speaker 1: We had talked about your experience with John Henrik Clarke in New York [New York].  And we had gone to that avenue of--we were also talking about your going to Goddard College [Plainfield, Vermont] to Mound Bayou [Mississippi].
Speaker 2: --you might want to--you know, this Harlem Writers Guild [HWG], Congo, United Nations [UN], On Guard newspaper, and then On Guard Committee for Freedom, and then Monroe defense committee [Committee to Aid the Monroe Defendants].  The On Guard stuff is also linked very much to the stuff that Tom Dent had started.  It was called Umbra magazine.  And my involvement with [Amiri] Baraka at that time, you know, LeRoi Jones, might be of some interest if you--
Speaker 1: Well, why don't you do that briefly, go ahead, continue it then.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: --you can go ahead.  This is your show.
Speaker 2: Once, you know, the, the stuff at the United Nations really was big in defense of the whole idea of liberation in the, in the Congo and in defense of Patrice Lumumba before and after he was assassinated.  And it really marked the beginning of my having some real leadership role in a fairly substantial part of a particular band of the New York population, you know, that cut across several kinds of boundaries.  It cut across racial boundaries because of the involvement of organizations such as the Socialist Workers Party, the Communist Party, the Workers World Party, it cut across ideological grounds.  It involved people, black people from one end that might be represented by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Color People] all the way up to the black nationalists, and the Nation of Islam, and Malcolm [X], and lots of stuff in between.  And again, personally I was trying sometimes purposely, sometimes with some consciousness, and lots of times not, but still trying to put these things together, the, the theological and the Marxists positions and to weld it into a black perspective, you know.  And [W.E.B.] Du Bois was certainly one of my mentors, and I was never close with him, but he and I talked on occasion.  He was one of my sponsors with the, with the creation of the Monroe Defense Committee.  William [L.] Patterson and Ben Davis [Benjamin J. Davis, Jr.], people like that, were very much a part of my circle.  I never, I never joined the Communist Party, but I had free reign to it in ways that many members did not, you know.  So it was a, it was a huge task that I had taken on for myself, even, and I don't think I knew the full dimensions of the task I'd taken on, on for myself.  If I had remembered, I would have brought, I still have a couple of copies of that newspaper, the On Guard newspaper.  I would have brought it--
Story_ID: 239359
Speaker 1: So a friend of, who I'd come to know named Walter [Augustus] Bowe called me up one day, after the first issue of the On Guard newspaper came out.  And Walter Bowe you may remember from a event when the United States government accused him and two other people of threatening or planning to blow up the Statue of Liberty, and the Liberty Bell, and the Washington Monument.  Well, that was Walter Bowe (laughter).  He called me up and said, "There's a guy down on the Lower East Side [Manhattan, New York, New York]"--I was living on Henry Street at the time--said "his name is LeRoi Jones [Amiri Baraka] (laughter).  He started this new organization called [An] Organization of Young Men--and you two need to get together," so we did.  And there were a bunch of people who were, some of whose names you would know now who were part of the, they were all really Lower East Side people.  But the names that probably would come to mind would be [HistoryMaker] A. B. Spellman and Archie Shepp, were part of this thing.  So I explained to them what was happening with the On Guard stuff, which included members of the Harlem Writers Guild [HWG], and some black nationalists, and some people my age who were probably more ideological.  The LeRoi Jones stuff, he had written a call to all organiza--creation of an Organization of Young Men.  But they weren't clear what they were doing.  They really weren't, we just, they knew they had to do something, but they didn't know what.  The upshort of that was that Organization of Young Men and On Guard Committee for Freedom became one organization.  And because I was following this Marxist formula, there was a central committee.  And LeRoi became the director of the central committee, and I was the head of the, the whole thing.  Into that mix came a lot of different kind of people.  Harold Cruse was one of them, came into that mix, and that made it very interesting.  After a while, you know, well, I became much more involved with Monroe defense committee [Committee to Aid the Monroe Defendants] than On Guard Committee.  But that was another ideological thing between existing parties on the left, you know, principally Workers World [Party] and the other Socialist Workers Party and the Communist Party.  Communist Party didn't want anything to do with Robert [F.] Williams because they had hitched themselves to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], into the integrationist mode.  The Workers World was absolutely revolutionary, and Socialist Workers Party was somewhere in the middle.
Story_ID: 239360
Speaker 1: You brought all this rich experience, ideological thinking, organizational development, meeting with all of these different positions and so on.  You brought all this back to Boston [Massachusetts].  I mean, you came back to Boston with just all this experience, right, and--
Speaker 2: No, when I decided to take the job at Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts], I definitely, I was in a groove and a--
Speaker 1: You were?
Speaker 2: In a groove.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean there's, there's no question about it.  I was, I wasn't the least bit ambivalent about any of that.  You know, I was, I--and one of the first things I did, I had a meeting out there.  I brought Mel [HistoryMaker Melvin King] and--
Speaker 1: Well, well, my question--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --was this though, you're bringing--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --all this back home now--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --out of a whole different environment and world--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to a wholly different place.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How did all this fit back here?  That's what I was getting.  I knew where you were.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: You were in a groove, but you came out of all this experience.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But how did it fit back here at home, this place that you had left?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did it all fit, 'cause Boston was--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --atypical of, you know, how did it all fit?  I know you went to Brandeis; you went to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--
Speaker 1: --Goddard [College, Plainfield, Vermont], but how did--
Speaker 2: --living in Auburndale [Massachusetts] satisfied the bourgeois side of me (laughter).  You know, I, I did not dislike that at all.  I thought it was great.  It's a wonderful house.  You know, wasn't nothing modern about it.  It was, you know, it was, had a--of character, so to speak.  I loved it.
Speaker 1: What years were you there again, just so can I get back on track?
Speaker 2: I, I came to Brandeis in the fall.  I left New York [New York], came to Brandeis the fall of '69 [1969].  My, and being on a university campus teaching was absolutely fine.  What was not fine was the insincerity of the enterprise, which is a product of my naivete.  It's not a product of them being on the wrong course for them.  It's a product of my naivete.  They were doing what they set out to do, you know.  What was also not nice was that I had no way to connect with the Boston community, black community.
Speaker 1: That's what I was getting at.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had no way to connect, you know.  One of the things I found about New York, I mean from the first day I hit New York, I was home.  I, I had, I mean, my physical gait picked up.  I, I mean, I was home.
Story_ID: 239361
Speaker 1: --That, that reconnect is what I was trying to get at--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And ask you what--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --how did you get back and how did, what kept you here?
Speaker 2: I, I didn't, I never, I mean I kept--there was a place in New York [New York] that we all used to go to and I wrote about it extensively one time.  It's called Stanley's on Avenue B and 12th Street in the Lower East Side [Manhattan, New York, New York].  It was a wonderful place; it was a wonderful place.  I kept looking for a Stanley's in Boston [Massachusetts] (laughter).  I kept, I mean I looked everywhere (laughter).  I, I used to ask people: where do black people go in Boston?  What do black people do in Boston?  It was and continues to be one of the strangest things in my life is I don't, I don't get it; I really don't get it.  I mean by this time I've kind of given up on it, but I, I didn't connect.  Now, I had some friends here, and my sister [Marjorie Hicks] was here, and other, you know, and my father [Louis Hicks] was still here, grandmother [Lenora Calvin] was still here, cousins.  And I was very busy.  You know, I became involved with [HistoryMaker] Willard Johnson and the guy who was his partner, whose name I can't think of now, who was teaching at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], 70 or 90 Warren Street.  There was ins-
Speaker 1: Cir, Circle [Inc., Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I became involved with them, but I never really, I never really connected at all, and it was very troubling, it really was.
Speaker 1: But you taught at Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You were at University of Massachusetts [Boston (UMass), Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: No.  Well, both--
Speaker 1: This, this came after that, right?
Speaker 2: University of Massachusetts as Boston, but I was doing that on a part-time basis.  That was as a consultant, really.
Speaker 1: Were you at Brown before that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Brown came after, after that--
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about--
Speaker 2: --if I remember correctly.
Speaker 1: --the UMass experience, teaching and learning--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --institute.
Speaker 2: Well, they, they had a, had a job that they were doing.  I guess they were contracted by the Boston school system [Boston Public Schools (BPS)], I guess, to put together this thing called Another Course to College [Boston, Massachusetts], which was to take freshmen and sophomores, I believe was the concept, and put them in an environment, a learning environment that would offer them some possibilities to successfully go to college.  And so I wrote this--excuse me--rather lengthy document that gave some, some teeth to the general concept, which was put into, into practice and ended up with the school that exists by that name.
Speaker 1: And it still exists today?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it's on Joy Street [at Peter Faneuil School, Boston, Massachusetts] I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 239362
Speaker 1: When I was with the Boston [Public] Schools [BPS]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the '80s [1980s] it was a very--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --important program, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause that was, that was a contribution--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that--
Speaker 1: --and it's a lasting contribution.
Speaker 2: --that took awhile to, it was about a year to, to write that.  Yeah, I think another contract that I had at the time was with Paul Cusick, who at that time was the director of the Cambridge [Massachusetts] economic council [Cambridge Economic Opportunities Committee] I think.  And he was wanted to have a study of police community relations in Cambridge.  And so I, I was, got a contract to do that.  That was a very lengthy study 'cause I went into a lot of stuff in Cambridge, not only with community people and the police department, but even into the housing patterns of Cambridge and the con--the positive and negative contributions of Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  That was a very lengthy job.  But the coming from New York [New York] to Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts] I came with such excitement.  I--(unclear)--part of it was because I was returning home, you know, first time in sixteen years.  Secondly, I wanted to do this good work for my grandmother [Lenora Calvin], you know, take her out of the nursing home.  And I was excited about, you know, my kids [Calvin Hicks, Jr. and Marjorie Hicks Gyewu] were very young, so I was very excited about my ability to do that kind of thing for these, for and with these kids, you know, and I really enjoyed it.  I really did, but I was severely disappointed.  I--(unclear)--the, the rabbi out there at one point invited me to go to the Hillel house.  And he had put together some kind of a conference on black/Jewish relations or something like that.  And that's another part of my life.  Tell you I should have known better, but I really went with an open heart, I really did.  But these folks were just waiting.  I mean they had researched everything I'd ever said and done in my life (laughter).  And there was no dialogue.  It was a bunch of questions: did you, is it true that you...  I mean, it made me angry.  But more than making me angry, it, it really disappointed me 'cause I had come there with this silly idea that we could do something, you know.  The other part of it was that the, the black students I found disappointing, at least the ones that I came in contact with.  I won't say that about all the black students, but the ones I came in contact with in my classes.  And I would, I know I took pride in my teaching and, and what I was trying to do.  There's politics connected to my being there; there's politics connected to what I'm doing, but what I'm doing is not politics, you know; I'm teaching, so there's work to do.  And one semester the, the whole business of grades became such idiocy that I finally said you know what, we really need to get to the issue here.  So let's just consider--I wouldn't do this now, but I did it then--let's just consider that everybody in here's gotta B.  You all gotta a B.  So are we through with this now?  Let's get to do some learning.  Probably for a good reason, that didn't go over too well with the school.  And the delegation came to my house to talk to me about it (laughter).
Story_ID: 239363
Speaker 1: How was your Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --teaching experience different from Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts]?  You spent considerably more time at Brown.  How, how--
Speaker 2: Oh, it's a whole different--
Speaker 1: --was that different?
Speaker 2: --whole different--
Speaker 1: How was, how was it different?
Speaker 2: Very different.
Speaker 1: How would you briefly compare the experience there?  Why was it different?
Speaker 2: I think one of the differences--the, this is kind of like my sidewalk psychology.  I don't think the--I think there were a lot of black students at Brandeis who really didn't think they belonged there.  You know, in the second semester there were some who said to me when I gave assignments, man, you just like the white teachers.  They actually said that to me: you giving us all this work to do.  At Brown that would have never come up.  They knew they belonged there.  They expected to be there.  They expected work to be done.  And if somebody had treated them in the way in which the Brandeis students appeared to say that they wanted to be treated, but I don't believe that was true either.  I think that was a defense--the Brown students would have been, would have objected strongly: what's wrong with you?  You know, this ain't no game.  You gotta take this seriously, you know, and they did.
Speaker 1: What courses were you teaching at Brown?
Speaker 2: I did one history from 1865 to 1920.  I did another sociology course, and I did a third one--can't remember what it is--did a third one, humanities course.  I've forgotten which one it was.  What--
Speaker 1: Now, in addition to teaching--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you had some administrative--
Speaker 2: Yeah, init--
Speaker 1: --positions there?
Speaker 2: --initially, it was the associate director with admission.
Speaker 1: Of admissions?
Speaker 2: Yeah, which was a very time consuming position but very interesting, but not one that one would want to do for a long time.
Story_ID: 239364
Speaker 1: Tell me about your Third World Center [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island]--
Speaker 2: The Third World Center--
Speaker 1: --initiative.  Was that something your started or--
Speaker 2: No, no, it had been there before and was pretty dormant.
Speaker 1: So what did you do with it?
Speaker 2: Well, we, it was in a place on the campus called Churchill House.  Churchill House housed--it was three floors--it housed a Third World Center on the, in the basement; the first floor was a performance center in a big lobby.  The second floor was afro studies and an organization called Rites, R-I-T-E-S, and Reason [Rites and Reason Theatre], which was run by George [Houston] Bass, which was a theater group.  The three of us worked together on just about everything, all right, theater interacted with afro studies, afro studies and theater interacted with Third World Center in terms of lecture series, community-based school where people from the community could come in.  And I got faculty to teach certain courses there.  (Unclear) pretty wide variety of courses there.  What else did we do?  Boy, you're making me really think.  (Laughter) It's been a long time.
Speaker 1: Did you find the Third World Center activities fulfilling and--(unclear)--feel that you made accomplishments there or?
Speaker 2: Up to a point, up to a point.  It didn't have the funding that it needed to have.  The building facility as improving.  When I took it over it was in pretty wretched shape.  When I left it was much better, but it wasn't where it needed to be and probably isn't where it is now.  It wasn't ranked as high within the establishment as it, I think, it should have been.  So it's, it's, it was, it was  strong, probably less of a struggle there than it would have been at some other institutions.  But the place where I was doing that which really made the connection between vocation and avocation, so there's no, there's no split, was at, was at Goddard [College, Plainfield, Vermont].  Now that's where it came, that's where it truly came together without any conceptual problems, you know, a lot of other problems, but not conceptual problems.
Story_ID: 239365
Speaker 1: Where did you go after you left Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island]?  What was your next move?  You left there in nineteen--
Speaker 2: Eighty [1980].
Speaker 1: Eighty [1980].
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, well, that was a period where I was have, had difficulty, you know, getting--first, I took some time off 'cause I needed it (laughter).  But when I had finished taking the time off, you know, I had some real difficulty finding another, another position.  I did some part-time teaching at Bunker Hill [Community College, Boston, Massachusetts] for a while, and then I, that's what it was unt--and then I went to Cambridge College [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I got a master's [degree] from Cambridge.  And then I worked at, after graduating from Cambridge College, I worked there for a while.  And probably about a year, I guess, I worked at Cambridge College.  I think it was probably about a year.
Speaker 1: And then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then I went to Roxbury Community College [Roxbury Crossing,, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Roxbury Community College?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: You were on the faculty there--
Speaker 2: No, I was not on the faculty.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me, tell me about your--
Speaker 2: I was there was the, initially as the--well, the way they had an administrative we set up I think is different now, in divisions, the business technology division, the science division.  I was the division head for liberal arts, which is the biggest division in the school.  I was under, in liberal arts.  Under that heading was the, the child daycare center wellness program, English, social sciences, humanities, the arts, bilingual.  All of that was on the--
Speaker 1: Pretty, pretty big umbrella, very broad--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: --yeah, a lot.
Speaker 2: So I did, so I was head of that until the, the, the dean of academic affairs got into a, was relieved of his position, and then I became the dean of academic affairs.  And then a new president came in.  A Charles Howard [sic. Dr. Walter Howard]--I'm not sure his first name is Charles, but his last name was Howard--came in from Florida.  And, and then I think probably his second year there, something like that, along with some other people--well, I could see stuff on the wall (laughter).  And I just went into 'em, because there were some things that normally should have been left to the dean of academic affairs to do in relationship to faculty.  And he started getting in that.  So I just went to him one day and I said let's make a deal, you know, 'cause I, I don't want to come here one day and find my office locked, you know.  So that's what we did, you know.  So that was 1990 when I left.
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety [1990]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  Now, I did not have a chance to teacher there--
Story_ID: 239366
Speaker 1: So you left Roxbury Community College [Roxbury Crossing, Massachusetts] 1990.  What was next, we, what happened next?
Speaker 2: I exhaled a bit and did some part-time teaching again at Bunker Hill [Community College, Boston, Massachusetts].  Then I came to the [New England] Conservatory [of Music, Boston, Massachusetts] in January of '92 [1992].
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your twelve years here.  I think it's been close to twelve years.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did you find this faith?  What did you do when you first got here?  Was this a new position?  Was it something that hadn't happened here before?  Tell me about the beginning years and things you worked on.
Speaker 2: Well, it's been and continues to be a very complex engagement interaction.  The position was not new.  It, it, it started in, in one incarnation in the 1970s when Gunther Schuller was the president of the conservatory in, along with some innovation such as the creation of the jazz department, which was a first in American classical conservatories.  He also started something called community service.  And the person who was running it then was well known in Boston [Massachusetts].  He just died two or three years ago, and he was living in Maryland I believe.  He's the one who wrote the theme song for WGBH [Boston, Massachusetts] program, 'Say Brother,' ['Basic Black'] the musical theme.  His wife is here, Tanie, Tanya Brown [sic. Marjorie Black] I think.
Speaker 1: Tanya Brown?
Speaker 2: I think so.  I think that's her name.  Anyways, he was, he was a music, musician, was head of a, had his own orchestra.  And they had access, provided access for the community people to take classes at very little money.  And frankly I don't know what else they did, but I know they did that.  And then, and it was an independent--not independent.  It was an autonomous division within the conservatory and apparently was, was pretty well funded and had some integrity and some muscle.  After the Gunther Schuller era it got, it lost its independent departmental status and was shifted to the extension division, which was at that time principally the Saturday prep school.  And there were some contracts to hire people to go into a couple of public schools and provide music courses.  There was a small tuition assistance program.  As far as I know, that probably was about it.  Well, I guess you could say without going into a whole bunch of detail, you could say that it devolved from something fairly active to this catchall outreach, you know, not enough funding, not regarded seriously, not a part of the core mission, very much on the margins kind of stuff.
Story_ID: 239367
Speaker 1: So you saw this as an opportunity or a challenge to do something that--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely a challenge.
Speaker 1: And so what'd you do--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --initially?  How did you, what did you start to work on?  What were some of your initiatives?
Speaker 2: Well, when I got here [New England Conservatory of Music, Boston, Massachusetts], it had, it had become part-time position.  It was a guy staff here who was running a beginning adult educational program, part time, and community service, part-time.  And community service considered of a one day a year gospel jubilee in Jordan Hall [Boston, Massachusetts], where the conservatory put up two or three thousand dollars to pay for the use of the hall, and take care of the expenses of using the hall, and to hire a graduate, namely Darnell Patterson [sic. Donnell L. Patterson], to identify people to bring in and put on the stage to have a gospel jubilee.  The conservatory did not consider this to be part of its universe.  They were doing a community service to allow black folks to come in once year and go crazy, all right, just y'all can sweat all you want, you know, get 5:00, you're leaving.  And don't nobody be operating under the idea that this is part of (laughter) the conservatory stuff.  This was service.  Y'all come enjoy the hall, and tear it up for one day, right, then go.  So that was one thing.  Dispensation of this tuition assistance pro--
Speaker 1: Well, can I say (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: How did you change that concept?  What did you, what have you done with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the first year I, it was January when I came, that the, the performance was in Febru--the third week of February.  That had already been set.  And so I just observed.  And there were a couple of things that I observed.  One was that I almost didn't recognize the music as gospel.  I didn't know what it was.  Secondly, the quality I thought was quite poor.  It was a lot of noise but not much art and not much gospel, you know, in, in the terms of good news and all that.  Thirdly, there seemed to be a competition between the choir conductors, 'cause there's principally choirs between the choir conductors, you know, like, 'cause people were, like, kind of saying to each other without saying it: hmp, you think that was something, I got something for you.  Let me bring my choir out here.  Fourth, that there was not an exchange between the audience and the stage about what was going here, or maybe there was an agreement, but it was an agreement about the wrong stuff; that just as I thought I saw choir directors be competitive with each other, that as a group or as a musical constituency made up of choir conductors, that they had agreed that they were going to take on the audience.  So the audience is made up at least a third, if not a half, of white people, who it seemed to me had all said to themselves: it's time to go to Jordan Hall and see all this black sweat; you know, let's go dive into all this energy.  And the choirs on the stage said we're gon' give you somethin'.  It was, it, it, it was, it wasn't right; it wasn't right.  Now, I didn't say that to any of them because I wasn't absolutely sure I was right, you know, not even all that sure now.  But that's the way it seemed, that this was entertainment; it wasn't church; wasn't spiritual; it wasn't good; and it was competitive.
Story_ID: 239368
Speaker 1: Did you change this?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I'm still in the process of changing it.  But I think--
Speaker 1: What have you done, what have you done over the years (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, one of the first things I did was to name it the Thomas A. Dorsey Gospel Jubilee, to give it a nexus, to give it focus.  The second thing I did was to change it from one day to two days.  The third thing I did was to make it more traditional, that is to bring in people like the shape note singers.
Speaker 1: The what singers?
Speaker 2: Shape note--
Speaker 1: Oh, shape note.
Speaker 2: --singers from Atlanta, Georgia, to bring in a singer from Port-au-Prince, Haiti, to give it some kind of way of linking up with a historical motif, you know, to be put in some other kinds of sacred music.  One year we did the, some Duke Ellington sacred music with the tap dancing.  And all, all of that wasn't successful, you know.  Had a hard time the year I brought in the Haitian people, 'cause some black folks said why you bringing that voodoo up in here?  Which really knocked me for a loop, for somebody to say something like that.  But gradually, there was absolutely a change.  And then the next thing I had to do was to take it out of this gift to the community status and make it a part of this institution [New England Conservatory of Music (NEC), Boston, Massachusetts] that it absolutely takes responsibility for.  And so that kind of came as a happenstance.  I used to have meetings in this room after every jubilee and to go over, you know, problems and bring the head of the PR [Public Relations] department, the audio visual department, et cetera, et cetera.  What went right?  What didn't go right?  And one of the things in the third year that I brought up was that the week before there'd been a concert here celebrating the music of Thelonious Monk.  And in that concert there was all kind of support stuff that I had asked for and had not gotten, and I asked why.  And as it was, very simple, because those events are NEC event; yours is not.  What make, would make it an NEC event?  Oh, if you had NEC people performing.  So I organized the NEC Community Gospel Choir (laughter).  And frankly, I didn't care if they just went on stage and said boo and went off.  But I was and still is a viable part of the institution.  It is now a curriculum course in the adult education division.  It's been going on, this is its ninth year now.  It travels all over the place.  It's been to Jamaica twice.  They go all over the place, and they're very, very good.  So since that point, amongst other things, it has absolutely become, out of four hundred concerts that are given here every year, it is the most popular, right.
Story_ID: 239369
Speaker 1: In the year 2000 I formed a [NEC] Millennium [Gospel] Choir, which is two hundred voices, from thirty churches around New England, all right.  And that year was the first year I brought in a big name outsider, brought in Richard Smallwood for the first time.
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: Richard Smallwood.
Speaker 2: Smallwood?
Speaker 1: Yeah, for the first time that year.  And the two hundred voice [NEC] Millennium [Gospel] Choir sang with him, right, on the first day.  The second day I said I want an even bigger perspective aperture, so I, I want to take it to a church, the second day, take it out of Jordan Hall [Boston, Massachusetts] to a church.  But it can't be just any old church.  It's got to be a church which by its, on its own maybe architecturally, maybe some other way it has distinction.  So I took--(unclear)--Cathedral of the Holy Cross [Boston, Massachusetts], right.  Jordan Hall seats a thousand people.  Cathedral of the Holy Cross seats two thousand people.  We had 2500 people, plus law was there.  And I remember walking down Worcester Street and then crossing over to Washington [Street] and Milwaukee [sic.], and I was really very apprehensive.  It was a big risk.  And there were buses in the street everywhere.  I mean you couldn't, if you were driving you couldn't, you couldn't have done it.  It was incredible.  It was absolutely--
Speaker 2: And clearly all of this is--
Speaker 1: --incredible.
Speaker 2: --I think is a signal--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: --achievement and accomplishment that--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you brought here.  In the position of the community collaboration--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --give me another example--
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: --of what you consider to be a major accomplish otherwise.
Speaker 1: Here?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that you brought here--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah--
Speaker 2: --in this position as--
Speaker 1: --yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: What else, give me another one that you think is--
Speaker 1: Well, I can give you a lot 'em (laughter), actually.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, give me, give me one and maybe do another.  I'm sure you can, but give me your favorites.  Give me the biggest ones--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the most challenging.
Speaker 1: Well, they're all (laughter) challenging--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --now.  Ain't none of it easy (laughter).  There's, there's plenty of lashes on, on my back, man.  We developed a Thomas A. Dorsey Gospel Institute [Thomas A. Dorsey Institute], 'cause in the, no matter how well the performance in February is structured, there's a limit to what you can do if you're trying to teach something.  So the institute was yield--I'm, I'm sorry--a week long in July, with nine to five, twenty-four workshops, three seminars, and then at the end, a big closing performance.  And the seminars are on the things that have to do with various, how various ministries within churches can, should, do, and don't operate, ministry of music and the, and the pastor, for example, you know, minister of music and the choir directors.  How do you do that?  And that's, that's a big thing, depending upon which church, denomination you're talking about, certainly different with Church of God in Christ and it wouldn't be with a Congregational church, right.  That was very successful.
Story_ID: 239370
Speaker 1: This past year I changed that and got rid of the Thomas A. Dorsey Gospel Institute [Thomas A. Dorsey Institute] and created the Institute for the Study of African American Sacred and Secular Music [ph.], so gospel fits in there, but it's not limited to gospel.  And this year we'll be doing the sacred music of Duke Ellington, probably, not certain yet, but probably at the, at Eliot Congregational [Church of Roxbury, Roxbury, Massachusetts], probably.  We have brought to Mississippi Mass Choir here as part of [Thomas A. Dorsey] Gospel Jubilee, cars--(unclear) Gospel Jubilee, last year, Richard Smallwood for a second time.  Two years ago, under the banner of the Thomas A. Dorsey Gospel Institute at St. Cyprian's [Episcopal Church, Roxbury, Massachusetts] church, we did the sacred music of Mary Lou Williams, and it was really terrific, with the NEC [New England Conservatory of Music, Boston, Massachusetts] big band, jazz band, the NEC Community Gospel [Choir], and Cecilia Smith came in from New York.  You know, she's at the xylophone with her in a rhythm section.  And we did a lot of research with Jazz Institute [sic. Institute of Jazz Studies] at Rutgers [The State University of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey] on Mary Lou Williams.  It was actually the music that she did as a mass at St. Patrick's Church [sic. St. Patrick's Cathedral] in, in Manhattan [New York, New York].  And it hadn't been done since, first time ever in Boston [Massachusetts], and it was really terrific.  So, so now we have the institute on sacred secular music, which, which is evolution from the Gospel Institute.  And then, under the auspices of the summer school, I do an institute on memory and society.  And last year, well, it's a whole long line of things that come under that, immigration, adaption, technicians of the sacred, and a whole bunch of things.  And that was a week long.  It has Horace [Clarence] Boyer come in, and he did a, does a certain section for a couple of days and accompanied by a film.  In his case, it was 'The Music We Cry To' [sic. 'The Language You Cry In'].  Are you familiar with that film?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It's a, it's a film, that, it's from the Georgia Sea Islands, well, the Sea Islands, both on Georgia and South Carolina--(unclear)--that depicts a couple of generations, or maybe more than a couple, several generations of black people in Georgia and South Carolina who were brought up singing a particular song.  And as far as they knew, it was just a kids' family community--(unclear).  Some cultural anthropologists, who were black, initially started trying to study this thing, and over time they discovered it comes from Sierra Leone.  And the relationship there is that most of the slaves who were in the low, Carolina low country are from Sierra Leone because of the rice.  And that's the chief crop in Sierra Leone, is the rice.  Well, they go through all these towns and villages of Sierra Leone, and they find people who know this song, right, over decades and decades between the separation.  So there's a delegation from South Carolina that goes to this village in Sierra Leone where these anthropologists have found people who know this song.  And the connection is, I mean there's a lot of tears and stuff.  And, and it's, 'The Song We Cry To,' you know.  So Horace Boyer takes the part of memory that that depicts and talks about that.  And we had people from the Georgia Sea Island Singers come up.  They take another part of the memory thing.  And then Willie Ruff from Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] came, and he takes another part of the memory thing.  His is much more--he's a wonderful musician, but he's very much into music of the spheres and stuff like that.  So that's another thing that I find is a huge, well, I'm very proud of, proud of that.
Story_ID: 239371
Speaker 1: I was just gonna say, all the things that you experienced--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --all the transitions that you made, all the organizations and people that you interact with and learn from; you came back to, to Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts]; you went to Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island], and then you brought all that here [New England Conservatory of Music, Boston, Massachusetts].  Has it all come together for you here or not?
Speaker 2: Well, to some extent, maybe just 'cause of who, how old (laughter)--(unclear)--I guess I'd say anything at this point (laughter).  But--
Speaker 1: Do you feel at this point--
Speaker 2: Fulfilled?
Speaker 1: --fulfilled in--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: --what you're doing right now?
Speaker 2: I feel comfortable with what I'm doing, because what I'm doing, what this place essentially has allowed me to do is to do a--within certain guidelines, namely money, of which there is not nearly enough, and I've learned to just do what I'm doing and not to look for the institution to give me the kind of credence that what I think I do deserves, and what I think the communities of Boston [Massachusetts] deserve, and what I think they deserve, if they had sense enough to know it.  I do what I do, and I don't have too much within the guidelines I've talked about, which are principally money, I don't have too much opposition.  I've learned how to do that, you know.  First couple of years I came, I, I was telling people off every day and telling them what they ought to do and what they need to do.  I don't do that anymore, you know, so, if in that sense, there's a kind of a comfort zone, and I don't feel particularly thwarted.  On the other hand, by no means do I think that I've reached the summit of my physical, intellectual possibilities, or desire, or energy, or wishes, you know.  And, and I'm probably not likely to be here very much longer because I think, frankly, it's time for me to not be here (laughter).
Story_ID: 239372
Speaker 1: How have you felt and how do you feel now, the fact that you have come back to your home community to your neighborhood.  And you are now working right here [New England Conservatory of Music, Boston, Massachusetts], a few blocks from where you were born and raised and went to school?  How has that felt to you?  What has that meant to you, to be back here?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's always, it's, it's always an existential moment throughout the moments of the day (laughter) that I can't necessarily put in some kind of neat narrative, but I'm supremely aware of it, supremely aware of it, you know, and that it's there, it's there, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: From Richmond College [College of Staten Island, Staten Island, New York] to Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island] to Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts], all the institutions where you--Roxbury Community College [Roxbury Crossing, Massachusetts], right on down, Goddard [College, Plainfield, Vermont], of all those institutions that you have been a part of and interacted with, which of those institutions holds the, the fondest memories in your academic intellectual experience where you felt that you were most at home and really felt you made an impact of all those where, where believing the conservatory--(unclear)--a minute, coming down the line?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I felt at home at any of 'em.
Speaker 1: You don't know what?
Speaker 2: If I felt at home--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --at any of them.  I mean I've always been supremely aware that my chutzpah, notwithstanding that I've been a visitor, a guest, sometimes welcome and sometimes decidedly not welcome, but, and for different kinds of reasons.  But I think that where I think I've made the most im--I have to even stop there.  What I started to say, well made the most impact I think was at Goddard, but then that may not be true.  I, I, I made, in fact I've made the most impact here.  But I think I can say that I've made the most impact, within the contact of a, of a designated bias of what I wanted to accomplish, a theoretical construct, a paradigm of what I, that I went into it with and had some measure of success matching up with that idea that I went into it with would be Goddard.
Speaker 1: Goddard?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Before I end up with some last questions for these interviews, is there anything else that you'd like to add to this interview that I haven't asked you about?
Speaker 2: I think probably I would go back to the Goddard thing, because I think the attempt there was to develop a sense of autonomy and independence not only physically but intellectually and was certainly struggling with what did we mean by that.  Now when the Goddard thing was offered to me I laughed.  Why in the world would anybody who's got one or two functioning gray cells want to go to Goddard College, especially if they're already ensconced in a place like Brandeis?
Story_ID: 239373
Speaker 1: I neglected to say before, in the midst of this kind of decision-making between continuing at Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts] or going to Goddard [College, Plainfield, Vermont], was that I had also gone to Barbados during this time and spent some time at The University of the West Indies [at Cave Hill] in, in, in [Cave Hill] Barbados, which was connected to what I was doing at, at Brandeis.  So, why would anybody want to, you know, go to Plainfield, Vermont, for goodness sakes, where, you know, the philosophical ideas that gave birth to Goddard were, you know, some very controversial ideas of John Dewey and was a place that seemed to be lacking in seriousness, seemed to be.  At that time, which is the early '70s [1970s], you know, there were a lot of efforts going on around the country to create black schools outside the system at all levels, a number of them at the university or college level.  One of the most successful one was on in California, Northern California, right down the road from Stanford [University, Stanford, California].  One of the things that was troubling to me about some of these efforts was that they were wrapped in afro-centric construction, which was fine, both in terms of history, and dress, and rituals and so on, and a lot of people had left the formal schooling to go to these places.  But the trouble was, along about the sophomore or junior year, it kind of hit people, I don't have a degree; what now?  Nor did these places have any funding of any great measure.  So there's the question of institution building, and how do you build an institution that lasts for more than six weeks?  How do you forestall that kind of disappointment, you know.  What is the educational mission?  How do we make that balance between what is educational soundness for a particular population, which in this case happens to be African American, but still maintain integrity around the whole process of discipline and an, and intellectual approach and, and learning, you know.  Being stupid is not the equivalent of being black.
Story_ID: 239374
Speaker 1: So all of that was in my mind when I left Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts], say, and I got this teaching thing here at this particular esteemed institution.  And it's, you know, it's, all things considered, it's pretty soft, you know.  And here I have a chance to really make some decisions about what education is and isn't, could and shouldn't be.  And to do it within a university, or in this case college, that has agreed that when I say I'm ready, I'm getting out of here and going to [Mound Bayou] Mississippi.  And they're gon' continue to give me the degree that I can confer, and they're gonna continue putting money in it.  Lord, have mercy, when has that ever happen to black folks?  Do what you want to do.  Say what you want to say.  Get a degree and be funded, right.  So that's the kind of decision I made, which a lot of people would say was a terrible career move and probably was, but it made sense to me to, to do that.  Now the first time I went to Goddard [College, Plainfield, Vermont], which was when I was still investigating whether I was gonna take it or not, they had a bunch of black of black students--and by a bunch, I mean about twenty--who had declared themselves to the third world studies program.  And they were sitting up in some dormitory.  Now, there's no entity.  Now, the board of trustees has just agreed you can have it, but there ain't nothing happening. Well, there was; there was one student, the other students had said you a teacher, teach drum and dance or something, okay.  And I walked into this place, and the music is playing.  And I'll tell you, there was enough marijuana going on there to just take one, just inhale once, and you would have been levitating, right.  That was the third (laughter) world studies program.  But I knew that this is what I should do.  I know, I mean I had to make some big time changes to get something going.  But we did it.  We did it, had an incredible faculty that I put together over about a year and a half, incredible lineup of courses that were really serious.  Goddard didn't have nothing like it in no aspect of its, of its institution.  And my decision-making was absolutely correct.  The second year at Brandeis, I said what you gon' do?  Well, I said I'm gonna still--third year, they say hey, man, (laughter) you've got to make some decisions.  We can't keep this up, right.  So I said okay.  I'm to Mississippi.  And I went to Mississippi soon, one year sooner than I, than we were ready for.  The, the president, board of trustees, decided to up the tuition.
Story_ID: 239375
Speaker 1: By this time, I had also created a, a graduate school, third world studies graduate program [at Goddard-Cambridge Graduate Program in Social Change], which was, the office was here in Boston [Massachusetts] and--it was actually in Cambridge [Massachusetts].  And at the time, Mel [HistoryMaker Melvin King] was still running Community Fellows [Program; Mel King Community Fellows], so, at the location they had right across from the [MIT] Sloan School [of Management, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  So in that building, Mel gave me a whole floor almost to house the third world studies graduate school, right.  That didn't go to well with the Goddard graduate school people.  And then when the president raised the tuition, some students got upset and said if [HistoryMaker Calvin] Hicks didn't have the president in his back pocket, you know, they wouldn't have raised the tuition.  And it was an East Indian guy I had hired part time.  Goddard [College, Plainfield, Vermont] had thrown him out 'cause he was about eighty years old.  And I hired him as a certain kind of wisdom, you know.  But he turned out to be too much of a Brahman, and I had to let him go.  And then he went to the newspapers and said that I was running my area like a militarist and so forth.  So and that got in the papers, and it got to be a mess.  And I said it's time for me to go to Mississippi.  I went sooner than I was really ready for, but we went.  And it was, the idea was not bricks and mortar.  Students were gonna live in homes there.  All of the sciences were gonna be taught out of the Mound Bayou [Mississippi] health center, which was the biggest employer in the little three thousand person town.  And we developed this incredible curriculum.
Story_ID: 239376
Speaker 1: Now, I made lots of mistakes, and that gets back to the point about, about institution building.  How do we go about doing that?  If we've got an idea, how sound is the idea, then how do we implement the idea?  And see, and that is some of what I experienced and I think others continue to experience at Roxbury Community College [Roxbury Crossing, Massachusetts], which if you took away the safety net of the state government, which keeps bailing it out, and you are left to the ideas, that place would have long since been gone, 'cause we haven't determined yet how to build an organization that lasts, at least in this context.  Every time the state or the media come up with a problem around the finance or the fiscal of student aid issues at Roxbury Community College, while I was there, invariably the faculty would say the white folks picking on us because we black.  Yes, well, I'm the last one who's gonna say that ain't got nothing to do with it.  But that ain't the reason, 'cause there's nothing black about Roxbury Community College except the people who go there.  Ain't nothing black in the curriculum.  Ain't nothing black in none of the rituals, pomp and circumstances every graduation.  Everybody throws that--(unclear)--in the air, and they wear the same robes.  Ain't nothing black about that place except that black people go there, right.  All of that was part of why Goddard [College, Plainfield, Vermont]/Mississippi was vocation/avocation all in, all in one and continues to be, as a reference point for me.  And Mound Bayou [Mississippi] was a very special place.  You know, it's, it's, it's full of its own sociology.  You know, there's families, you know, who go to a grocery store on the left-hand side of the main street, which is the only street.  And then some families only go to the store on the right-hand side.
Story_ID: 239377
Speaker 1: I think you've brought great clarity--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --now to all of this--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --great clarity.  And I want to move to some closing questions--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --that you made reference back to some of this, but how do you feel about the way you've lived your life?
Speaker 2: Well, this may be great practice for that great (laughter)--(unclear)--I wanted (laughter).  Oh, gee whiz, well, it come back a Marxist religion slash or dash religion, first floor or second floor.  You know what, if somebody says you do good works, what does that mean?  And you know, if you pay attention to Christianity, it doesn't mean nothing if you haven't made, you know, that personal commitment to what you call God or Jesus Christ.  So, why are you doing these good works?  If we all agree there's good works, why are you doing it?  When you do it, what are you actually doing?  I mean is it for the thing itself?  If you can identify the thing itself and, or is it for some other reason that really you are putting into, to have some kind of moral bank account or ethical bank account?  I don't know the answer to that.  I can only say that it occurs to me as a consideration.  I would like to participate with myself in a life where that kind of question doesn't even come up and that it becomes so, such a flow and so natural that, that I don't have to deal with that kind of notion, because at the point, the point that you even have to deal with it means that it's there somewhere in your consciousness.  So I don't know.  I mean I do, I think pretty much the best I can.  I will never believe that anybody does all they can.  That's one of the great idiotic statement I think especially bureaucrats make: "We did everything we could."  You know, ain't nobody doing everything they could.  But I think I do the best I can or know how to do most of the time.  But I'm not always sure what it, what it's means, which is probably more important to me than knowing whether it's any good or not.  You know, 'cause I could probably take somebody saying it ain't no good, take that much more easily than what does it mean.  But I don't know any other standards that I can latch onto, so my answer to your questions is I don't know.
Story_ID: 239378
Speaker 1: Okay.  What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community here in Boston [Massachusetts] and across the nation?
Speaker 2: I, I think I told somebody before I came back to Boston (laughter) that Boston should be cut off (laughter) from the--(unclear)--just ship it out to the sea (laughter), and you just put everybody who's drawing their last breath on it and ship it out.  You know, last winter Bill Owens had the National Black [Political] Convention, last month I guess it was.  And he asked me to do a vision paper, which I did, which was, ran into a lot of things.  But I think this, one of the central points that I tried to make in it, and this is my answer to your question I think, is that we're in a position where we've never been at, in before since we've been here.  And that is that we no longer operate as a people based on our more vicissitude.  We have made sufficient progress that we are able to be totally confused.  It doesn't operate within the group, and it doesn't operate external to the group.  When there was a certain kind of moral position we had in the country while we were suffering what we were suffering, and maybe because we were suffering, were suffering, we had that more position externally, outside the United States for sure.   I mean even the Vietnam War, Vietnamese say you can go ahead, but we're gonna kill that white boy behind you, you know.  Now, we have, who would have thought, three of the most powerful people on the planet at the UN [United Nations], secretary of state, and head of National Security Council [NSC], all black, and two of 'em at least acting damn fools, all right.  And it's questionable about the third.  Why would anybody anyplace, starting in Iraq let's say, give us or lend to us a certain kind of stature when we are quite likely to kill 'em, right.  Given the fact that the world, in my opinion at least, is tilting way on its side in terms of any kind of logic, it becomes extremely important for African Americans to regain for ourselves some moral position as a matter of survival and truth.  I mean we have to stand for something better than what we're able to purchase as consumers.  You know, we've got to stand, I mean being black has never mean just the color.  It's meant something in terms of how we behave and what our value system is and what kind of strength we have, yeah.  So, I think that if we don't--we've gotta come to terms with that.  I think Boston, Mississippi, Georgia, Maine, wherever, that's where we need to come to because these other advances we make are like, they're important, but they're nothing.
Story_ID: 239379
Speaker 1: Last question: how do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, please, I know I'm getting old now, gee whiz (laughter).  I don't know.  I don't know.  Person of value, that'd be enough.  Person of value, that, that'd be enough, yeah (laughter).
Story_ID: 239380
Speaker 1: That was, well, that's me (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, and when and where was this taken?
Speaker 1: At a friend's house in Cambridge [Massachusetts] probably around 1986, '87 [1987].  No particular occasion.
Speaker 2: That's at, that's me.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's in the presidential library here at the [New England] Conservatory [of Music, Boston, Massachusetts].  It's at a reception that I had for a conference here in Boston [Massachusetts] that I had organized as part of the William Grant Still centenary year.
Speaker 1: That's also me during the summer vacation, 19--I'm sorry in 2001.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay, and say Nantucket [Massachusetts] again.
Speaker 1: Nantucket, 2001 in Nantucket.
Speaker 2: All of those, my grandmother, Lenora Calvin.  The first one I believe is in Randolph, Massachusetts, at the home of her son, Arthur Calvin [ph.].
Speaker 1: And that would be sometime in the 1940s.
Speaker 2: The middle one is outside of her home, 7 Wellington Street, in South End of Boston.  And I believe that would be sometime in the late '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: And the third one is on the porch of the house my parents [Marguerite Calvin Hicks and Charles Hicks] had, 24 Waybon Street in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts].  And that would be sometime in the 1970s I believe.
Speaker 2: First one is me with my daughter.  My daughter I guess is about two years old.  And when I, we were still in Brooklyn [New York, New York], and that's at Jones Beach.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  What year?
Speaker 2: Ah, that would have to be around '66 [1966], around '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Next one is graduation, my graduation from Cambridge College [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  That's my son, Calvin J. Cinque Hicks, and me in the middle, and my daughter, Marguerite Hicks [Gyewu].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Date?
Speaker 1: And gee, I don't even remember when I graduated, probably '84 [1984], '83 [1983], '84 [1984].
Speaker 2: Next one would be 1979, and that's a barn on the property I had when I lived in Uxbridge, Massachusetts.  And my daughter and I are horsing around.
Speaker 1: And the last one is my sister outside my grandparents' [Lenora Calvin and Thomas Calvin] house at 7 Wellington Street [Boston, Massachusetts].  And that's her graduation year, so that would be about 1960.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Go ahead and say that again.
Speaker 1: My, my sister's name is Marjorie Hicks.
Speaker 2: This is outside of Franklin Park, in Franklin Park, Boston [Massachusetts], Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], on a visit I made from New York [New York] to Boston with my--and I'm showing my daughter Franklin Park so she would care (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): (Simultaneous) Approximate year?
Speaker 2: The, '66 [1966] I guess, somewhere--
Speaker 1: This is my son's [Calvin Hicks, Jr.] graduation from middle school in Cambridge [Massachusetts].  And he's the person in the dark suit in the front in the middle surrounded left to right by his sister, Marguerite [Hicks Gyewu], and his mother behind his sister, my father [Louis Hicks] in the back, and next to my father is my sister, and then in front is my nephew.
Speaker 2: Mother [Marguerite Calvin Hicks] and father outside of my grandparents' house, 7 Wellington Street.  And the young fellow there with his mother is me.  And frankly, I don't know what year that is.  Is it, it's not written on there?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Well, you look like you're what, four or five--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that too is outside of my grandparents' house, 7 Wellington.  It's my mother and father.  And I'm, I just don't know the year.
Speaker 2: That's my, my uncle, my father's brother.  His name is Jake Hicks [ph.].  And at that time, in addition to earning his living in the post office, he was a boxer by avocation, and again, I don't know the year.
Speaker 1: Sunshine Band, which was a youth organization at Ebenezer Baptist Church [Boston, Massachusetts], West Springfield Street in the South End of Boston.  And whoops--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Say top row, middle row--
Speaker 1: Middle row, one, two, three, fourth from, yeah, that's me.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay, fourth from the left, middle row.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay, what do you suppose this was or decade or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, decade is definite the '40s [1940s].
Story_ID: 239381
Speaker 1: That's me, same place.  That was the barn next to the house in Uxbridge [Massachusetts], and I'm just posing (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's, that's at the [New England] Conservatory [of Music, Boston, Massachusetts].  That's the year 2002.  It's downstairs outside of a hall called Brown Hall in the Jordan Hall [Boston, Massachusetts] building.  And it's a concert that I had put together.  The person standing with me his name is Kyle Atkins [sic. Carl Atkins], and he worked here at the time.  He was the director of the Thelea, Thelonious Monk Institute [of Jazz Performance], which no longer exists here.  And he was part of the concert that I put on at that time.
Speaker 1: This is also in that same, inside that same hall, Brown Hall, in February of 2001 on the occasion of a re- rehearsal, [NEC] Millennium [Gospel] Choir rehearsal for the February 2001 Thomas A. Dorsey Gospel Jubilee.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This was the opening of Roxbury Community College [(RCC), Roxbury Crossing, Massachusetts] on Columbus Avenue when it moved from, on the occasion of its moving from Huntington Avenue.  And we're on the grounds of the National Museum of Afro-American Artists [sic. Museum of the National Center of Afro-American Artists, Boston, Massachusetts].  And there was a, we set up this tent and so on, and I had put together this celebratory program to announce the opening of the campus on Columbus Avenue.  So, to the left behind me at, I'm at the podium.  To the left is the presi- the president of RCC at that time.  Good Lord, I can't think of the name.  Well, I'm sure you can research it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: No, no before her.  Well, she, she was the president, she was the second president of RCC.  And she was before this guy [Dr. Walter] Howard came from Florida.  She was forced to resign 'cause she had given some money to people who were running, grand total about two hundred dollars, to people who were running for political office.  And I cannot think of her name.  Then the next guy is the painter.  Oy, my mind is playing games.  I'm sure you know who I'm, huh?  Ah, Crite, [HistoryMaker] Allan Crite, Allan Crite; that's this guy.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is [HistoryMaker] Elma Lewis, and oh, maybe that isn't me at the podium.  That's me sitting down there.  Yeah, that's me sitting down.  I'm not sure who that is at the podium.  I think it may be the architect--not the architect, the sculptor, Wilson, you know, the one who did the [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], John, John Wilson.  I think that's who's at the podium, yeah.
Story_ID: 239382
Speaker 1: This is at the Museum of Science [Boston, Massachusetts].  And it, I think would be either '87 [1987] or '88 [1988].  And that's me at the podium, and it's on the occasion of first big meeting of an organization that was co-founded by myself and another person by the name of James Jennings, who at that time was the dean of the, of a department, really a school within a school, University of Ark--yeah, CPCS, Community--College of Public and Community Centers [sic. College of Public and Community Service].  Okay, he was, James Jennings was the dean.  And that, that department was part of U, University of Massachusetts, Boston [Boston, Massachusetts].  So he and I were the co-founders of the organization called Black Educators Roundtable.  And this was a public meeting, the first public meeting of that organization.  And I don't know if I remember any of the people on that panel.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Yeah, yeah, just I can tell you this person right here, can you--that's--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Just indicate to the--
Speaker 2: --that's James Jennings.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, to the viewer's right of the podium--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --immediately to, to your left--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --as you're standing there, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Ah, God, what's this man's name?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: He's at Lawrence University in Wisconsin, Appleton, Wisconsin.  He's an extraordinary musicologist who's done an extraordinary amount of work in codifying the work of African American classical composers.  And I just can't, but he was here.  I brought him here for that same celebration that I talked about early, for the centennial work, and he was actually a keynote speaker.  This is also at the same reception.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, yeah, I recognize the shirt and tie.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the same reception.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, this is that same Brown Hall [Jordan Hall, Boston, Massachusetts], and it's a picture with me of two of my, at the time, two of my work study students.  The one on my life is Kokui, K-O-K-U-I.  I'm trying to speak of the spelling of her last name.  She's from Ghana.  At the time she was a graduate of Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and had come here to do graduate work.  And at the time that picture was taken, she was in her second year of graduate work in the opera department, and she has since graduated.  The person on my right is Craig Lemming, who is still a work study student of mine.  He's now in his senior year, and he's from Zimbabwe.  And that was probably in 2002.
Speaker 2: This is a Romain [sic. Romare] Bearden reproduction, which his estate in New York allowed me to use for virtually no cost.  And it's an enlargement of the program cover that I used that year for the Thomas A. Dorsey Gospel Jubilee, and the year should be on there, '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: The person on the left is Dominique[-Rene] de Lerma, a pretty eminent musicologist, specializing in the classic music of African American descent composers.
