Story_ID: 8390
Speaker 1: My name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton and I am the interviewer.  [Edgar] Carey Lane is the videographer.  Pat Johnson and Scott Stearns are the observers, and this interview is taking place on March 3rd, 2004, at the Comcast Center at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland].  And Mr. Hill if you would begin by please telling us your name, your full name, and spelling it.  Okay.  My name is Darryl Andre Hill, D-A-R-R-Y-L, A-N-D-R-E, H-I-L-L.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And if you could please tell us your date of birth and the location of your birth?
Speaker 1: I was born on October 21st, 1943 in Columbia Hospital, Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: And what's your occupation?
Speaker 1: I am a sports executive.  I'm supposed to say I'm the Director of Major Gifts for the University of Maryland, Department of Athletics.
Story_ID: 8391
Speaker 1: What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I would say pork, in all forms--pork chops, spare ribs, ham, bacon.  I love it. It's good for your constitution.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year is October.
Speaker 1: And your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's another good question, red.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: South of France.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Oh my favorite phrase or saying?  Let me think about that for a minute.  I got one.
Speaker 1: Well when it comes to you, just let me know.
Speaker 2: It will come to me it's just I got a mental block.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: I'll think of it.
Speaker 1: So now lets start and lets talk a little bit about your mother.  What was your mother's name?
Speaker 2: I'll tell you what my favorite phrase is.  "Call it what you want."  Someone ask me a question, I'll say "Aw, call it what you want."
Story_ID: 8392
Speaker 1: So tell me a little bit about your mother [Palestine Hill].  What was her name?  Where was she born and where did she grow up?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Palestine [Smith] Hill like the country.  She was born in Washington, D.C.  Her father [Crawley Fayette Smith] was an electrical engineer, who had an electrical business, and her mother [Margaret Riley Smith] was a, worked in a department store.  My mother was a studious and talented student.  She was valedictorian from Dunbar High School in Washington D.C.  She also was summa cum laude and valedictorian at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  She had actually all As and one C through four years of Howard.  She has two masters degrees and, and something that I didn't know, she had completed her course work for a Ph.D.  She just never told anybody or never used the talent from Catholic University [of America, Washington, D.C.].  She was an educator, worked in the [Washington] D.C. public school systems for thirty-five, forty years, retired, and--good mother, homemaker, wife and all these things, and helped my father [Kermit E. Hill] run his business also.  He had a trucking company and so she kept the books and did the administrative work.
Speaker 1: What can you tell me about her growing up?  Where did she grow up and did she ever share any stories with you about growing up?
Speaker 2: Well she grew up out of northeast Washington [D.C.].  Funny thing was that my parents, their families lived within walking distance of each other so I could go see both grandparents as a kid, and she was raised Catholic and my father's family they were Baptists.  Some of the stories, one of the stories that sticks in my mind when my mother and father were dating, my father was starting his business, he was in the trucking business so he on the first date he came and picked, to take her out in a truck.  So they're going along in the truck.  The irony of it all is that her father lived right next door, grew up right next door to my father.  The house was the adjacent house, so it was kind of a small world.  You know one of the, the--I used to spend a lot of time with my great-grandmother who lived actually to age of 98, and she was born in 1877 and I used to sit and listen to stories and she could tell me stories that her mother and older sisters told her about when Abraham Lincoln was shot [1865].  And that John Wilkes Booth actually crossed their farm in Oxen Hill [Maryland] and the soldiers came and, you know interrogated everybody on the farm in the family.  And I was fascinated when we was a kid, you know, to even know somebody who had direct connections all the way back to the Civil War.  So--
Speaker 1: Can you share some other stories with us?
Speaker 2: Well, let me think about that for a minute.  Well, one of the stories I was telling you about my mother and her days of Howard University and she got this one C and it was in swimming only because she was deathly afraid of the water.  So the teacher said, "Well if you would just jump in and hold onto the side I'll give you a C and you can write a paper and I'll give you a C."  But she had this fear of water and she used to be afraid of dogs, so consequently as a kid we never had a dog.  Finally, they bought us a dog one Christmas, and she grew to like the dog, you know they came very close.  And you know we never named the dog.  So when we wanted him we'd just say "Here, boy." And that got to be his name.  So my father would come home and say did you feed Here Boy yet?  And it just got way out of hand when people would go to the back porch and say "Here, Here Boy."  So one day I was, she was--I came home and she was in tears.  She had Here Boy in her arms, he had been hit by a truck and killed.  And she was so sad and she--to this day I mean she mentioned it just recently that she blamed herself for what--you know she'd say, "Well if I hadn't called him he wouldn't have came running across the street and got hit by the truck."
Story_ID: 8393
Speaker 1: What about your father?  Can you tell me a little bit about him?  What was your father's name, where did he grow up and what do you know about his background?
Speaker 2: My father was, his name was Kermit Hill.  He was born in [December 23] 1913, one of seven children.  And unique thing about my family is, all the males in my family including myself and my son, have all been businessmen.  This is the first job, for example, I've ever had.  I've never had a job.  I always owned my own businesses, my father did, and both of my grandfathers [John Hill and Crawley Fayette Smith], and my great-grandfather, which you know for African Americans during that period of time was kind of unique.  My father started off with one truck, and he was in the commercial furniture and appliance delivery business.  At one point we had dozens of trucks, and he was contracting for large companies.  He contracted for Sears, Montgomery Wards [department stores], the precursor to, to Circuit City [electronic store], group called Sun Radio.  So when you would see those trucks riding around, they weren't--see a Circuit City truck, that's not necessarily their truck.  That's a contractor who's painted their name on it.  So this is what he did and was very good at it.  And he also had a moving company.  He'd move people and I, you know, I, I got a class--a chance to observe that close up you know as a kid, worked on the trucks and when I was in, and during the summers you know when I was in school.  And I did make up my mind that I wasn't going to ever be in the trucking business.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: You know, he was up at 5:30 every morning and I had to stay in every evening till all the trucks came in you know sometimes 10 [P.M.], 11 [P.M.], 12 o'clock [A.M.].  You know it was hard, it was hard work.  You know we could hardly ever take a vacation because he couldn't go away for any standard period of time, leave the business, it was sorta like that.  I, I guess the thing that's most remarkable about my father was the, the image and appreciation that people had.  You know, he was a very well liked person and a very genteel and decent guy.  You know a tough guy but a decent person.  I actually believe that my father never lied to me that I, that I know of and that's just how it was.  And it was an incident once when this company Sun Radio, which was like Circuit City at the time, came around for contract negotiation time.  And by this time I was running the Greater Washington Business Center [Washington, D.C.] which is a business development center, so my father says "Okay I'm going to take you along," and help him negotiate this contract.  And we got in and these businessmen, tough businessmen, the Warsaw (ph.) family, as I can recall, Warsaw Brothers.  And Joe Warsaw, whenever he would get to a sticky point, I was doing the negotiating, he would turn to my father.  You know kind of say "Well, Conrad what do you think about this?"  And he would kind of, you know, condescend or you know he would be you know kind of give where I wouldn't have.  And so after the meeting I kind of postponed the discussions under some pretense and you know we're going back in the car.  And I said "Well pop you know how you let these guys bully you like this?"  He said "Well let me tell you something.  As a black man doing business in a white world in the '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s], if I didn't do it we wouldn't be here."  He said, "But my day was to see you do what you did so it was worth it."  And I you know I got all, emotional you know and I said "Oh yeah, I'm sorry," you know.  He said it was hard but you know it was what I had to do and what I'm used to doing.  So, but you know that was a, a day that sticks in my mind you know.  To this very day. And sometimes you know when I get into a difficult situation, picture of him on the, up on the banister on the, on the bookcase, you know I'd say "Well what woulda pop done you know under these circumstances?"  A lot of times the right answer comes.  You know so if I start thinking about it in a way that he would have thought about it, sometimes I come up with a different answer than I would if I had done it myself.
Speaker 1: Do you have any stories about your father, about how he grew up, his background?
Speaker 2: Well my father never finished high school that I know of.  You know he went to two or three high schools but you know he started working with his father, who was in the trucking business and kind of went in the business.  He actually wound up hiring his brothers, you know to work for him, or some of them, and not a lot, a lot of stories about his youth that I know of.  You know I mean I had a lot of firsthand stories, for example where he was, yeah a guy, he was a nice guy but he had his limits and he had taken my brother [Lorn Hill] and I to the beach once and I guess I was maybe ten or eleven and my brother was young, he was like six.  And you know so he'd say, "Well come on kids, let's go," and you know we kept on playing in the water (unclear) and he came back a second time and said, "Okay I'm ready to leave, we got to leave," you know.  We kept on playing.  We finally got out of the water when we felt like it.  We looked and we saw his car was going off the parking lot.  He left us at the beach.  So you know I had to catch a ride home, you know.  I had, you know there were people there who lived in, back in [Washington] D.C.  Eventually I saw somebody we knew and took her home--took us home.  Of course when we got home my mother [Palestine Smith Hill] was furious at him but you know that's kind of--he said "Hey, they didn't come.  I told them three times."  So it was sort of, you know he--there, there's a lot of stories that kind of fit into that category.  I learned from that lesson you know when I was going to go somewhere with him I was in the car early.
Speaker 1: So it's interesting you mentioned how studious your mother was, valedictorian of her high school and, and your father didn't finish high school.  How did the two get together?
Speaker 2: Well he, he was a bright guy.  As a matter of fact when I was a young guy I, I tested well you know on national tests and IQs [intellegence quotient] and, and people would comment you know "Oh he's getting that intelligence from his mother," you know.  And she always used to say "Hey, it's not me, it's his father where it's really coming from."  She said I'm just a worker you know.  She said I'd go to school, I'd do all the assignments, do everything you're supposed to do.  I'm studious you know and, and I, I give the teachers back what they want.  He said but the natural intelligence, IQ comes from his father.  So, and as, as I got older I suspected that was true.  So they were a closer match than it would appear on paper.
Story_ID: 8394
Speaker 1: What do you know about your ancestors?  Do you know who they were and how far back can you trace your origin?
Speaker 2: Well, I can tell you a real interesting story about that.  My grandfather [John Hill] was very, very fair and at the day of my grandmother's [Lurene Banks Hill] death after, at the repast after the dinner I asked him, started asking him about the family.  Now whenever I brought this question up with my father [Kermit E. Hill], what about your grandfather you know what about--and my father said that "Papa never told us."  He wouldn't ever, we don't know, you know.  He never gave us any information.  So I had a sense that he was going to die soon, 'cause he had said to me, "Well you know I, whatever I was living for--"he was ninety-two at the time so she just--"I just buried her today."  And in fact he, that day he went upstairs to his room and never left it, died about a month later.  He just went, laid down and died more or less you know, peacefully.  Anyway he told me he said look, you want to know the story?  I'm going to tell you something I've never told anybody.  He said "I was born from a union, my mother was a domestic on, basically a big white estate plantation-type horse farm down in Culpeper, down in the Culpeper area of Virginia.  And my father, my father was the head of the estate and my mother was, worked there and I was born and his name was John Hill."  So I said, "Is that right?"  So I go down to Culpepper courthouse, tracking down looking there eighteen something and another and another [1800s], "John Hill born of the union of John Hill and Sarah"--didn't even give her a last name, just Sarah.  So I go, I get a lawyer, 'cause the Hills owned most of the county.  I said "We want to get in line for our inheritance."  And I was expecting a big fight you know.  They said, "Sure, come on in here, no problem."  And took all--I still get stuff till this day.  The family, I guess was fighting over it.  Big, there was big lawsuits and squabbling going on and on and on about this, you know.  So, and you know he never hid it.  I mean you know it was in the books, it was in the, in the files, in the records and so forth.  But I, it was comical when I thought "Oh they're going to be saying, 'Yeah, right,' you know."  They said, "Okay," said, "John Hill had a lot of children."  It was hundreds of them literally.  You know people said that they were his so I, I, I got a kick out of that but I don't know if anything would ever come of it.
Speaker 1: How did, what did the rest of the family think about that?
Speaker 2: They didn't believe it.  I guess you know his, his brothers and sisters who were still living when he died, they just kind of blocked out of their mind that they you know they were, they didn't seem that interested in it for whatever reason.  And the interesting part was that I wasn't the, the heir.  I mean his, my father's oldest brother who was still living, Uncle William [Hill], he was the one--so the lawyers had to talk to him, not to me you know.  And you know that's where it kind of got lost in the shuffle 'cause I, I don't know what became of it, you know.
Speaker 1: What can you tell me about your grandparents [Margaret Riley Smith and Crawley Fayette Smith] on your mother's [Palestine Smith Hill] side?
Speaker 2: Well as I said all my grandparents were businessmen.  So starting with my great-grandfather, his name was John Riley, he was a Cherokee Indian.  And he was born and raised in Indian Head, Maryland, that's funny.  And I used to wonder why they called it Indian Head you know but that's why.  A lot of Indians lived down there in that, in that area.  And he was one of the first minorities allowed to be on the [Washington] D.C. fire department.  He was a fireman and a, and he had a paper hanging business, and you know he was a fireman for a short while but just wound up being a paper hanger.  He died young and you know, I knew a lot about him from his wife, my great-grandmother, who I spent a lot of time with, who helped raise me actually.  My grandfather on my mother's side went to Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] and got a degree in electrical engineering.  He came back here, couldn't get a job.  Pepco [Potomac Electric Power Company], the electric company wouldn't hire him 'cause he was black, even to do you know a basic job, you know, a wireman.  So he wound up fixing appliances initially out of his basement you know.  So you bring your toaster, iron, curling iron, a lot of curling irons.  They were frying up some heads back in them days.  I remember those little stands, I don't know if you remember, little hot thing, little iron thing and you put the curling iron in there, you know.  It heated it up.  He had a bunch of those.  So I used to, used to like hang out you know, watch him do it and then he eventually opened up an electrical shop up on U Street [Washington, D.C.].  And you know very, very interesting man.  You know he was a, a, a devout Baptist.  He played the piano and organ in the church.  I think he was a bit of a player.  He was running around as, as the story goes, and he was kind of stern you know.  And my mother and, and her two sisters, they didn't have any brothers, you know they kind of stayed out of his way.  But you know as they did in the old days everybody lived in the same house.  So my great grandmother, my grandmother and my grandfather lived there and the three girls lived there till they got married you know.  And we didn't think much of it.  It was like a three bedroom house but it was big enough for us at the time, one bath you know the whole nine yards.  And but I you know was always bucking the tide.  You know, I--they were telling me, "Don't be, don't be messing with Crawley," you know.  You know his name was Crawley.  Crawley Fayette Smith.
Speaker 1: Could you spell that Mr. Hill?
Speaker 2: C-R-A-W-L-E-Y.  So Crawley would play the piano.  He'd come home on Sunday after church and play the piano and sing you know in the living room you know and I would crawl under the piano and be pressing on the pedals and stuff you know.  And my grandmother would say "Don't be, don't be messing with Crawley," you know.  I said you know--and I did it anyway.  He never, never did anything.  And he used to call me Rasputin, and I didn't know what it meant, you know who Rasputin was.  When I grew up and found out who Rasputin was I said "Oh, now I see what he was trying to say."  I was bad.  And he used to take me fishing you know, and he and I, I tell you one story that was funny was the--we had some relatives that lived in New Jersey.  So we, he was taking me up there one summer and we were going up the New Jersey turnpike and Crawley drove real slow.  He had this 1948 Plymouth [automobile], I never will forget it.  And he drives slow, what would have taken five, four hours or so, it took all day, just to get to New Jersey.  So we're on the turnpike and he's going about thirty five, right?  Police come.  Police said, "Well you know there's a minimum speed on the turnpike as well as the maximum.  You got to go up to the minimum," whatever that was, let's say forty five or fifty, you know.  And but he didn't you know so a few miles later this police comes back and kicks us off the turnpike, takes us to the exit says, "You got to get off."  So we had to go all the way up through the local yokel streets you know to wherever we were going.  You know we got there the middle of the night seemed like.  And you know poor Crawley.  Crawley was a--he had the right name, Crawley.
Story_ID: 8395
Speaker 1: What's your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: I can remember as a very little kid you know at my grandmother's house you know kind of with my little wagon, and one of the things I used to like to do as a little guy is slide up and down the banisters.  So I can kind of remember sliding down the banisters you know, taking baths with you know, every Saturday you do that, once a week.  You stayed in the bathtub for hours, you know.  You'd get out of the bathtub, your fingers would be all shriveled up.  And I can remember chickens.  Both grandparents had chickens in there.  Now this is both within, in [Washington] D.C., within the city limits.  I mean this is how it was back in the day.  They lived out in northeast.  They had chickens and fruit trees, apple trees and pear trees and cherry trees and grape vines, you know.  So those are some of my earlier memories.  Seem to focus around my grandparents, the more vivid memories.
Speaker 1: What other memories can you share with us, like holidays or special occasions?  What were those like in your house?
Speaker 2: Well Christmas was always a big deal 'cause my parents [Kermit E. Hill and Palestine Smith Hill] were big gift givers.  And then we would have several Christmases because I was a--my great-grandmother was one of thirteen girls, and she had a daughter who had three daughters.  So I was the first male born in the generat--in the, in the family for four generations.  So needless to say I was in pretty good shape.  I was getting the attention from top to bottom, my great-grandmother, grandmother and my two aunts, who were single for a long time. My mother married a long time before her sisters did.  And so I was you know, before they had kids I was it you know.  So my aunts were taking me everywhere and buying me stuff.  So you know the holidays were like a big deal cause I'd have two Christmases.  You know I'd have mine at home, and then I'd go over to my grandparents [Margaret Riley Smith, Crawley Fayette Smith] and had another one and then of course my father's grandparents [John Hill and Lurene Banks Hill].  Well they had more, more grandchildren to deal with.  I was the only game in town on my mother's side.
Story_ID: 8396
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about your sibling, your brother [Lorn Hill] and just tell us his name and give his birth order?
Speaker 2: Yeah his name is Lorn Hill, L-O-R-N, which was, my mother [Palestine Smith Hill] was a language major and so this is a Dutch name, she came up with and he was born on 21st of November, 1948, so he's five years younger, and quite different.  His personality is--considerably more constrained than mine and, and his, you know--and he was the only one in the family that ever had a job, any male you know.  He worked for the [Washington] D.C. government for about thirty-five years.
Speaker 1: What kinds of stories can you tell us about the two of you all growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know we did the normal things that, that kids do and I--it was one of the pictures that I was going to bring here today was a picture of me at naval academy you know in my uniform.  And I guess one day we got a BB rifle [pellet gun] and I shot a hole through my brother's picture.  So we went through the house and shot up each other's pictures.  All the pictures got BB holes in them.  So we still got them--I still got this picture with a BB hole right, right through my nose.
Speaker 1: What did your mother say?
Speaker 2: Probably not much you know.  She was, tried to be strict but it wasn't all that, wasn't all that bad.  You know we, my brother he, he used to like experiment with animals you know so he had a cat, and somebody told him one day cats always land on their feet.  So he'd throw the cat up and the cat land on his feet.  Then he's spin the cat around up in the air and the cat land on his feet.  Finally he goes upstairs and throws the cat out the second story window, cat land on his feet but he didn't see that cat no more.  That cat ran away.  He had to bust.  He threw that cat out the window.  He was gone.
Story_ID: 8397
Speaker 1: Mr. Hill if you will, tell me a little bit about the, the street that you grew up on.  What was the name of the street and can you describe your block for us--(simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --and what your community was like?
Speaker 2: I grew up in a place called Mayfair Mansions [Washington, D.C.].  It's still there.  We've got a bit of a reputation during the '90s [1990s] as having big drug problems.  The Mayfair Mansions was built in the mid-'40s [1940s] and it was the first upscale garden apartment complex built for blacks in Washington [D.C.].  So at the time that I was living there it was you know a black upper middle class community and it was sort of self-contained.  So the only streets in there were the streets, the egress and access streets into the apartment complex.  It was a very large complex so it was a great place to grow up because most of the people who lived there were starting their family so there were a lot of kids.  There were a lot of kids to play with and a lot of things to do, woods and rivers and creeks.  And, and you didn't have to worry about traffic and streets and, and crime and all that stuff because we were kind of cut off.  Now, adjacent to Mayfair Mansion was a low income housing project called Parkside and the elementary school, Neville Thomas School was actually in Parkside.  And so we all went to school together and there was a natural resentment between the, the, the kids in the low income area and the kids that lived in this middle class apartment complex.  But you know it was a good way to get a grip on life and to get to know a full realm of you know the black experience.  So living in close proximity I thought was a good thing to me and I've gotten a lot of, a great deal of long lasting friendships that were developed, you know.  In fact more of my friends today were residents of Parkside than were of Mayfair when I really think about it.  And a lot of them of course went on to do well in various walks of life, some professional athletes, politicians and so forth.  I went back and visited my neighborhood.  My, my daughter, my youngest daughter Maia [H. Frierson] wound up living, moving over there into some apartments that had been built recently in that same area of Mayfair.  So while I was visiting her I went back and looked at my old apartment, you know.  And I can remember because I lived in the very last block of house, apartments and you know, our apartment faced, the back of our apartment faced out on the parking lot and then there was just woods, you know.  And I lived on the second floor in a two-bedroom apartment and there were four other apartments you know in the building.  And you know I can remember who lived in each one of them so, to this day.  You know, all the, the, the young people who lived in the area. And as a matter of fact this recent article that was in the 'Washington Post', a woman calls me and she says "Is this Darryl Hill that used to live in Mayfair?" and I said "Yes."  She said, "You're not going to believe who I am."  She said, "I used to live in the neighborhood," and I said, "Barbara Stewart."  She said, "How did you know?"  I said, "I don't know, I just guessed that it was you."  And she said, "You know you haven't seen me in forty some years."  I said "That's true."  And I, I was just kind of surprised and gratified you know to, to hear from them.  And this was a great place for sports.  We played sports more or less from dawn to dusk everyday you know baseball, football, basketball and this is how I learned to play.  You know we had all the facilities to do it you know because we weren't like in an inner city compacted area.  There were plenty of ball diamonds and open fields and so forth.  So as a matter of fact I was riding down Kenilworth Avenue [Washington, D.C.] just the other day and had a colleague form work with me and I pointed over there and I said this is where I learned to play football.  See that field?  It's still, it's still there.  You know I said, "That's the field I played on," you know.
Speaker 1: What was that visit like for you when you recently went back?  Was it--were you disappointed or what was it like?
Speaker 2: Oh no, it was nostalgic.  I mean it, it felt good because that was a nice period of my life you know I enjoyed it.  You know I got all good memories.  You know, looking up at my apartment you know I started remembering things you know, like, I can remember one, one Christmas Eve and it snowed on Christmas Eve.  You know and it was a lamppost that's still there.  You know like, a little light on it, a little post with a light on it that was right outside of my window.  And I can remember looking out there seeing the snowflakes falling down and couldn't go to sleep, you know, 'cause it was Christmas Eve.  And I saw that lamppost and I said "Dag, that was really, really a deal."  And then, there was another lamppost where they had taken the post out and just left the iron casing and that was the signal post, see.  I would come out with a baseball bat and hit it, "Bong!," and that's when all the kids knew to come on out and play.  In fact, I had, one of the kids that lived over there she said, "I remember you used to hit on that lamppost and we used to come running out."  Now that was, that was really a nice visit to go back and do that.  So then I went and visited you know went by where my grandparents [John Hill, Lurene Banks Hill] lived.  Actually one of the houses is still owned by the family.  One of my cousins lives in it to this day, my father's [Kermit E. Hill] parents' house.  And you know I went and looked around the house, looked in the yard then I went--my mother's [Palestine Smith Hill] parents' [Margaret Riley Smith, Crawley Fayette Smith] house has been sold but it's still there you know so I went and visited them and then knocked on the neighbors' across the streets house and, and the family, the Taylors (ph.) who lived there, still live there you know, and you know the young person answered the door, you know.  But it was like the grandson of the person that I knew.  I said "Oh,"  he said, "I'm Tony" you know, "I'm So-and-So's son."
Speaker 1: How had that--how had your community changed when you went back to visit?
Speaker 2: Well, my, my community has gone through a cycle.  As, as I said it went all the way down to where it became a real hell hole, and you know was crime-ridden and drug-ridden.  And then the [Black] Muslims went in and cleaned it up.  And this was like you know one of those really heroic stories, but they kind of moved in, took control of it.  And now they've rehabbed it and it's kind of made, it's kind of cycled back into you know a reasonably decent place to be.  So that felt good.
Story_ID: 8398
Speaker 1: What sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, well it--one of the things that--fruit trees remind me, because we used to have a lot of fruit trees, and we don't have any.  You know people don't have them anymore.  But back in, when I was a kid you know, like in my house we had an apple tree, we had a pear tree, you know cherry tree, and so when I see fruit trees that kind of reminds me of, of, of the youth.  And we lived--this is funny talking about smells.  Adjacent to Mayfair [Mansions, Washington, D.C.] was the city dump.  It was kind of back off there by the Anacostia River.  It was a landfill area. I mean, it wasn't immediately adjacent but it was walking, dist--you know we could walk there if we wanted to, but we didn't.  But occasionally every blue moon that wind would be blowing in the wrong direction, and that smell would come off the dump you know.  And they would burn the trash in the open, they just burned it you know.  They'd dump it and burn it.  And so these big columns of smoke and paper would go up in the air and then the little black papers would fall down in our neighborhood.  You know as kids we would run around trying to step on them, play games and--but I kind of remember that smell you know coming off the dump.  And then the railroad tracks, there were railroad tracks there.  And one of my grandparents lived right on the railroad tracks more or less, so as kids we played on the tracks.  And so the sounds of the trains, and the smell--railroad tracks have a kind of, unique kind of smell to them.  They still do.  So if you go to some railroad tracks you kind of get that railroad smell.  So that reminds me of my youth, and I can remember my grandparents used the trains to keep time, see because certain trains came through everyday at certain time, you know.  And you know they'd say, "Here comes the 6:02," and so, and I can remember one time when there was a train that came through the middle of the night, and they stopped it, or they changed the schedule of the train.  And my grandmother's was complaining she said, "I can't sleep, 'cause the 4:44 [A.M.] don't come by no more.  You know I'm, I got used to hearing it you know all these hundreds of years you know and they, all of a sudden and there it is and it's not there anymore."  And we used to ride the trains you know as kids 'cause it was a switching yard near my grandparents' house.  The trains would have to slow down to go through this sort of this, this switching area, and it would take a freight train--these were freight trains not passenger trains--it'd take freight trains a long time to, a fully loaded freight train, a long time to get up to speed again.  So we would jump on the trains, hang on the bar, on the little ladder, and we would ride wherever we were going, like there was a movie theater that was a couple of miles down so we'd jump on the train, ride to the theater every Saturday morning.  One Saturday, I guess I'm about twelve [years old] or so, we jump on the train and the train starts picking up speed quicker than normal.  So my cousin Gerald--it was Gerald, Donald and, no Gerald, Donald and Vernon (ph.), they said, "We better jump off."  And so we said, "Oh we can go a little further, we can go a little further."  Then when it started going real fast we said, "We got to jump off," but we were in an area where we couldn't jump off.  You know it was some rocks or something.  By the time we got to the place where we could safely jump off the train was going too fast.  We looked, the train goes on, goes across the bridge in the, down into Virginia.  We had walked around to where we worked--had this little platform in between, these are box cars, they got a little platform, a little thing on them.  So we got around to the platform.  We looked up and the box car said 'Georgia Peach'.  We started saying "Oh no, we going to Georgia. We going to Georgia"  We rode for hours.  Well finally the train slowed down to go across a trestle. And we jumped off and it was a dirt road beside the track.  We walking down the dirt road and we saw a farmer--but you know this is in the '50s [1950s] we, we down in the South, you know, we ain't messing with nobody you know.  Farmer sees us, but we don't say anything.  Cloud of smoke comes up, and here comes a state trooper, picks us up, takes us to the station.  When we told them what happened they fell out laughing.  We were in North Carolina.  We rode all the way through--right across the border, I can't remember the town, right across the Virginia border, North Carolina.  These cops, these white cops were like just hysterical.  You know they said, "These fools all came all the way from [Washington] D.C. on the train."  The people were coming in to look at us.  We're like--and they, they were kind you know they brought us something to eat, they called our parents.  They said, "Okay, we're going to put them on the eight o'clock [P.M.] or seven o'clock [P.M.] Greyhound.  It gets into D.C. Greyhound terminal at like two in the morning.  So you, you all go there and you can pay the fare there, you know we just going to put them on, on the bus right."  So we're on the bus and we get there, so Vernon, you know my buddy, I see his father coming across the terminal, belt in hand.  We said, "Oh lord, Vernon gonna get a whooping," you know.  So my, my other two guys were with me were cousins, my cousins they were brothers, so my father's sister's kids, Aunt Louise [Hill].  So Aunt Louise comes, grabs them and takes them off.  So I said, "Well where is my father?" So she said, "Well he gave me the money for your fare, but told me not to bring you home.  If you can get all the way to North Carolina, you can get home by yourself.  And you ain't to ride the bus or hitchhike."  So I had to walk home from downtown Washington [D.C.], New York--Twelfth [Street] and New York Avenue all the way to far northeast. You know by the time I got home it was breakfast time.  They were sitting, they were sitting there having breakfast, my mother and father [Palestine Smith Hill, Kermit E. Hill] right.  I walked in you know, I was expecting to get fussed at and punished you know, and they were like "Hi."  I said, "You ain't going to say nothing?  Well let me tell you about what happened."  They weren't interested.  They would never let me tell this story.  This is the greatest adventure, and they ignored it.  They act like it never happened.  That was the worst punishment in the world.  I said "Punish me.  But let me tell you about it.  You know, we're on this train,  you know, this happened, the police--."  Uh-uh.  But to this day I brought it up to my mother recently to try to get a reaction.  She said "What?  What train?"  So.
Story_ID: 8399
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your elementary school years.  What was the name of your elementary school and what was life like there?
Speaker 2: Well first I went to Neville Thomas Elementary [Washington, D.C.] which was in the housing projects.
Speaker 1: Could you spell that Mr. Hill?
Speaker 2: Yes, N-E-V-E-L-L, Nevell Thomas [sic, Neval Thomas].  And I was a pretty bright kid so at that time, you know you--they taught at a pace I guess that the average kid could keep up with.  So my mother [Palestine Smith Hill] skipped me a couple of times, but I was basically bored and so then I started getting mischievous.  So then she transferred me to a school called Lucretia Mott [Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], M-O-T-T, which is up near Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and this was supposed to be you know the, the black sort of elite grade school at that time, schools were segregated.  And I went there but I guess I was in a class with, with the teacher's son and, and I was, I would always get whatever the top grades that they would give.  And this, this teacher gave me a, an average grade and made some comment about "Well I ain't going to give him a grade better than my son," or something like that and my mother was furious.  So she snatched me out of there in the middle of the day, you know the middle of a semester and took me to Holy Name School [Washington, D.C.], dropped me off with the nuns, sisters of St. Joseph.  And they, they were, they were ready and able.  And so I, I went to Holy Name School in the fifth grade, and I stayed there to the eight grade, through the eight grade.  I did make a short stop at a school called Charles Young Elementary School [Washington, D.C.], didn't stay there very long.  Then I went to Mott and then I wound up at Holy Name.
Speaker 1: What type of child were you?  Were you well-mannered, mischievous, what type of child were you?
Speaker 2: Yeah I was probably, I guess I, I was mischievous.  You know I wasn't a serious problem, but you know I was like didn't do everything right.  I didn't do all the things I was supposed to do, certainly didn't--wasn't neat and tidy by any means.  You know, I was kind of a practical joker at times.  I used to always try to lay traps for my father [Kermit E. Hill], put, put buckets of water on top of the door so they'd fall on his head, stuff like that.  You had to run the risk you know of what the consequences might be.  That was part of the fun.  So--
Speaker 1: What about your teachers in elementary school?  Were there any teachers who really influenced you or any teachers that you really remember from elementary school?
Speaker 2: The one teacher that I do remember was Sister John Anthony.  She was my eight grade teacher, and she was a big woman and, and her--you know the nuns had different responsibilities you know.  Somebody had the cafeteria, somebody had to take care of the books in the library, and her job was physical labor you know.  So when they had to move chairs or take desks somewhere you know they, the boys in the class you know this is what we did you know.  So we sat up the chairs for the auditoriums you know, and that kind of stuff.  And I was still you know I was still a bad, you know a, a mischievous student but not, you know, not unruly, but you know I was always doing something funny.  And so when I did stuff like that she used to make me sit in the trash can under her desk you know.  I was crowded up in there.  And the kids used to be rolling.  They got a big kick out of that.  But she also used to--you know they were competitive.  We were talking about Gonzaga [College High School, Washington, D.C.] and the entrance exam, and the exam was competitive.  And at that time we'd say seven hundred kids taking it.  It was over a couple of thousand kids took it, 'cause there were less high--Catholic high schools at that time, in fact there were only three.  It was [Archbishop] Carroll [High School], St. John's [College High School] and Gonzaga, then DeMatha came along, it was four.  So you had a lot more people trying to get into these schools, and she used to coach us on these entrance exams.  We'd stay after school, certain students, you know spend some time and go through this stuff.  And it worked for me 'cause I wound up finishing third you know out of a couple of thousand applicants in, in Gonzaga entrance exam, got an academic scholarship to Gonzaga you know, based on that competition.  So you know she had an impact and I really liked her.  You know she was, she was funny, she was, she was, she was good at, good at her job and good at what she did, you know.
Speaker 1: At this time in your life, while you were in elementary school, did you have dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't know what was going on.  I was just living from one day to the next.  You know you just--you know one thing for sure I mean you knew you were going to go to college, at least I did.  You know there was no question about that it was just where.  So, but that's about far as it went, you know.
Speaker 1: Were you starting to develop a love for football?
Speaker 2: Well I loved all the sports, I was, oh yeah.  You know I, I was a sports player and, and one of the things that helped me having skipped grades, I wound up playing sports as a young person with older kids.  So, so by the time I got to high school and started catching up with kids my age and I was better than they were, 'cause I was used to playing with older, older kids.  I was only--when I played football as a senior in high school I was only fifteen so I was still, still young.
Story_ID: 8400
Speaker 1: What about church?  Did you and your family attend church, and if so, what were your experiences there like?
Speaker 2: My mother's [Palestine Smith Hill] side of the family as I said were Catholic, and--except her father [Crawley Fayette Smith], who was Baptist.  But my great-grandmother, grandmother [Margaret Riley Smith], they were devout Catholics.  My great-grandmother went to mass everyday, you know at six o'clock in mass before she did whatever she was going to do that day.  And you know I went to church.  I went to Catholic grade school and Catholic high school.  The thing I liked about being Catholic was you get out quick.  I used to be laughing at my Baptist friends you know, they'd be in church all day.  We'd be on, on the ball diamond, and they used to be so mad.  So I, you know, and so back then you know you just, as they still do now, you took up the, basically most people took up the faith of their family you know.  Your family was Baptist, that's what you did.  So I was glad you know.  I said, "Boy I sure am glad I'm Catholic."
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of your church?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I never will forget it.  It was called Incarnation, Church of the Incarnation [Washington, D.C.], and it was a little church that was right, you know like two blocks from the grandparents' house.  And it's like a big old church now over on Eastland Gardens [Washington, D.C.], but at that time it was a small modest church.  And, and my father's [Kermit E. Hill] family they went to a church called Zion Baptist Church.  It was also a little church.  It's now a big, a big, big church today you know.  And I can remember that little building.  It was like leaning, you know I used to tease and say, "You got the Leaning Tower of Pisa church, you know your church leans."  And you know my, my grandmother [Lurene Banks Hill] was real active in the church.  You know she was in the (unclear) and you know all the other ladies' things as, as well as my mother's father.  My mother's father went to my father's father's [John Hill]  church.  All the rest of the family went to the Catholic Church.  Then I wound up going to Gonzaga [College High School, Washington, D.C.], of course with Jesuits.  Jesuits were Catholic, barely.  They weren't very reverent, I would say.  They were educators mostly.  I mean I really adored the Jesuits because they, they challenged you academically which was a good thing, and they let you go as far as you could go.  So the education at Gonzaga is without parallel, I don't think, nationally you know.  And the national tests and merit scholars and all that bear that out, year in and year out.  So they know their jobs.
Story_ID: 8401
Speaker 1: At this time in your life as a young person, who was influencing you and who did you want to be like?  Who were your role models?
Speaker 2: Well I certainly wanted to be like my father [Kermit E. Hill], only because--one day one of his friends said to me, he said, "You know something, everybody loves your father."  You know just like that.  You know so I said you know you, you always aspire to be like that, and it was probably more subconscious than conscious at the time.  'Cause when you're around things or around people who are a certain way, you take it for granted.  You, you really don't recognize what they're really bringing to the table until you get out there in the world and you see others, and say, "Man, this is a pretty good father here," you know, by the scheme of things.  So as far as people outside of the family, you know I, I didn't have any real heroes per se.  You know there were athletes of course that all kids admired you know, kind of lock into.  But you know, outside of sports figures, I can't--no, no one jumps out at me and you know and I say, "Hey this is a great deal."
Story_ID: 8402
Speaker 1: Where did you go to high school, and describe your experiences there?
Speaker 2: Well I went to Gonzaga [College] High School [Washington, D.C.].  As I said you know I came in on an academic scholarship.  And you know the Jesuits used to demand three hours of study every night, and it's no joke.  You, you really got to do this.  And one of the ways that they, they enforce it is you had an, an examination once a week in every subject, so Monday it was English test day, Tuesday was math, Wednesday was Latin, and at the end of a, a month these four tests, you took the numerical grades and that was what was on your report card.  So if you got an average of ninety for the four tests you got a ninety, that was it.  Now if you goofed off and didn't apply yourself and didn't study for one test, you were in trouble, 'cause that could throw your whole report card for the year out of whack.  So the pressure was on.  And they didn't give you any breaks.  They didn't take any excuses, so you had a test everyday so you had to study everyday.  So, now being an athlete, I was always coming home, six [o'clock], seven o'clock [P.M.] you know every evening, a little bit tired.  You know, so studying was a little bit more problematic for me, 'cause I went from one season to the next, you know so I was playing football in the fall you know, basketball, track, you know winter and spring.  And so you know I never got to come home at three o'clock, so I had to find ways to study.  You know I'd study on the bus coming and going from school.  I'd study during lunch you know, during recess, you know that kind of situation.  You get to be pretty creative, you know in school like that.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers at Gonzaga and are there ones that you remember for a special reason?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there are.  There was a freshman teacher named Father Hocking, H-O-C-K-I-N-G, who was a nerd if, if you want to put it in simple terms.  You know this guy was real square, straight-laced as he could ever be, and you know he was my first experience you know, my homeroom teacher as a, as a freshman.  So he had a telling effect, and got me a little more disciplined than I had been previously.  And he was a Latin teacher, which was a somewhat difficult subject but I think looking back on it a very useful subject you know.  There was a principal there, his name was Anthony B. McHale (ph.), Father McHale and he was a very erudite guy, learned, you know many degrees.  So he and my mother [Palestine Smith Hill] had this kind of thing going, you know.  They, they related to each other quite well, and he, he was stern you know, but I think he had an effect.  And I can remember one day he called my mother in you know after maybe a year or so out there, and said well you know, "He's, he finished third on the test but he's about fortieth or fiftieth in ranking in his class."  You know, "What's up?"  You know, "Is there some problems?  He has some issues, you know?"  She said, "Nothing's up."  She said, "Just more to life than studying all the daggone time. He want to do something else, he's a boy."  I never will forget that, even though she was getting on my case all the time about not doing it enough.  I overheard her tell him that you know on the q.t. [in secrecy].  You know they didn't think I heard it.  I said, "Ah-ha, alright Mom."
Story_ID: 8403
Speaker 1: Mr. Hill while you were in high school [Gonzaga College High School, Washington, D.C.] what were you thinking you wanted to do with your life?  What were you thinking you wanted to be?  And you said already you knew you wanted to go to college but what were you thinking about college?
Speaker 2: You know I think I was probably typical at the time.  I didn't know what I was about, you know.  There was a time where I thought I wanted to be an engineer, and that's because in the '50s [1950s] engineering was you know the new rage of the day, you know.  And as, as an African American you know we didn't think much about business because that just wasn't a world we had been fully welcomed to at this point.  But engineering was a shot, so I kind of thought that I wanted to do that.  But I, looking back on it that, that wouldn't have suited me.  I, I probably you know, wouldn't have enjoyed that particular--as far as schools go, I didn't, I just was going to go where there was a good education and a decent football team.
Speaker 1: Were you starting to develop a, a love for football?  Were you liking football a little bit better than other sports at this time?
Speaker 2: Only because I was probably better at it than other sports.  And you know, football was the all American game.  At that time basketball had not stepped up to the, to the level of popularity that it is today you know.  It was football, then baseball, and basketball was like third.  So I didn't play a lot of basketball I think for that reason.  Baseball was okay, it was kind of boring.  And I was not as good at baseball as I was at football, so that, that was kind of my sport, maybe track and field.  But I, you know I didn't, didn't have any real ambitions per se, at that point.  I don't know whether I ever did.  Eventually I finally figured out something but you know not way back then.
Speaker 1: So how did you decide where you were going to college?
Speaker 2: Whoever gave me a football scholarship.  So, you know I was--several schools offered and I wound up going to Xavier University in Cincinnati [Ohio].
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: 1960.  And I went there primarily for two reasons.  My coach in high school, that was his alma mater, and secondly I had a buddy who played football at John Carroll High School [Washington, D.C.], Ken Price, who was my best friend.  But didn't get as much--he was a good football player but didn't get as much public acclaim.  And so I wanted the school, whoever got, wanted to get me, they had to take him too on a scholarship so we, you know I shopped around as a package deal, so Xavier was willing to do that, so Ken and I went to Xavier.
Story_ID: 8404
Speaker 1: Were you getting a lot of notoriety for football while you were in high school?
Speaker 2: I did because Gonzaga [College High School, Washington, D.C.] was good.  We won a city championship and, and I was one of the star players and, and I, I was player of the year in the metro area and so forth.  So yeah there was a lot of notoriety at the time.
Speaker 1: What was that like for you?
Speaker 2: It was kind of fun, you know.  It was interesting.  You know I was a young guy, and you know high school, I was the only black, it was only twelve or so blacks at Gonzaga at the time, you know.  So I was the only African American on the, on the football team.  And football was, high school football was really popular back in the day.  We had, used to have a city championship game where the public school champion played the Catholic school champion.  And we played in the big stadiums, and at that time it was [Clark] Griffith Stadium but we would fill it, you know.  We'd put more in there for a high school game than the [Washington, D.C.] Redskins [professional football team] did.  So it was, it was quite a treat, thrill, fun.  So I enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: What was it like being the only black on the team in high school?
Speaker 2: Nothing, you know.  I had--there, there was no problem.  I had very little racial incidents at Gonzaga and I got to give credit both to my teachers, the Jesuits, as well as my classmates.  I can remember one incident that we were on the football team bus coming back from practice one day, and one of the guys on the team used the N-word you know.  He was just trying to be funny.  Boy, he you know, he never forgot it.  I mean he, he must have apologized you know a hundred times.  You know I bet if I see him today he'd still apologize.  You know, but it was nothing you know.  And but, so I'm saying that to say that it, it just was not, it was a non-issue.
Story_ID: 8405
Speaker 1: What was it like at Xavier [University, Cincinnati, Ohio] for you?
Speaker 2: Boring.  Cincinnati [Ohio] was boring.  I mean coming from [Washington] D.C. going to Cincinnati was, even though Cincinnati is a big city, but it's certainly not Washington, D.C. by any means.
Speaker 1: And what was Cincinnati like in the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Racial.  You know, Cincinnati is in the, right at the southern tip of Ohio right at the Kentucky border, so there was a lot of racism there at that time and something that I wasn't quite used to.  You know the only thing, claim to fame that the black community had in Cincinnati at that time, well they had two.  They had the Isley Brothers [vocal group] and Oscar Robertson [pro basketball player].  They were the two big heroes for Cincinnati.
Speaker 1: What was your football career like at Xavier?
Speaker 2: Well at that time freshmen couldn't play varsity football so we played on the freshman team, you know.  I was the star running back on the team.  And Xavier had a, you know pretty good, big time football program at that time.  They eventually dropped it.  They don't play football anymore but they did then.
Speaker 1: Were you treated any differently because you were an athlete, in terms of being an African American?
Speaker 2: You know, that's kind of hard to say.  Athletes in general are treated a little bit differently, and depending on what school.  Some schools you're treated better, more differently than others.  Xavier didn't put a lot of hoopla on, around those athletes and certainly not around its freshmen athletes you know.  We were, we were grunts you know we were just out there.  There may have been a time, I think you know if I had stayed, actually my friend Ken Price wound up staying and became, you know a big star at Xavier and I'm sure he got treated nicely.
Story_ID: 8406
Speaker 1: How did you end up leaving Xavier [University, Cincinnati, Ohio] and going to the [U.S.] Naval Academy [Annapolis, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Well one day my mother [Palestine Smith Hill] called me and said "If I get you an appointment to Annapolis would you go?"  Now this was like April, and at that time the military academies were very prestigious and very much in demand and very difficult to get in.  You know you had to be appointed by your congressman or by the President of the United States, or your father had to be a Congressional Medal of Honor winner.  There were several ways to get in but primarily through congressional appointment.  And I knew that these appointments had closed, not to mention the fact that being from Washington, D.C., we didn't have a congressman.  But there was a provision where D.C. cadets could, I mean, midshipmen from D.C. could get in.  I can't remember what it was.  But anyway, so I said, "Sure."  You know I knew that the appointments had closed in January.  Next thing I know I get this letter from the president of the United States that said, "Congratulations Midshipman Hill.  You've been accepted to the United States Naval Academy.  Report for duty June 28th, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah."  I said get out of here.  Couldn't believe it.  Next thing I know I'm going down there, put all my civilian clothes in a suitcase and gave them back to my parents [Kermit E. Hill and Palestine Smith Hill], you know, shaved my hair off and I was a Midshipman.  It, it happened so fast I didn't have time to think about it.
Speaker 1: What was that like for you, especially being someone who was mischievous and a practical joker?  This was, was it a very different environment for you?
Speaker 2: Oh very different.  You know, here now you got to shine your shoes, make up your bed, get up at six o'clock [A.M.], you know had to be neat, had to have everything in place.  And surprisingly I, I didn't do that badly at it you know.  I didn't have, I think I was kind of in the middle of the pack, you know in terms of military you know discipline.  So it was, you know I, I would have thought I would have done worse than I did, and it didn't really bother me that much once I got into the routine of doing it so, no, that, that wasn't, that wasn't a, a big deal.  What, what I did find out though was I didn't want to be in the [U.S.] Navy.  You know, I basically didn't like the attitudes.  I think at that time the Navy was still elitist and racist, and I didn't really want much parts of that.  So, but you know, if you went to Naval Academy, you didn't have to go in the Navy.  I mean you had an option.  You could go in the [U.S.] Marines or you could go into any branch of the service, really, technically.  Even though most people, very few people did.  A lot of people went into the Marines which is part of the Navy.  And so--.
Speaker 1: What years were you at the Naval Academy?
Speaker 2: I was there for one year from '62 [1962], from '61 [1961] to '62 [1962].
Story_ID: 8407
Speaker 1: How did you end up leaving the [U.S.] Naval Academy [Annapolis, Maryland] going to the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Well I, I was a football player and when I first got there to the navy a lot of young men tried out for the football team, for the plebe football team at that point.  Freshmen couldn't play varsity.  Because a lot of the, the midshipmen were athletes in high school, that's A, and B, if you made the football team you got away from a lot of the harassment that you get a plebe you know, so four hundred and fifty guys come to try out.  The football team is going to take, you know sixty players or so right?  And about twenty-five, thirty guys, they kind of said you guys go over here to this field you know and they gave us some balls and we're playing catch.  And these other four hundred fifty guys are all tackling and running and blocking and you know trying out for the team.  So after about three days, you know we're getting worried.  You know, "When we going to get our chance?  We're not going to make the team."  And there was a guy there, tall, lanky, quiet guy and running around.  He could really throw a football, you know.  And I said, "Well what's your name?"  You know, he said "My name is Roger, Roger Staubach." [pro football player] So I said "Oh, you can play."  And well, you know the rest of the story in his case.  So we wound up--and then when they cut the team they're going to put the death chart, you know first team, second team.  And the thirty, forty guys were the first three teams.  So I found out after the fact that we were the guys that they basically had recruited to play football, and they knew who we were.  And so they had made arrangements with my mother [Palestine Smith Hill], [U.S.] Congressman Dawson, Charles Dawson [sic, William Levi Dawson] from Chicago [Illinois] appointed me to the Naval Academy, gave me an address, I never will forget it, on Peach Street in Chicago.  I've never been to Chicago, but I had to be, to be appointed I had to be a, technically a resident of his state.  And that's how I got there you know.  Staubach got there, he went to a military prep school, and so that's how he got there.
Speaker 1: What was it like playing with him?  Do you have any other stories about him?
Speaker 2: I got legions of stories about him.  Roger was, was one of the greatest athletes I've ever you know come in close contact with.  Well, when they put the death chart on, he and I were on the second team, you know?  So Roger said "Darryl, by the end of the, the end of the week we're going to be on the first team."  So when they had the practice game, the practice scrimmage is Saturday.  We're going to light them up, and that's what happened.  And you know, we wound up being on the first team and we played together.  I mean Roger was the kind of a quarterback that you never gave up on.  He'd be running around, they're chasing him.  You know he'd, somehow you know he could deliver the football so you never, you know--I can remember we were playing Penn State [University, University Park, Pennsylvania], and it was the last play in the half, you know like one second to go.  And we were at about midfield, Roger's running around.  I ran, he said, "Darryl just go deep, you know I'll throw."  Well the D--the defensive back stopped at about the twenty [yard line], right, you know.  And Roger's being chased and you know I knew him you know.  I kept going you know.  He threw the ball sixty yards to the back of the end zone, on the dead run with a guy hanging on him.  And I said, "Oh yeah, this guy, this guy's got something going on, you know."
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: This was in '62 [1962].  So there came a time, we were leaving and you know he and I had kind of decided we, we were going to get out of there.  You know we were thinking pro football.  The thing I hated worst about the Naval Academy was just being confined, you know.  You had to stay on the base.  You couldn't do anything.  No girls, you know all that.  You know it was boring you know just, that was the worst part about it so I was ready to go after a year.  But they put a lot of pressure on me to stay, and matter of fact I was only seventeen when I was enrolled, so I--my mother--not being eighteen, your parents have to sign you in cause you're actually going in the military.  So for me to resign my parents had to agree.  They had to sign me out.  So they got to my mother and said, "Well don't sign him out you know he, he just don't like the plebe year.  You know next year it will be different you know.  He can always leave after the end of next year.  Let him stay one more year," so she wouldn't sign.  So I, I said you know going off.  So one afternoon I show up at my father's [Kermit E. Hill] office on Saturday afternoon in my uniform you know.  So he said "Well what you doing here?"  So I said, "Well if I'm not back by six o'clock I'm going to be AWOL [absent without leave] and they're going to kick me out."  So he said, "Well what are you saying?"  I said, "I'm not going back unless you all sign me out."  So you know my father picked up the phone and called my mother and said, "I think the boy's serious."  They signed the papers and I left.  Well in the meantime you know I'm shopping around with all the big football schools you know, [University of] Notre Dame [Notre Dame, Indiana], you know Penn State, [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Had you developed a pretty good reputation by then?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Yeah, I was a good player.  So, and so we had played [University of] Maryland that year and that picture that, that was in my office I was showing you.  Maryland and Navy [U.S. Naval Academy] had two of the best freshmen football teams in the country.  We were undefeated.  In fact, both teams were beating their varsities in scrimmage you know.  So this, they had this big game, Maryland, Navy, undefeated freshmen teams playing, you know, and they had to move it over to the main stadium and yada yah.  And so we played, I had a good game, three touchdowns, you know.  Got a ninety-eight yard kick-off return and another sixty yards, couple hundred yard plays you know.  So when the word got out in the papers that I was leaving, I get a call from Maryland.  They said, "We'd like you to consider coming on a football scholarship to Maryland."  And I said, "Well you dropped out of the Atlantic Coast Conference [athletic conference] or something?"  They said, "No."  I said, "Well it's segregated isn't it?"  They said "Yeah, but we're ready to break the segregation."  And I said, "Well why me, you know?"  And they said, "Well two reasons, three reasons really."  Said, "One reason is you did it before.  You did it in Navy," 'cause I was the first black to play any varsity sport in the military academy, Navy, Army or Air force.  And it was done kind of quietly without a lot of fanfare, but Maryland they said, "You played at Gonzaga [College High School, Washington D.C.].  You were the only black on the team.  So you, you're suited to do it, you're a decent student, and you beat the hell out of us in the football field."  So they said, "With all of those things we got--and plus you're a resident of the state."  My family was living in Maryland at the time.  So I, I said, "Let me think about it," 'cause my basic response to them was you know, "I'm not Jackie Robinson.  I just want to play some football." That's what I told them.  But anyway after I thought about it I said, "Why not?  You know somebody's got to do this, you know.  I could do it.  I could be close to home.They, you know they got a big time program and so forth."  So that's how I got there.
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: I enrolled in Maryland in September of '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: Do you remember what your first day on campus was like?  What was that like?
Speaker 2: Somebody asked me that recently and, and I can't remember that.
Speaker 1: What--?
Speaker 2: I can remember my first day of football practice.
Speaker 1: What was that like?
Speaker 2: You know I had a, we had a kind of a, an interesting, colorful coach.  He was kind of theatrical in a certain way.  His name was Tom Nugent.
Speaker 1: Can you spell it out for me?
Speaker 2: N-U-G-E-N-T.  And Nugent he, you know, he invented the I-formation.  You know, he was a pretty innovative guy.  So first day of practice, he had me stay in the locker room while the team goes out there.  I don't know why, but anyway, then I came out like ten minutes later.  And the thing that I remember is that somewhere during this practice he says, "Well let's have a little pass-catching demonstration."  So he takes the best receiver on the team and I--and said, "Okay let's see you guys catch some balls."  So he tells the quarterback, he says you know, "Now throw them some difficult, you know throw them down in the dirt," and you know so forth.  And I remember that and the whole team was standing around watching this, you know this performance.  So that kind of sticks in my mind you know that, that incident.  But you know for the most part it was, playing football here as far as my team was, teammates were concerned, were without incident.
Speaker 1: And, and that experience for you as an African American, the first on the team, was it similar to Gonzaga?  What was that like?
Speaker 2: Well Maryland, you see, at that time recruited most of us players from the North, so most of my teammates were from Pennsylvania, New Jersey.  You know there were a few from Maryland and D.C., but most of them were--so these guys it wasn't anything unusual to play with a black player for them.  So it just--you know I was just another guy out there as far as they were concerned.  Now you know the fans and the, the South and all of that, that's a whole other story.  But you know that's, the players were okay.
Story_ID: 8408
Speaker 1: Let's talk about that [racist encounters amongst college football players] a little bit, particularly about the big game at Clemson University [Clemson, South Carolina].
Speaker 2: Well--.
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: It, you see, when I transferred I had to sit out a year by NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] rules as, as a transferee.  So in the football season of '62 [1962] I, I could not play.  So I wound up playing [for the University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland]--the first year I played was the football season of '63 [1963].  And the first thing that happened, the two teams from South Carolina in the conference said, "If you play a black player we ain't going to play.  We're going to cancel the game."  So that was the first issue.  So the very, the second game of the year was University of South Carolina in Columbia, South Carolina.  So here you go, you know we're going to find out what the deal is right?  They're talking about they're not going to play.  Now Clemson is waiting to see what they do you know, 'cause Clemson came later right?  So South Carolina of course you know as we well know, they're going to play.  They're not going to give up the money.  It's too, too much to lose to cancel a football game over something that's going to be inevitable.  So we knew that and--but we--it was a night game, and the first issue is where the team would stay.  Now the hotel that the team normally would stay in wouldn't let me stay.  So the football team said, "He don't stay, we don't stay."  So that was the first issue.  So I guess the hotel must have came to its senses.  They don't want to lose all that business, and made a turnaround.  "Well we're going to make this one exception," you know, nonsense you know.  So that was the first issue.  But you know the good part about it was the team voted you know without prompting from me, you know just said--oh in fact they didn't tell me about it.  They, they did this on their own you know they kind of got together on their own and said, "Hey we're going to stick with him and if he can't stay we won't."  And the coaches also you know.  So the administration, athletic department was backing it up.  Well that was a good thing.  So during the game, when the game was over and I was leaving the stadium you had to kind of walk between the stands, and there was a whole lot of people gathered around you know and we were trying to get, quietly get off the field, and a guy poured a drink on me from up above.  And so we had this guy named Jerry Fisherman who was in the article, he was a real tough middle linebacker, you know, Jewish guy too.  And so he, he like grabs this dude by the shirt and takes his helmet by the face mask and starts beating this due across the head, Bam!  I said, "Jerry are you crazy?  If a riot break out in here you can melt into the crowd, brother.  I can't hide.  Who you think going to get, get their whooping?  You better stop and be cool, you know."  He--.
Speaker 1: But how did that make you--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) And it came close to that, being that way you know.  Couple of the players kind of grabbed Fisherman and dragged him, and we got out of there, you know but it, you know trouble could have broken out behind that incident.
Speaker 1: How did that make you feel though, that particular incident?
Speaker 2: I felt relieved that I got the heck out, is what I felt.
Speaker 1: But when the guy poured the drink on you how did that make you--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) You know, I didn't think much of it particularly.  I mean it didn't make me angry or--you know, you can't let stuff like that weigh on you, because if you, if you're dwelling on it then you're going to be distracted.  You're not going to be able to do what you came here to do and that's to play football. So you, you can't be thinking about what's going on.  Now, you know for the most part you see the players, even the boys were Southern boys.  They were South Carolina boys.  They--I never had a problem with them.  There never was an incident.  You know there never was name calling.  I think that athletes sometimes will circle the wagons you know.  If, if it's like somebody's messing with one of theirs so I don't think these guys--and, and in a couple of incidents they apologized you know for their behavior.  And the fans were another story you know.  They were raucous, raw you know.  And it's sort of like you got to understand, in the South at that time there was no professional sports.  There were no Atlanta [Georgia] Falcons, no Tampa Bay [Florida] Buccaneers, you know, no [North] Carolina [Panthers, pro football teams], and so the colleges were their professional sports.  So that, you know the University of South Carolina and Clemson let's say in South Carolina, that, they were the be all and end all.  And they were worshiped, these sports.  And then the temples in which they worshiped these sports were the stadiums.  So in their mind, to have an African American in their stadium was like desecrating their temple, and they took this seriously, you see.  So my coming down there was the symbolic nature of it in their mind.  There was, it was a big deal.  They were, they were pretty much upset about it, you know because they knew that I was opening a door which, which was going to be a flood tide pretty soon.
Speaker 1: Were your parents [Palestine Smith Hill and Kermit E. Hill] at all concerned about your safety?  How were your parents feeling?
Speaker 2: They didn't convey that concern to me and, and I didn't feel unsafe, you know.  It wasn't an issue even though I did get a couple of crank calls along the way.  You know people, one guy called and said he was going to be up in the stands with a high powered rifle you know.  And you know, but those incidents we just turned over to the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation].  But it wasn't something, it didn't unnerve me.  I wasn't sitting out here looking around.  I just thought they were crazy so, as they were.
Speaker 1: So what happened at Clemson?  Well typically my parents would go to most of the games.  But my father had a business so Saturday was difficult for him to get away for away games.  So, but my mother would go and I told her, I said "Look, don't come down here to Clemson."
Story_ID: 8409
Speaker 1: The name of the football stadium in Clemson [University, Clemson, South Carolina] is called 'Death Valley'.  And instead of building the stadium up on top of the ground they dug a big ditch and they dropped the stadium in it and it was real steep.  Like the stands--so a person in the top row can spit and land on the field and that's how it was.  So I'm going in there.  It's, it's homecoming you know--sixty thousand drunk, redneck farmers, in there coming to homecoming.  There's not a black person in the stadium nowhere doing nothing, selling the hot dogs, sweeping the floor or more or less watching the thing.  During the warm up I go out early because I'm a kicker, so the kickers go out before the rest of the team.  The head coach of Clemson comes over.  He's got a cigar in his mouth, stogie, and he comes over and stands over me, gives me the evil eye.  He looked just like that sheriff in the James Bond movie.  Sheriff said, Southern sheriff say, "You in a heap of trouble boy."  Remember that sheriff?  That's what this guy looked--with his cigar. (laughs)  So later on in the warm up one of the assistant coaches come and gets me, takes me to a side gate.  There's my mother [Palestine Smith Hill] out there.  I told her not to come.  She got a ticket, they won't let her in.  So I said, "Well okay, I'm, enough is enough."  So I go back in the locker room and start changing my clothes.  "I'm going to take my mother and get on out of dodge you know before something happens to her.  And, but the President of Clemson University came and took my mother to his box.  And then I got dressed, and went back and played the game and actually set a Atlantic Coast Conference [athletic conference] pass catching record that day that stood up for about twenty years.  I, I was kind of mad. That was that story.  And it was so bad that we had to, they were so mad cause I caught all these passes cause they were double teaming and triple teaming, that we had to go back on the, to the airplane in our football uniforms.  And we had to get on the busses and get out of dodge.  You know we went straight from the field, to the bus, to the airport under police escort.  The managers had to go back and get our clothes out the locker room, bring it later.  We didn't get our clothes till the next day.  That was true too.  It was funny.  So--.
Speaker 2: Did you feel a little vindicated after that game?
Speaker 1: Well I don't know if vindication was the right word, you know but you know the, one of the, but I couldn't have thought of a better setting you know, a better situation to play well, that's for sure.  I tended to play better actually on the road than I did at home, for whatever reason.  Maybe it was just coincidence, maybe I was a little more motivated.
Speaker 2: What other experiences did you have while you were at [University of] Maryland [College Park, Maryland]?
Speaker 1: Well there was a time when we went down and played Wake Forest University [Winston-Salem, North Carolina], and the student body was into racial chants you know.  And that was pretty, pretty crude out there. I thought they, they were going--you know, Wake Forest was supposed to be good old Christian school too, you know.  But they were off and running, and during the warm-ups one of the Wake Forest's players, in fact their biggest star came, comes over and puts his arm around my shoulder, walks toward the student body you know and you could have heard a pin drop.  It shut them right up you know, 'cause he was all, Mr. All-everything you know, All-American, the only one Wake Forest had ever had.  And it took a lot of courage because you know he, he ran the risk of being ostracized back in those days in the early '60s [1960s], you know, and his name was Brian Piccolo.  And so if you've ever seen the movie 'Brian's Song', that's the guy.  So the same thing that he did with Gale Sayers in 'Brian's Song', he had started doing with me.  And so, and every time I see that movie a tear gets in my eyes you know for him, because of what he did and you know it's something I never forgot.  And there were lots of other incidents you know of courage and stuff.  But something I didn't even know which one of my players told me was I had gotten knocked out in a game, knocked unconscious.  And the, the medical guys refused to give me oxygen.  They said, "We ain't putting that mask on that nigger's face."  And one of the, some of my teammates had to make him do it, and I didn't know this you know.  I, I found this out later you know.  So you know that's, that's the way it was back in the day.  I mean here in Maryland wasn't the warmest place in the world.  Maryland was kind of a rough situation at that time also, if you can recall.  [H.] Rap Brown [later Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] got arrested down on the Eastern Shore [area of Cambridge, Maryland] and all the problems that they were having down there, you know.  Maryland which it was Maryland State at that time, so it took a while for, for even my hometown fans to really warm up.  But they did, you know, having a couple of good games winning a--I won one big game against the [United States] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado] at the last second, you know, last play of the game scored a touchdown and that was a big upset, you know.  So their tune began to change.  Winning helped cure a lot of stuff.
Story_ID: 8410
Speaker 1: At this time, what were you thinking you were going to do with your life?  Were you thinking you were going to become a professional athlete?  What were you thinking you were going to do?
Speaker 2: No, I thought that I would probably graduate and go on to develop a career.  You know, I thought I had a shot but I was a little guy at a time when didn't too many little guys play in the NFL [National Football League].  They changed the rules now, you know.  I, I--if they had the rules they had then I probably would still be playing.  I was a receiver, and now they have rules where you can't even touch a receiver after he runs five yards down field.  Well, if you let me run five miles I'm going to run away from you.  But at that time you know they didn't have those rules and the receivers were bigger, tougher you know, 'cause of defensive backs, guys like Jack Tatum for example you know were beating on me all the time you know.  So, so I didn't you know I didn't, I wasn't hanging my hat on you know pros you know.  I gave it a shot, went up to the [New York] Jets [pro football team], hung around a couple of years you know I kind of on and off, mostly practice squad and you know I just came back and went to grad [graduate] school [University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland].
Speaker 1: And so after you went to grad school, what was next for you?
Speaker 2: Well then I wound up running an agency called the Anacostia Economic Development Corporation, which was a community development agency out in Anacostia section of Washington [D.C.].  And I went from there to being the director of the Greater Washington Business Center, which had basically same mission but for the entire region.  And I did that for ten years, which a big part of that was minority business development, and this was in the '70s [1970s] when minority business was kind of just emerging.  So I worked diligently at that and, and I enjoyed that you know.  I, it's a nice feeling to go to work everyday and have some meaning in what you're doing, you know.  And all of these jobs had great meanings, and they were great learning platforms.  So I learned a lot, and you know ultimately transferred that learning into my own business use.
Story_ID: 8411
Speaker 1: Tell me about your first business.  My very first business was a chain of dry cleaners, called Aristo (ph.) Cleaners.  And I was still running the Greater Washington Business Center, and I bought this chain of dry cleaners, fifty-three cleaners, didn't know a doggone thing about cleaning.  Had a partner, a guy working with me, Michael Wallick (ph.).  Brought him in to run it and, and he, he ran it, and it eventually failed, because it was in the, the basis of the business was home delivery.  And home delivery dry cleaning was just fading out, you know at the time.  That's why I was able to buy it so cheaply.  But we thought we could turn it around and resuscitate it, but you know that didn't work.  Then I opened a restaurant called W.H. Bone.
Speaker 2: What year was this?
Speaker 1: 1977.  And the reason I opened that restaurant, I was running the business center of course and a guy came to me one day, Aaron Brown and I still see Aaron, and Aaron said, "Darryl I want to open a restaurant."  He said, "I got a place down on 13th and E [Streets] Northwest [Washington, D.C.], by the National Theatre.  It's a great location."  He said--I said, "Well good, good idea Aaron.  What kind of restaurant?"  He said, "I'm going to open a French restaurant named Chez Brown."  I said, "Yeah, Chez Brown, okay.  And whose going to believe a black man running a French restaurant more or less named Chez Brown," you know.  So I began, you know and I tried to get him to open something a little more along ethnic lines but you know he studied in, in France and that was his thing, so I understood.  So he opened it and you know it, you know it struggled but it ultimately didn't, didn't survive.  So I wound up one day, you know I started thinking I said well why does--I said there's every kind of ethnic restaurant in the world.  We even got Afghan restaurants, Lebanese restaurants.  And there are no decent black restaurants in the whole country.  I said, "Most of the ones we've got are, are either bars, or neighborhood joints.  That's it.  You know there's Sylvia's up in Harlem [New York] and so forth."  I said, "But you don't have any mainstream white tablecloth, downtown catering to the broader market restaurants.  You know all of our stuff are little greasy spoons, you know."  In [Washington] D.C. for example we had Wilson's and places like that and they were fine but they just weren't, you know they weren't mainstream restaurants.  So one day a friend of mine Ralph Emerson who had a chain of restaurants called Emersons Ltd. and they were closing units down.  He said, "Darryl I can fix it so you can buy one of our restaurants at a decent price."  So I wound up buying their flagship restaurant and I converted it into a restaurant called W.H. Bone and Company.  And basically it was chitlins on china.  And it was very popular you know.  Had, had a mixed, a mixed clientele, blacks and whites and you know it was very elegant, well done.  You know it had a piano lounge, and it was a double-decker with a mezzanine, and a very lovely place and very, very, very popular.  And I opened it to prove a point you know that, hey, our restaurants, that people would eat out, eat Southern cooking or soul food so to speak and that everybody likes it and that it could be done in an elegant fashion.  It doesn't have to be in a joint, and that was the idea.  And I wound up--what, what I did find out was that I wasn't really a restaurateur.  I really didn't enjoy standing there grinning and greeting for hours on hours everyday.  So, and when you don't like something, you don't do it properly.  So when I saw the--where my, my tastes were going I wound up selling it, and then the people that I sold it to wound up losing it.  And it kind of, kind of made a lot of blacks in Washington [D.C.] kind of angry or disappointed is a better word--didn't want to lose it.  So I, from there I took off and went to California.  And a friend of mine had told me about a new phenomenon called lease cost planning. It was a form of energy management and he was working for a company that was in that business.  So I, I remember, I moved to California.  I arrived on April 7th, 1982.  By April 22nd, 1982, I opened up a company.  Pacific Energy had an office, staff and everything.  And then I wound up buying another company from a competitor, and wound up with one of the largest energy management companies in the state of California.  And, which was very successful, and you know I did quite well financially and otherwise.  And then toward the early '90s [1990s], this whole energy management stuff was losing, losing the flavor you know.  So I said well I think it's about time to go to another endeavor.  So I wound up selling the company and, and rightfully so, because not long after that, that whole thing kind of fell apart.
Story_ID: 8412
Speaker 1: I just had gone to Russia just on a trip one day, right after, right after Perestroika.  And I looked and it, it was like, it was as if one man owned every business in the United States and one day he stood up on top of the Washington Monument and said, "It's all for sale, make me an offer."  That's what happened in Russia.  The Russian Communist government owned all the businesses.  So all of a sudden they said, "It's all, it's all for sale."  So aerospace, you know all, everything from aerospace to, to rural tiny restaurants to everything in between, mining, material, manufacturing, automotive you know, all for sale.  So I said, "Hey this is a big candy store right here.  You know this an opportunity for a man with a little guts and a little foresight can wind up playing in a game much bigger than he could normally be pitted to play in back here."  So you know, I went to Russia and I started in business.  And I, I initially started, I, I imported some cars to Russia, some Jeep Cherokees and lost my shirt on that one.  So I said, "Well that's one thing I don't want to do.  You don't want to bring nothing to Russia."  I said, "Okay, the deal is let's bring something out of Russia," and so then I formed a joint venture with a Russian optical company you know.  They made optical equipment and it was originally a military company.  They made night vision equipment.  But they had some little telescopes and binoculars and all that kind of stuff.  And so I started importing that from Russia and that, and that went fairly well.  And one day somebody took me into Siberia, and in the middle of Siberia there was this little place called Buryatia.  Now you got to understand that Russia, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, well they was made up of a whole lot of republics.  When the Communist government went away, a lot of these republics went off and became countries.  So now you got Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Georgia and Ukraine and Estonia and all these were republics, now they're nations.  But there was a bunch of little republics who didn't break off cause they didn't have the economic wherewithal.  Buryatia was one of those.  So I go to Buryatia and Buryatia is right north of Mongolia.  So the people who lived there are of Mongolian descent.  There are some white Russians there too, but the native people are, are what they call Buryats.  Genghis Khan was born in Buryatia.  So I liked these folks.  You know we, we had a nice rhythm and one day--and their biggest industry had been timber, trees, nothing but trees.  And they, see they never learned how to operate commerce because the Communist system didn't work that way.  So the Communist bosses would call up and say we need so much timber.  Send it to Kazakhstan, send it to here, send it to there.  So what they were doing was exporting timber to the republics in areas of Russia that didn't have timber, like the Arab countries, like what I call the "stans" you know, Turkmenistan, Kyrgyzstan, you know Kazakhstan and so forth.  So, but when these countries, republics broke away they didn't have money to pay for the timber so the, the whole business dried up.  So I'm looking around and they got all this equipment and timber processing stuff, but no customers.  But I'm looking I said, "Well Japan is over there and they ain't got a tree. [South] Korea ain't got a tree.  China got some trees, but got too many people.  So we're going to send them some trees."  Now these people were importing trees already mostly from the United States and from New Zealand.  But you know United States timber is expensive.  So I said, "Well I got you now, 'cause a Russian lumberjack work all day for $5.00.  American lumberjack cost $30.00 an hour well, so the cost of the timber."  So I'm sitting, and the President of Buryatia--see these republics they had presidents, had their own legislature.  We're sitting around and I said, "Well you ever thought about making a joint venture?"  He said, "Well we got some joint ventures.  We got joint ventures with the Finnish, with Finland company."  So I said, "With a Finnish company, well tell me about it."  He said, "Well we, they bought these four big machines called lumber jacks."  Now a lumber jack is a machine that will cut the tree, trim the branches off, it will do all the stuff.  It's a labor saving machine, okay.  It's expensive, ten million dollars per lumber jack.  So they--I said, "Well how does the joint venture work?"  He said, "Well we didn't have to pay for the machine."  I said, "Well who is paying?"  I said, "Well what happens to the money?"  Said, "Well we sell the logs and all the money from selling the logs go to pay for the machines," and then I, then--I said, "Well all you got is equipment loan.  You ain't got a joint venture.  They just lent you something on credit, but you got to pay for it."  I said, "For ten million dollars I can buy a chainsaw, give a chainsaw to every man in Buryatia between the ages of eighteen and forty and we can cut every damn tree down in this country in six months by hand.  You don't need this."  So he started laughing.  He said, "You know, you're right."  I said, "Plus you got to put your people to work."  So we formed a joint venture, cutting trees and that's still going.  As, as luck would have it, just as I got it up and rolling along, Japan, who was the biggest customer, the Asian economy started going in the tank, in Japan like this is late 1990s.  Japan went down, then Korea, so they stopped buying timber because timber is soft wood, where (unclear) used mostly for construction.
Story_ID: 8413
Speaker 1: From there, how did you end up back here at your alma mater [University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Well I, from there I went into the packaging business.  I formed a joint venture, company called Global Pack and we have a joint venture with the largest packaging producer--box, you know boxes.  We exported those.  And I found a, a joint venture partner here in the United States to work with me and they mostly could handle the day to day needs and operations.  So I didn't you know I was looking.  I didn't have much to do and I happened to be having lunch with the athletic director Debbie Yow, here in Maryland and she said I got just the thing.  You got--(simultaneously).
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: This was September 2003.  So we wound up being, I wound--she wound up offering me the job as Director of Major Gifts, which I accepted.  And you know my job was to just work with the larger contributors to athletics, and so that's fun.  I travel to the games.  I go and sit with various contributors, go on their, fly on their jets and their boats you know and wine and dine, you know.  Probably, I'd pay them to do this.  That's, that's how, that's how it evolved so that's how we got to where we are.
Speaker 1: Is it nice being back here at Maryland?
Speaker 2: Oh it's wonderful yeah, it's fun you know 'cause sports is my life so I like you know being around the young student athletes.  You know I'm developing some new and innovative programs and concepts to help them and career development programs and other things.  This has given me a forum in which I can really do some nice stuff.
Speaker 1: When you first came back here to Maryland, you spoke to the football team.  What was that like and looking back and seeing the diversity on the team, looking and seeing the diversity, what was that like?
Speaker 2: The thing that impressed me the most was I was telling the team about my experiences, and you know you could see confusion and disbelief.  I mean these young kids just can't relate to how it was back then.  You know, they're kind of looking at me like, really?  Could this have happened? I can't--you know and after you know the comments and questions afterwards kind of bore that out.  They, they just really didn't, didn't have a feel for it, that, and could relate to this at all.  You know it was just something foreign to them.  You know and you're looking out there at a football team now that's 80 percent black, you know which is you know another turn of events over the years.  So, cause the last time I'd been in that locker room was another story.  So--.
Speaker 1: What did you, what kind of advice did you give to them?  What kinds of things did you tell them?
Speaker 2: Well, you know the main advice, and they hear this all the time but, you know, "Don't count on being a pro football player.  That's a very narrow funnel up to that top you know.  And so you know get yourself ready to go on in life and be the best that you can be."  And, but you can't, you can't ever say that too many times.
Story_ID: 8414
Speaker 1: And how do you feel being such a trailblazer just in terms of you know starting at Gonzaga [College High School, Washington, D.C.] and then at the [U.S.] Naval Academy [Annapolis, Maryland], University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland], how does that make you feel?  What are your thoughts on that?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  You know I, I think that some people are destined to do things and it certainly was never, I never once had it in my plans to do any of this.  It just happened, you know.  And how it happened is you know I think it's fate.  You know how was it that I just happened to be in this place at the right time?  I mean you know first Navy [Naval Academy], then Maryland, you know back to back.  I mean that's, it's not something that was part of any master plan.  I mean even some of the things that I've done later like the restaurant concepts and stuff, they kind of trailblazing in a certain way too you know.  I don't know why.  Maybe I just had an inclination or maybe I'm crazy.
Speaker 1: Are you happy with the way you lived your life?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, sure.  You know some--you always think you could have done more, you know.  I, I'm thinking you know that I could be a lot richer than I am.  But all in all I, you know I wouldn't trade it for most others you know.
Speaker 1: What haven't you done that you'd like to do?
Speaker 2: Go to the South Pole, haven't done that.  I'd like to do--I've been a lot of places, but that's not one of them.
Story_ID: 8415
Speaker 1: What would you like for your legacy to be, and how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As, as a good guy who left something positive to society, had something positive impact on the overall good of things.
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life and all of the things that you've done and all of the things that you've accomplished, what's been your most proudest accomplishment?
Speaker 2: Oh that's a real difficult question.  I, I don't know to be honest with you.  I don't, I don't--there's nothing that comes out of me and just--you know I, I'll take the whole package.  You know I think that if I pull it together I'm pretty proud of what I've done, but you know I'm my own best critic.  You know you always think you could do more.
Speaker 1: And why do you think history is important?  Why do you think this project is important?
Speaker 2: Well history is important because it's the educator for the future.  You know you, you learn from the past, and it's critical that, as people forge into the future that they have a good working understanding of the past.  So, for example, just as its critical for these young guys to know what it was like playing sports in the '60s [1960s].  So any--this project is, is, is a very, very valuable project in terms of our future and everybody's future.  I mean society in general.  I think a lot can be given and learned from this and, and it's a wonderful concept and idea.  I really am excited about it.
Story_ID: 8416
Speaker 1: A picture from a football game in 1962, actually, no 1961. [University of] Maryland [College Park, Maryland] and Navy [U.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland].  I'm number 28, playing for Navy at the time against Maryland, our (unclear) school.
Speaker 2: [Darryl Hill, #28 (left), plays football for the U.S. Naval Academy, 1961. From the collection of Darryl A. Hill.]
Story_ID: 8417
Speaker 1: This is a photo of my great-grandmother who was born in 1877, Mary Riley in her younger days, beautiful woman.
Speaker 2: [Darryl Hill's great-grandmother, Mary Riley, 1877. From the collection of Darryl A. Hill.]
Story_ID: 8418
Speaker 1: This is a picture of high school against--in 1959.  I'm running a football there against St. John's High [School, Washington, D.C.].  You know I played for Gonzaga [College High School, Washington, D.C.] in the league championship game.
Speaker 2: [Darryl Hill plays football for Gonzaga College High School in the league championship game, Washington, D.C., 1959. From the collection of Darryl A. Hill.]
Story_ID: 8419
Speaker 1: This is a photograph, Thanksgiving day, night--championship game 1959, Catholic high school versus the public high school.  I'm number 31 running the football in the city championship.
Speaker 2: [Darryl Hill plays football for Gonzaga College High School in the city championship game, Washington, D.C., 1959. From the collection of Darryl A. Hill.]
Story_ID: 8420
Speaker 1: This is John Riley, my great-grandfather.  Mr. Riley was a Cherokee Indian from Indian Head, Maryland and had a paper hanging business.
Speaker 2: You know about what year his photo was taken?
Speaker 1: I do not, no.
Speaker 2: What, what would be your best guess?
Speaker 1: My guess would be turn of the century.
Speaker 2: [Darryl Hill's great-grandfather, John Riley, ca. 1900. From the collection of Darryl A. Hill.]
Story_ID: 8421
Speaker 1: This photo was taken in 1940, October of 1940 to be precise.  It's my mother on her wedding day, Palestine Smith Hill.
Speaker 2: [Darryl Hill's mother, Palestine Smith Hill, on her wedding day, October, 1940. From the collection of Darryl A. Hill.]
Story_ID: 8422
Speaker 1: This is a photo of my father, Kermit E. Hill, not long before he passed away.  I would say this photo was taken around 1990.
Speaker 2: [Darryl Hill's father, Kermit E. Hill, ca. 1990. From the collection of Darryl A. Hill.]
Story_ID: 8423
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Darryl Hill, age two.  And the funny thing about this picture one of my little classmates, as I got older in elementary school, brought a friend over and said, "Let me show you a picture of Darryl when he was a girl." (laughs) That's true.
Speaker 2: [Darryl Hill, age two, 1945. From the collection of Darryl A. Hill.]
Story_ID: 8424
Speaker 1: This is Palestine Smith Hill, my mother, as a senior in high school, age sixteen.
Speaker 2: [Darryl Hill's mother, Palestine Smith Hill, at age sixteen during her senior year of high school, ca. 1937. From the collection of Darryl A. Hill.]
Story_ID: 8425
Speaker 1: This is me, age five at Christmas time in my Santa Claus outfit.  I reversed the pose and I became Santa.
Speaker 2: [Darryl Hill, age five, at Christmas, 1948. From the collection of Darryl A. Hill.]
Story_ID: 8426
Speaker 1: Darryl Hill as an infant in the crib with the satin sheets, 1943.
Speaker 2: [Darryl Hill as an infant, 1943. From the collection of Darryl A. Hill.]
Story_ID: 8427
Speaker 1: This is the [University of] Maryland [College Park, Maryland] football team.  I'm number 25, third row from the bottom, fourth from the right.
Speaker 2: What year?
Speaker 1: 1963, Maryland Terrapins.
Speaker 2: [Darryl Hill, #25 (third row, fourth from right) in team photo of the University of Maryland football squad, College Park, Maryland, 1963. From the collection of Darryl A. Hill.]
Story_ID: 8428
Speaker 1: 1963, catching a touchdown pass, Maryland, [United States] Air Force Academy at [Harry Clifton "Curley"] Byrd Stadium [University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland].  I'm in the dark uniform.
Speaker 2: [Darryl Hill (above) catches a touchdown pass for the University of Maryland against the United States Air Force Academy at Byrd Stadium, College Park, Maryland, 1963.  From the collection of Darryl A. Hill.]
Story_ID: 8429
Speaker 1: 1963 publicity photo, Maryland University [sic, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland] football, Byrd Stadium beginning of the season.
Speaker 2: [Darryl Hill in a publicity photo for University of Maryland's football team, College Park, Maryland, 1963. From the collection of Darryl A. Hill.]
Story_ID: 8430
Speaker 1: 1991. Red Square,  Moscow [Russia] posing with an army vet and, and his wife--the beginning of my business there.  Actually it's 1992.  That's the Kremlin in the background.
Speaker 2: [Darryl Hill (right) with an army veteran and his wife, Moscow, Russia, 1992. From the collection of Darryl A. Hill.]
Story_ID: 8431
Speaker 1: This is scuba diving at Playa Blanca, Mexico.  Among my other, other ventures, scuba diving, skier, snow boarder and--.
Speaker 2: What year Mr. Hill?
Speaker 1: This is in 1989.
Speaker 2: [Darryl Hill scuba-dives at Playa Blanca, Mexico, 1989. From the collection of Darryl A. Hill.]
Story_ID: 8432
Speaker 1: This is approximately 1950.  My mother Palestine Smith Hill upon her graduation from, with a Masters in Middle High German from Catholic University [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: [Darryl Hill's mother, Palestine Smith Hill, upon receiving a Master's degree from Catholic University, Washington, D.C., ca. 1950. From the collection of Darryl A. Hill.]
Story_ID: 8433
Speaker 1: This is approximately 1951, the occasion of receiving a certificate as an outstanding performer in a theatrical performance.
Speaker 2: [Darryl Hill (right) receives an award for a theatrical performance, ca. 1951. From the collection of Darryl A. Hill.]
Story_ID: 8434
Speaker 1: 1992, at the time I was made honorary captain at the half time of one of [University of] Maryland's [College Park, Maryland] football games.  I don't know who the gentlemen in the pictures are, however.
Speaker 2: [Darryl Hill (left), with two unidentified men, named honorary captain at a University of Maryland football game, College Park, Maryland, 1992. From the collection of Darryl A. Hill.]
Story_ID: 8435
Speaker 1: This is 2002, in my restaurant in Atlanta, Georgia called Wildwood.  And I was hosting former mayor of Atlanta, Maynard, the late Maynard Jackson.
Speaker 2: [Darryl Hill (center) at his restaurant, Wildwood, with former Atlanta Mayor Maynard Jackson (right) and an unidentified man, Atlanta, Georgia, 2002. From the collection of Darryl A. Hill.]
