Story_ID: 614690
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns is the videographer, and Leon Dash [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash] is observing.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me, including your middle name?
Speaker 2: Well, my full name is Audrey Sharmane Amy Hilliard.  I go by Amy Sharmane Hilliard, and that's A-M-Y, S-H-A-R-M-A-N-E, H-I-L-L-I-A-R-D [HistoryMaker Amy S. Hilliard].
Speaker 1: Your date of birth?
Speaker 2: August 16, 1952.
Speaker 1: And what is your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Tell me your occupation.
Speaker 2: I'm an entrepreneur.  I own my own company, called the Comfort Cake Company [Comfort Cake Company, LLC, Chicago, Illinois].  And my other company is called The Hilliard Group [The Hilliard Group, LLC, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: And what is the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is July 14, 2008.
Story_ID: 614691
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you some of your favorites.  What is your--and it requires just a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is lime green.
Speaker 1: And what about your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food, that would be, right now it's watermelon.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: And when you go on vacation, what's your favorite destination?
Speaker 2: The Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite book?
Speaker 2: Oh, I have many favorite books.  But the book that's a clear favorite now is 'The Game of Life' by Florence Shovel Scinn, Shinn, Florence Scovel Shinn ['The Game of Life and How to Play It,' Florence Scovel Shinn], and it's based on the Bible, which is another favorite.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  It's: seek progress, not perfection.
Story_ID: 614692
Speaker 1: Now, we're going to begin by talking about your family.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And I want to start on your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Tell me your mother's name, where she was born, and when she was born, if you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My mother's name is Gwendolyn Adele Russell Hilliard [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard].  And she was born in 1920 [sic. 1924], in East Chicago, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Did your mother share any stories about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, she did.  She explained to me that growing up as a child of the Depression [Great Depression]--because she was born in 1920, and she remembers many things about working hard, her parents [Gussie Smith Russell and Genese Russell] working hard.  Her mother always worked outside the home, or they also did work in the home to keep things afloat.  She was the second oldest of three girls, and so she remembers being a middle child and remembers going through the tragedy of her older sister [Eleanor Russell] dying very suddenly.  She also remembered being the only black family on the block where they lived, and integrating their neighborhood.  So, she would tell me about that as well.  And she just remembers that--she would tell me about her goals growing up, that she would always strive to do well in school, and I think I inherited that technique from her.
Speaker 1: You said that they did things in the home to keep things afloat?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What were some of the things that they did at home?
Speaker 2: Oh, they would, my grandmother would take in boarders, she would take in laundry, she would do things in the neighborhood to help out with community work.  Those are the things that I can remember.
Story_ID: 614693
Speaker 1: You talk about your [maternal] grandmother.  Did you know your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I knew her very well.
Speaker 1: Tell me her name, and if you know where she was born and when she was born.
Speaker 2: Her name was Gussie Russell [Gussie Smith Russell], and she was born in Eufaula, Alabama.  She was born in, I want to say 1894 or thereabout, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And what do I know about her?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness.  My grandmother was a very formidable woman, very independent, very entrepreneurial.  I used to go to her home every day after school when I was in elementary school [Roosevelt Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], because she lived ultimately in Detroit [Michigan].  She moved to Detroit and lived about three blocks away from where I went to elementary school.  And so, I'd go to her home for both lunch and then after school.  And she owned her own two flat, lived by herself independently.  And had, and was very much about doing well in school, minding your manners, being respectful.  And she didn't take a lot of stuff, but she enjoyed doing special things for us grandchildren.  She always had peppermint candy for us, which was a treat.  And one of the fondest memories I have was her taking us to see the movie, 'Ben-Hur.'  That was when cinema, the big screen cinema was just starting.  This was I guess in 1960, and she took us to see that.  She wanted to see always the latest and the greatest things.  But that was one of the best times, because that is still to this day is one of my favorite movies, probably because she took me to see it, and probably because of the grandeur of it all.  She was a very, she wasn't very affectionate as a, as a grandparent, you know, not a lot of hugs and things.  But you knew you were loved, and she cared very much about your safety, your wellbeing, and that people respected you.  And so, those are things that I remember about my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Did she ever talk about her life in Alabama?
Speaker 2: Not too much, she actually didn't.  She basically talked more about her life in Indiana.  She was a journalist back then, so she wrote for the local paper.  She was a political and community organizer.  She talked about that a lot.  But I think growing up in Eufaula, Alabama was rather hard.  She was one of ten children, and her mother [Eliza Smith] was very much a taskmaster.  And so they lived-- you know, they did some sharecropping I think at that time, and so it wasn't easy.  And so, she didn't talk about it much.
Speaker 1: As a journalist, how much education did she have, your grandmother?
Speaker 2: My grandmother, she did not graduate from college, but she did attend Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], um-hm.
Speaker 1: And do you know what publications, other publications she might have written for?
Speaker 2: No, I don't, I don't, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: You say that she owned her own flat.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Or two flat.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you know how she acquired the property?
Speaker 2: Well, she was very set on buying property.  She always felt that you needed to own your own property.  So, when she moved to Detroit to be close to my mother [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard] after her husband died, it wasn't an option.  She said, "I want to buy my own house."  And so I remember my mother talking about that, and they went, she went looking for a home that she could afford.  And wanted to be able to have income, so she was definitely looking for income property.  And so back then, I mean this was, you know, I was in elementary school, so this is the '50s [1950s].  She, I think had saved up money or had insurance money from her husband's passing.  But the thing that I do remember is that it was not an option.  It was, "I'm going to own my home. I don't want to rent."
Speaker 1: And you mention her husband.  Was he your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yes, my grandfather, Genese Russell.
Speaker 1: Do you remember him at all?
Speaker 2: No.  He died right after I was born, so I don't remember him, I just have pictures of him.  I just know that was very tall and lanky, and that he was a welder in the steel mills, and that he died of black lung disease from having worked in the steel mills as a welder.  But his height is something that I think I got my height from.  And he was, my mother was very close to him as well.
Story_ID: 614694
Speaker 1: Your mother [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard], let's return to talking about your mother.  Tell me about her education.
Speaker 2: My mother is a graduate of Wayne State University, undergrad, in Detroit [Michigan].  And also she got her master's from Wayne State University in Detroit.  Interestingly, she had four children before she got her bachelor's degree.  So, I remember as a young girl going to my mother's college graduation.  She was a registered nurse before that, and during her nursing she decided that that wasn't going to be conducive to raising a family, because the hours were so unpredictable.  So, I don't remember much about her being a nurse.  She did that before, you know, when we were very, very young, but I do remember her going to school at night.  So, she worked during the day, went to school at night, and I went to her graduation from college.
Story_ID: 614695
Speaker 1: What characteristics do you think that you have gotten that you, you know, you possess from your mother [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I would have to say tenacity.  Tenacity, strength, a belief very much in family, a belief that you can do what you set your heart and your mind to do; that it shouldn't be at the expense of your family, but there's nothing that you can't desire--that you, if you desire it, if you work hard enough, you can do it.  I mean I remember literally seeing her get her undergraduate degree and then going back to get her master's degree [from Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan], and typing out her thesis on my grandfather's, my grandfather on my father's side [James Hilliard, Sr.], his manual typewriter.  And she just took over our dining room.  We didn't eat in the dining room for several years, because that was my mother's office.  And she would type out these thesises and all these things with carbon paper, because Xeroxing was not even invented back then.  And I just remember her doing that.  But I also remember her taking us to the museums, taking us to the parks.  She and my dad [Stratford Hilliard] made sure we had a lot of fun.  We went on vacations.  They worked very hard, but they also provided a balance, and she was very much about a balance.  We never missed a birthday party, celebration, Halloween, Christmas; all of that was very important to her.  So, she sacrificed a lot for us, but she also went after her own dreams.
Story_ID: 614696
Speaker 1: Are your grandparents [Gussie Smith Russell and Genese Russell], as far as you can go back in your history? On your mother's [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard] side?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side, no.  I can go back to my grandmother's mother, who, my Great-grandmother Smith.  Her name is Grandmother Smith [Eliza Smith], that's kind of all I know.  I don't remember her first name, but I have a picture of her that is in the photos.  And she raised the ten children, and she looked very much like my maternal grandmother.  And so, I think that she was a hard worker.  My grandmother was a hard worker, my mother was a hard worker, and I picked up that hardworking trait from all of them, and I saw it most readily in my mother.
Speaker 1: I didn't mean to jump back to it, but I realize I hadn't asked you did you know further than your grandparents.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But your grandmother, did she have sisters, and did your mother have sisters that were a part of your immediate life?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother did.  She had, you know, there were ten of them.  And I didn't know all of them, some of them died before I was able to know them.  But I very much remember my great-aunts; my Aunt Blanche [Mary Smith Renfro], my Aunt Clem [Lizzie Smith], and my Auntie Noble [Annie Smith].  Those are the three that I remember the most.  They lived here in Chicago [Illinois], which was great.  So because we were in Detroit [Michigan], we used to come to Chicago often to visit with them.  My Aunt Blanche and Aunt Clem were entrepreneurs.  They were caterers back in the '40s [1940s] before it was thinkable for women to do.  My Aunt Noble lived with them, and I don't recall what she did.  But my Aunt Blanche was, she was a pistol.  She, you know, was just a fireball of energy.  She was always laughing, she was always having a good time.  She was very much about loving life.  My Aunt Clem was the most exceptional cook in the family; I just remember eating her biscuits.  They kind of would float in the room before she got there they were so light, and I remember that very much.  She was an elegant woman, she was very tall.  She had, she wore her hair in that upswept do that they used to wear in the, in the anti- in the, oh, in the early 1900s.  And I remember that her hair was silver, and she was just very--her posture was always ramrod straight.  I remember that about her.  My Aunt Blanche, she outlived three husbands, (laughter) and so she always kind of said, "Well, I'm going to do what I want to do."  And I remember her coming to Thanksgiving dinner once and I asked her, I said--you know, her third husband had just died--and I said, "Aunt Blanche, are you going to get married again?"  And she goes, "No, girl, I'm going to have an affair."  And she was like eighty-five years old when she (laughter) said that.  And so my mother was totally embarrassed, but I thought it was pretty cool.
Story_ID: 614697
Speaker 1: And then my mother [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard] had one sister that survived.  Her older sister Eleanor [Eleanor Russell] is the one who died tragically.  But her other sister, my Aunt Aileen [Aileen Russell Woodson], was again, just a bundle of energy.  She was well ahead of her time, in terms of the things that she wanted to do.  She lived in Los Angeles, California, but she was an educator by nature.  And she, when she got her degree from college--and I don't remember where she got her degree, but it was in Indiana--she and her, she eloped, number one, because she wanted to get married to her college sweetheart.  And her father [Genese Russell] was totally deadset against it, so they eloped.  And then after graduating, they told their parents they were married, and my grandfather was very angry.  And so she said, "Well, okay, you can be angry, but we're married now.  And so, we want to live life the way we want to live it."  They wanted to go out West, and the only thing that they could get for teaching jobs back then was teaching at an Indian [Native American] reservation, so she moved.  She and her husband both were teachers, and they taught on an Indian reservation in Arizona because they wanted to move west, and they ultimately lived in Los Angeles.  And I'll never forget my aunt and uncle, I developed my love of travel from them.  Because in 1965 they took a sabbatical after teaching for seven years, and took their two children, Brett [Brett Woodson] and Adele [Adele Woodson Bailey], their two daughters, out of school for six months and they traveled the world.  And I mean, we got postcards from Moscow [Russia], from China, from Africa.  They bought a Volkswagen bus in Germany and drove across Europe and drove across Africa.  And so, these are the memories that I have of my Aunt Aileen.  She was very politically oriented.  She was, she worked on political campaigns in California.  She was a staunch supporter of Tom Bradley for all of his mayoral runs and his governor run, gubernatorial run.  And so, I learned from her the importance of being politically active.  And she was a terrible cook.  She didn't care about cooking too much, but she cared about living life.  And so, you know, I have fond memories of her.
Story_ID: 614698
Speaker 1: You talked about your aunts that were entrepreneurs [Hilliard's maternal great-aunts] back in the '40s [1940s]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --as caterers.  Are there any stories about any of their catering jobs, or where they catered or who they catered for?
Speaker 2: I don't know much about who they catered for, other than they were catering for pretty well to do families in Chicago [Illinois].  They were catering for Caucasian families more than black families, I know that much.  And they lived right on Drexel [Boulevard] in the '40s [1940s], so they lived in what's now called Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois].  And they would go to people's homes and do the cooking.  They also, my Aunt Blanche [Mary Smith Renfro] also would do day work as well.  But, you know, the catering part was what she did as her own business, and Aunt Clem [Lizzie Smith] did that as her own business.
Story_ID: 614699
Speaker 1: And you said that your mother's sister passed away tragically.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you know what happened in that incident?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, my mother [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard] really just told me that story; I just knew my Aunt Eleanor [Eleanor Russell] had died.  But what happened was she was playing, she was an athlete, and she was playing baseball.  I think she stepped on a rusty nail, and that tetanus or whatever took over her and she died within three days.  I mean, it was totally sudden.  And she said that that really sent my grandmother [Gussie Smith Russell] into the worse depression ever.  She said that she remembers very much, you know, my grandmother just losing it over the death of her oldest child.  And that back then they would bring the body home, to the home for the repast, for the viewing of the body, and my grandmother just was devastated to have to have that in her living room.  And my mother said she was never quite the same after that happened.  And so, my mother saw all of that and saw what it did to her mother.  And I think that it, it really inspired her to stay very close to her children because of what happened to her mother and what happened to her sister.
Story_ID: 614700
Speaker 1: Let's switch to your father's side--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --of the family.  And tell me your father's name, where he was born, and if you know his date of birth.
Speaker 2: My father was born on March 31, 1920 in Fort Smith, Arkansas.  His name is Stratford Sherman Hilliard [Stratford Hilliard].  He is an identical twin.  His twin brother, Bedford Hilliard, unfortunately drowned when he was four, so I never knew him.  But I knew that my dad was a twin, and he's still with us.  He's eighty-eight years old, as is my mom [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard], who's still with us at eighty-four.
Speaker 1: Where does he live?
Speaker 2: They live in Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 1: The live in Detroit still?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And tell me, did he share any stories about his growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, many stories.  He was one of thirteen children, and he used to always tell me stories that--around dinnertime.  Because with thirteen brothers and sisters, dinnertime was always an adventure, and you had to learn how to stand up for yourself, or else you wouldn't get, you know, the food that was being passed around the table.  He was the youngest boy in the family so, and he was on the short side.  So he always felt he had to stand up for his position at the dinner table, or else he wouldn't get the prime cuts of whatever was going around.  But he talked about how strong his mother [Minnie King Hilliard] and father were, in terms of disciplining them.  Many of his brothers and sisters, almost all of them, went to college.  And this is, again, back in, you know, the days when that was not the case.  His father, my grandfather, James Murray Hilliard, Sr. [James Hilliard, Sr.], was an executive chef.  And he used to travel the South in the '20s [1920s] going to major cities, going in major hotels like the Peabody [Peabody Hotel] in Memphis [Tennessee], all the big hotels, teaching those executive chefs how to be an executive chef.  Because back then he couldn't wear that title.  Because of being an African American, they would not give him the title, but they wanted him to do the instruction.  Interestingly he learned how to cook from his wife, Minnie Hilliard's mother, who was a cook in someone's grand home in Arkansas.  So, he met my grandmother because he was doing basic work around that home.  And he would hang out in the kitchen so he could be next to, close to my grandmother.  And her mother was the cook for this wealthy family, and so by hanging around the kitchen he learned how to cook, and that became his profession.  So my father also loved to cook, and he got that from his dad.  But my dad grew up wanting to be a doctor; that was his dream.  He went to, he also went to Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], and then he was--I'm trying to remember.  He went into the [U.S.] Army.  He wanted to be part of the Tuskegee Airmen.  And I remember that he came--he told me a story of coming very close to becoming a Tuskegee Airmen, but there was a riot on the base back near, where things were being selected.  And because of that, he did not get selected because of the riots that happened.  And he always regretted that, because he was like two weeks away from that selection process.  And he loved to fly in airplanes.  He will get on a plane today, in a moment's notice.  So, he's a very strong man; very strong willed, very disciplined, very caring about his family and his family is very close.
Story_ID: 614701
Speaker 1: What trait have you gotten from your father [Stratford Hilliard]?
Speaker 2: I think from my father I've gotten the trait of being very authentic to yourself, to, being very honest about your situations; to not let anything deter you from taking care of your family.  I remember my father working two jobs, sometimes three jobs, to support our family.  And I also got from my father that a man should support his wife and her dreams, because he was doing all of this while my mother [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard] was going to school [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan].  So, my mother had dreams of going to school after having four children, and my father supported her in that.  And so, I grew up thinking that's how a husband and wife should be; that the husband should be a hardworking person, but also support the wife's dreams, and I saw him do that.  I saw him never living with a lot of regret.  You know, he had some things that, some dreams that he didn't fulfill, like being a Tuskegee Airman and not being able to be a doctor.  But I never felt that he let that hold him back, and he would still strive to do other things.  If this didn't work out, he said try something else.  And so I learned how to keep going, you know, from my dad.
Story_ID: 614702
Speaker 1: You talked a little bit about your [paternal] grandfather.  Did you know your Grandfather Hilliard [James Hilliard, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: I met him only a couple of times.  I don't remember much of him.  He died when I was about four.  But I remember very clearly him coming to Detroit [Michigan] to visit our family.  He was a big man.  He was bald, very tall, fair-skinned.  And I remember this image of him coming to our house and I remember my father [Stratford Hilliard] being very nervous.  And that was the funniest thing, because my father, I'd never seen him nervous about anything.  But he was nervous about his father coming to his home for the first time.  And I have this image to this day of my grandfather sitting out on our back porch, because we had a light, an overhead light, and that light was shining all over his bald head.  And I just remember Grandfather Hilliard, you know, sitting there as a big man, and my father sitting next to him and my father looking very proud that his father was in our home, and smiling, and my grandfather smiling back at him.
Speaker 1: And what about your grandmother, Minnie [Minnie King Hilliard]?  Do you remember her?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Grandmother Hilliard was the warmest, lovingest person.  We would go to Arkansas to visit, and she would, my mother would try to get us to settle down and not run around.  And she'd go, "Gwen [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard], let those children be.  Let them just have fun."  We'd be out in the backyard just doing whatever we wanted to do, running around.  And she always had lots of food.  But I remember she always had an ice, an ice tub full of sodas, and we could grab what we wanted.  Whenever we'd go shopping with her, there was a little carousel that you'd put a penny, you know, in the horse.  And my mother was always trying to like keep us in line.  And she's like, "Gwen, let the girls ride on the pony."  She would always let us do fun stuff.  And she had the, a very bright smile and a twinkle in her eye.  And I remember how sad it was when she passed, you know.  I remember going to her funeral.  I remember also that my parents talking about their fiftieth wedding anniversary.  My grandparents on my father's side were married for over fifty years.  But they had a big celebration for their fiftieth anniversary, and a plaque was done for them to celebrate it, with their names and all of their children's names engraved on it.  That was in my home, and still is in my home, my parents' home in Detroit.  So, I remember seeing a strong bond of fifty years to last through a lot.  They had tragedies, you know, with my father's twin [Bedford Hilliard] drowning suddenly.  Another one of their daughters died of some sort of, I think it was tuberculosis back then.  So, they weathered their storms, but they smiled.  And my grandfather, you know, was a dapper man as well.  He, the picture that I have of him that I keep in my home, he was bald headed, but he had the best hats in the world.  So, he had a very nice fedora that he would wear.  And that's my favorite picture of him, from their fiftieth anniversary.
Story_ID: 614703
Speaker 1: I know you don't know your great-grandparents.  But do you know their names?
Speaker 2: I do know my great-grandfather on my father's [Stratford Hilliard] side.  His name is T.P. Hilliard [ph.], and he actually was a minister.  So he had his own church, and it was in, somewhere in Florida.  I don't recall exactly where, but T.P. Hilliard, I have a picture of him.  I do tend to like to keep my ancestral pictures, so I have what I call an ancestral wall in my home with my great-grandfather's picture and my grandparents' pictures on this wall so that my children can see where they come from.  So, that's all I know about T.P. Hilliard.  I know that he was married twice, and so he had kind of two sets of children; I do know that piece of it.  And so, of the, I know the, some of the children from--his second set of children, I do know that.  And so, that's kind of all I know about him.
Story_ID: 614704
Speaker 1: You talked about your parents [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard and Stratford Hilliard]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and your [paternal] grandparents [Minnie King Hilliard and James Hilliard, Sr.]--your grandparents being very light.  Was there any talk, or do you have any knowledge of interracial marriages?
Speaker 2: I don't know of any.  But my grandfather's skin color would leave one to believe that somewhere along the line there was an interracial marriage.  My grandmother on my father's side clearly was, has Indian [Native American] in her blood, and you can tell from her bone structure.  In fact it's Cherokee, we've done some research.  And there's Cherokee in her side of the family.  And on my mother's side of the family, I do know that there was interracial--I don't know if it was marriage, but let's just call it interracial relations back in those times.  In slavery times those were not always desired relations, but they happened nonetheless.
Story_ID: 614705
Speaker 1: Can you spell your aunts' names, just so that we have the correct spelling?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  My aunt, my mother, on my mother's [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard] side, Aileen Russell Woodson, A-I-L-E-E-N, Russell, R-U-S-S-E-L-L, Woodson, W-O-O-D-S-O-N.  My great-aunts are Blanche, B-L-A-N-C-H-E, Renfro, R-E-N-F-R-O [Mary Smith Renfro], and Aunt Clem [Lizzie Smith] and Aunt Noble [Annie Smith]; I don't know their last names.  On my father's [Stratford Hilliard] side--goodness, my aunts and uncles--do you want those?  Or--
Speaker 1: No, the ones that you spoke of.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We wanted to make sure we had the correct spelling.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  I have lots of stories on my father's side with his brothers and sisters, whenever we get to that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, we can start there.
Speaker 2: Okay.  On my father's side my aunts and uncles would include, in no particular order, Uncle Herbert Hilliard; Herbert S. Hilliard, H-E-R-B-E-R-T, Hilliard; James Murray Hilliard, Jr. [James Hilliard, Jr.]; Uncle Jinks.  In other words, Uncle Jinks was my father's favorite brother; they were very, very close.  Aunt Sue [Thelma Sue Hilliard Smith], Aunt Alice [Alice Hilliard Payne], Aunt Gloria, those are the ones that I knew.  Uncle Talmadge [Talmadge Hilliard, Sr.] was his oldest brother, I didn't know him.  I think I met him once.  But he was the oldest.  He was old enough to be my grandmother, grandfather; he was old.  But I was very close to my Uncle Herbert and his wife, Aunt Alma Hilliard.  They lived in Annapolis, Maryland, Anne Arundel [Anne Arundel County] on the bay [Chesapeake Bay], and I was very close to them.  I used to go spend summers there just because we had a special bond.  And Aunt Alice, they all lived in Indianapolis, Indiana.  Aunt Sue stayed in Fort Smith, Arkansas.  Gloria Hilliard lived here in Chicago [Illinois], she was a teacher.  She was beautiful.  She was the beauty of the family.  And my young, my sister right under me, Gloria [Gloria Hilliard Banks], is named after Aunt Gloria.  And Anita Nance is a cousin, but she was more like--she was the daughter of my Aunt Eleanor [Eleanor Hilliard Nance] on my father's side, but I didn't know her.  And my Aunt Eleanor, though, was also in the food business.  And so, many times I feel my ancestors at my back, and their wings beneath my wings.  And when things are kind of crazy for me in the food business, I know I have my ancestors, who were in the food business also, supporting me.  And I'm not thinking of everybody on my father's side, because there were thirteen of them.  But those are the ones that I remember.
Story_ID: 614706
Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory?  And I want to stay in your elementary years.  As far as school is concerned--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --what's your earliest memory in school?
Speaker 2: My earliest school memory was nursery school, because my mother [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard] had a nursery school in the basement of our home.  It was a cooperative, so my mother was an entrepreneur way back then.  In order to stay close to the children and to make money for our family, she ran a nursery school out of her basement.  And my teacher's name was Miss Alice [ph.], and I remember getting dressed in the morning and going downstairs to school.  And it was, it was so much fun.  Miss Alice was great.  She wore saddle oxfords and poodle skirts, and I remember that.  And she was white, and she taught all black students in our basement.  And my--I loved to color.  I loved anything relating to art.  I loved making things, and I liked getting dressed for school.  My mother to this day will tell me that, you know.  And I liked my things to match, you know, my skirts and my blouses to match, and my socks to match, and my ribbons to match.  My mother said I used to drive her crazy if they didn't match.  I would get kind of upset, but I enjoyed getting dressed for school.  I have friends from that time period.  Deborah Ford [Deborah Bledsoe Ford] is my oldest friend that I remember.  She was in nursery school with me.  David Barthwell was my oldest male friend in nursery school with me.  They're still friends of mine today.  Deborah Ford is actually a judge in Detroit [Michigan], and David is a doctor here in Chicago [Illinois].  So that's my earliest school memory.
Speaker 1: And when you went to kindergarten or the first grade, what school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I attended Roosevelt Elementary School in Detroit.  And one of my earliest memories of kindergarten was how I came to use the name Amy [HistoryMaker Amy S. Hilliard].  Because when I was in kindergarten, up until that time, people were calling me by my first name, Audrey.  But at that time there was a cartoon out called 'Little Audrey,' and she was a bit of a, of a troublemaker, and she had these crazy, crazy Curly Qs on her hair.  And so, when I got to kindergarten and I said my name was Audrey, well, kids started teasing me, "Oh, Little Audrey, Little Audrey."  And I said, "You know what?  My name is not Audrey, it's Amy."  And so, I really told people that that's what I wanted to be called.  And so, even though Amy is my third name--because Audrey Sharmane Amy, that's the name I go by today.  And I remember very clearly in kindergarten saying, "That's what I want to be called," and I remember that.  I remember my kindergarten teacher, Miss Murphy [ph.].  She was a jovial woman.  She was just, she was jolly, you know, she was one of those jolly people.  I loved kindergarten, we had the best time.  We would make stuff.  We would make, we would make butter in a jar.  You know, she'd sit us all in a circle and she'd pass around a jar of heavy cream.  And we all had to shake it five times and keep passing it to the next person until it became butter, and then we could eat on crackers.  I remember that.  So, it was, it was fun.
Speaker 1: Two things.  What year did you start kindergarten?
Speaker 2: Ooh, well, let's see.  Kindergarten, I would have started when I was five.  And I was born in '52 [1952], so probably 1957.
Story_ID: 614707
Speaker 1: You had so many names.  Who named you?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a lot of names because I think my parents thought I was going to be the last one.  My mother [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard] had some difficult pregnancies, and so they kind of put (laughter) all the names on me.  Audrey came from one of my great-aunts that I didn't know; it was a great-aunt on my mother's side.  And I remember my mother telling me about Aunt Audrey, that she was a very elegant woman and she loved to dress.  And that's kind of all I know about her.  But that was my first name.  Sharmane is for my father [Stratford Hilliard], whose middle name is Sherman.  So, they wanted someone to have something close to my father Sherman.  And Amy [HistoryMaker Amy S. Hilliard], I'm not sure where my mother got Amy from.  But I think it was, again, one of her aunts on her father's side that I didn't know.  And that's where the Amy came from.
Story_ID: 614708
Speaker 1: You went to Roosevelt [Roosevelt Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] from kindergarten to?
Speaker 2: The sixth (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The sixth grade?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What other teachers do you remember? Who was influential during that time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, goodness.  I remember my first grade teacher, Cecil McFadden [Cecil Whittaker McFadden], because she had a thing about penmanship.  And the first day of the first grade, she had us write down our name five times on a piece of paper.  And then after we'd been in class almost toward the end of the semester, she had us write our names down again, and pulled out that first sheet of paper, so we could see the progress in our penmanship from the first day of school, when we couldn't write well at all, to when we were almost leaving the first grade.  And our penmanship after practice was excellent.  I remember her instilling a love of reading in me.  She would read to us all the time, and reading to us was important.  And I used to just love for her to read to us, and story time was a favorite time of mine.  I remember also my French teacher.  At that time, we were taught French, even in elementary school.  Miss Bohannan [ph.], she used to teach us French.  This was in like the third or fourth grade.  And I loved French, and wanted to visit Paris [France] from back then, when she teach us un, deux, trois, you know, how to count in French, and bon jour, things of that nature.  I also remember Mrs. Cleage, Pearl Cleage [Doris Graham Cleage], whose daughter, [HistoryMaker] Pearl Cleage is now a very famous author.  But Mrs. Cleage was so--she was my social studies teacher, and she was so into history.  She let us know about our history.  She was very, very fair-skinned.  She could have passed for white, but she was so proud of being a black woman.  And she would bring all kinds of historical things to the classroom.  Mrs. Cleage was just wonderful for instilling a love of history.  The principal of the school, Mrs. Lynette Taylor, she was just, I was in awe of her, because she was so gracious and refined, and she made you want to present your best self every day.  She would walk those halls dressed elegantly every day.  I mean just--every outfit was just--dressed well.  And she did it not in a showy way, but it was her persona, and she set the standard of what she wanted her school to be.  She wanted her school to be run well.  She wanted us to present ourselves well.  And she was, her voice was very soft spoken but very determined.  I remember when Mrs. Taylor would come over the PA system with announcements.  You would just stop, because her voice was strong, but soothing.  And she'd say, "Students, this is an important message.  I want you to listen."  And we would listen.  When we'd have assemblies in the hall, I would just love to sit up close so I could sit up next to her, because she smelled good too.  I also remember Mr. Tom Mason [Thomas Mason], he was my math teacher in the third grade.  Now, this is when there were, you know, there were more male teachers than there ever were now in elementary school.  Mr. Mason could have played football, he was huge.  But he taught us math, and he was like a gentle bear.  He would teach you that math and he would laugh, but boy, Mr.--and you called your teachers by their last names.  And he wore a tie every day.  And so I grew up, you know, going to see and hearing Mr. Mason teaching us about math, and the image of a strong black man teaching small children.  But with, but he had a gentleness around him that I remember to this day.  I remember Mr. Cross [ph.], he was my sixth grade teacher, because, and I remember him because he was stern.  He was white but he was stern, and he was a teacher I remember.  Because I remember profoundly when John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated, because I was in Mr. Cross' class.  And he, this is a man who rarely smiled.  He was a taskmaster.  But I remember him coming in, being called out of our classroom and coming back in total red face, with a totally red face.  His face was totally red, and he was in tears.  And he announced that President Kennedy had been shot and killed in Dallas [Texas].  I'll never forget that.  I remember Mrs. Grady, our librarian, who was a friend of the family.  Her husband, Mr. Grady, owned a pharmacy near our church [Grace Episcopal Church, Detroit, Michigan].  But Zephyr Grady, she was, again, she was a task master, but she was fun.  She was one of my mother's [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard] bridge playing friends.  But at school, she was Mrs. Grady.  And if you messed up in the library, she had a ruler, and she would come by and she'd whack you on the hand.  It didn't matter that she was friends with my family.  I got the whack just like everybody else if the class messed up.  So, I remember her wanting everybody to be very quiet in the library.  And boy, if you started--you know, if other kids starting messing up, I was like, "Would you stop that?  Because I'm going to get hit just like you are."  (Laughter) And so, I remember that about Mrs. Grady.  That's some of the things I remember.  I remember my gym teacher, I can't remember his name.  But I remember he was just, he was a white guy, tall.  I think Mr. Scott [ph.] was his name.  He encouraged me to run.  I, at one point wanted to run track in college.  But it was, I never wanted to practice that hard.  But in elementary school, I was kind of a track star.  I used to run the 50-yard dash, and I won some school records that way.  And I think that was my beginnings of wanting to stay athletic.  It started with him.
Story_ID: 614709
Speaker 1: What other activities were you involved in in school?  You said track was one of them.
Speaker 2: Track was one of them (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What else?
Speaker 2: In elementary school [Roosevelt Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], I was involved in the typing team.  We had a Mr.--oh, Mr. Stevenson [ph.], he was the assistant principal.  And we took typing, and he was so mean.  I mean he was like--where Mrs. Taylor [Lynette Taylor] was very nice, Mr. Stevenson was very, very mean.  He would scare people walking through the halls, because he had this big, booming voice.  Then I found out my mother [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard] wanted us to take typing so we'd learn how to type.  And he was the typing teacher, and I was like, "What?"  And he could type with the speed of light.  It was so funny.  He would start off the class, you know, "Okay, how fast do you think people can type?"  And, you know, he'd get us on the typewriter and we'd be pecking one finger.  And he said, "Let me show you how fast you should type." (Makes sound) And I remember that, saying, "Oh, my god, he's, you know, like a robot."  But when he was teaching typing, he was a totally different person.  So, I took typing.  I was in the glee club, so I would sing.  I did, I wanted to be in school plays.  And honor roll, you know.  I wanted to do well in school. And I liked being on the honor roll at school.
Story_ID: 614710
Speaker 1: So you were a good student.  But what type of child were you?
Speaker 2: I think as a child, I was very inquisitive.  I wanted to know how things worked.  I wanted to know why. "Why is this this way?"  And, "Why can't we do it that way?"  I liked doing things my way, you know, finding ways to do it the way that I liked to do it.  I liked to have things done right.  I was, I liked my reports to be really, really well done.  I liked to--when I would set the table at home I wanted it to be set just so.  I liked cooking when I was very, at a very young age.  In fact one of the things I did when I was growing up was, because my mother [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard] was in school while I was in elementary school [Roosevelt Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], she taught me how to cook.  I guess she--since I learned how to cook, I used to have to cook dinner for my whole family, I think starting about the sixth grade.  So, I learned how to cook for six people.  And when I was out on my own, I only knew how to cook for six people.  So (laughter) I had a lot of leftovers by the time I went out on my own.  But I used to cook a lot.  And I used to love to cook for my dad [Stratford Hilliard].  I used to love to make sandwiches, make his lunch.  That was something that was very special for me.  So, the napkin had to be folded very nicely.  I would stick pickles on his sandwich on a toothpick, and I'd fold the napkin and I'd, you know, arrange his food.  And he used to really love that.  I remember making a pie for him when I was in elementary school.  Because our neighbors next door to our home had fruit trees, and so I would go pick the cherries.  And I made him--because cherry pie was his favorite.  And I made him a cherry pie, and I forgot to take the pits out of the cherries.  And the pie was delicious, and he broke into it and broke a tooth.  But he was like, "Baby, this is the best pie anyone's ever made" (laughter).  I broke his tooth.  I was creative.  I liked to experiment with food, and my mother always let me do it.  One St. Patrick's Day I said, "I want to make green pancakes."  And she said, she had food coloring, and she said, "Okay."  And so I made green pancakes that looked horrible.  Nobody would eat them because they looked bad.  Green pancakes was a great idea, but they didn't look too good.  So, I used to experiment with everything.
Story_ID: 614711
Speaker 1: Who were your friends in elementary school [Roosevelt Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan]?  And what was the makeup of the school?  Was it an integrated school?
Speaker 2: It was integrated, but largely African American. By that time, whites were starting to move out to the suburbs in Detroit [Michigan].  But my closest friends in school, ooh, were Michelle Cunningham [ph.].  She was a friend from back then.  Debbie Ford [Deborah Bledsoe Ford] was still there at school, and David Barthwell. The kids I went to nursery school with, some of them were in elementary school with me.  Beverly, what was Beverly's last name?  Beverly Fanniker [ph.], I want to say.  She was a friend, but she became a friend really later.  She was kind of my archenemy when we were in the fourth grade.  We'd always, you know, "I'm going to get you after school."  And then when we got to high school [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan], she was a really good friend.  She was the captain of the cheer team, and got me on the cheer team.  I remember Renee Floyd [ph.] was in my class.  Eddie Anderson [ph.] was my guy I had a first crush on, he was there.  Those are some of the things I remember from elementary school.
Story_ID: 614712
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the neighborhood in which you lived.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me, say, if you had to take me on a tour--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --of a square block from where you lived--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --tell me about the neighborhood.  What, first, tell me your earliest memory of the neighborhood in which you lived.
Speaker 2: Well, we lived in a middle working class neighborhood in Detroit [Michigan], and it was a beautiful neighborhood.  Back then, you know, if you--and the good thing about Detroit is that if you were willing to work hard, you could get a job in the auto plant.  So there were a lot of autoworkers that lived in our neighborhood.  So, our neighborhood was well kept, and I remember everybody kept their lawn really, really pretty.  And I remember that just walking down the street, everybody's grass was always cut, and there were always flowers around.  And people in my neighborhood took pride in their homes, so they kept them up and people would take care.   We had a block club.  I remember my parents going to block club meetings.  But one of my earliest memories is my father [Stratford Hilliard] coming home from work.  He would come home from work and we would be there waiting for him.  And he would stop at the walkway to our house, and I'd run down and I'm grab onto his leg and sit on his foot, and he would swing me up the walkway and up the steps.  And I was his Bunty Bink number two, and he would--
Speaker 1: His what?
Speaker 2: Bunty Bink number two.  We were all Bunty Binks.  And he'd say, "Hi, Bunty Bink number two."  And I'd grab his foot and sit on his foot, and he would swing me up the walk with his briefcase up the steps.  And I remember sitting on those steps with my dad at a very young age.  We had flower pots, we had a big flower pot.  We had two big areas where you could put a big flower pot on either side of our porch.  We had a big porch.  And I remember that my mother [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard] always kept flowers there.  I remember in our backyard she had a rose garden, and my father actually tended those roses for her.  And it was a beautiful hedge of roses, and I remember that.  I remember our dogs, we used to have dogs in our home.  We had a Cocker Spaniel, Chauncey [ph.] was his name, and I loved him very much.  And a dog, Tawn [ph.], a beagle, Tawn, and we used to love her.  I remember riding bikes.  We lived near a park, La Salle Park.  Our street was 2260 South La Salle Gardens, and it was near La Salle Boulevard.  And where we lived was a working class street, but right around the corner were upper middle class homes.  It was an all-black neighborhood, almost all black.  There were still some white neighbors.  But they, our next door neighbors were white, but they moved out.  But it was in transition.  But the homes that were right around the corner from us were unbelievably gorgeous.  They were huge.  And I remember Dr. Edwards, Galene Edwards [ph.], which was a good friend of mine from the elementary school [Roosevelt Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan].  She didn't go to my school, but she was my closest friend in the neighborhood.  Her dad was a doctor.  And her home, to this day, would be in Architectural Digest.  It was exquisite.  It was huge, decorated with the finest velvet drapes and brocade sofas.  I remember going to her home in the living room, and loving to just run up to the sofa and dive into it, because it would--you'd dive into it and it would go (makes sound).  It was down filled, it was amazing.  She had a pool in the backyard.  So, we had a combination of very well to do African American families on one side of the block.  We lived on the working class side of the block, but everybody got along.  The park was safe.  There was a safety in the neighborhood.  We had many mothers who would watch over us in the neighborhood.  Aunt Verna [ph.] and Uncle Truman [ph.] were--we knew where to go if we couldn't find our parents.  We'd go to Aunt Verna's house or Uncle Truman's house.  We'd go to Galene's house.  We'd go, you know, across the street to our babysitter's house.  Anita [ph.] was her name and Lamont [ph.] was her brother, and I can't remember her parents' name right now.  But we had a very good sense of neighborhood and safety, it was great.  I also remember down the street we had a numbers runner, Mr. Evans [ph.].  He always had a new Cadillac every year.  And we knew he worked for the Cadillac people, but he really had a really nice Cadillac every year.  And I would always ask my mother and father, "How come Mr. Evans has a Cadillac every year?"  And they were like, "Well, that Mr. Evans, you know, he just has his own business."  You know, (laughter) that's what they would say.  And he had lots of kids, but he had that Cadillac every year.  So, it was great.
Speaker 1: How did you find out he was a numbers runner?
Speaker 2: I found that out after I became, after I got to high school [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan].  And, you know, then you'd find out the real deal.  People would tell you, you know--
Speaker 1: What other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My friends would tell us.
Story_ID: 614713
Speaker 1: What other businesses were in your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we, interestingly, we lived close to 12th Street, which was two blocks away from our home, and that was the business district.  So I remember Superior Beauty and Barber Supply [Detroit, Michigan].  Mr. Jefferson, Melvin Jefferson owned that with--oh goodness, what was his name?  He had a partner, and I can't remember his name.  I can see it--Lou Morgan [Louis Morgan] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) African--these are African Americans?
Speaker 2: These are African Americans, yes.  Mr. Melvin Jefferson and Mr. Lou Morgan owned Superior Beauty and Barber Supply.  So that was back in the fifties, and that's where all the hairstylists would go.  It was a very well known, very well run beauty supply store.  So the Koreans weren't in it.  This was Mr. Morgan, Mr. Lou Morgan and Mr. Jefferson's store, their business.  Mr. Grady owned Grady Pharmacy [ph.], right across the street from our church [Grace Episcopal Church, Detroit, Michigan].  This was also on 12th Street.  There was a record store on 12th Street.  There were a lot of black businesses two blocks away from our home.  And also, about four blocks away from our home was Motown [Motown Records].  So, I remember very much growing up going to West Grand Boulevard, which was a big, big thoroughfare and seeing Hitsville U.S.A. [Detroit, Michigan].  And I remember seeing The Supremes, The Temptations, The Miracles, all of them just kind of hanging out there when they were all starting out.  I could sit across the street and watch them come and go.  Stevie Wonder, all of them were right near our neighborhood.  Aretha Franklin lived in our neighborhood.  Again, we had the working class street, but three or four blocks going east or west were these beautiful homes.  And Reverend C.L. Franklin lived in one of those areas where it was close to West Grand Boulevard in a big beautiful masonry home, and that's where Aretha Franklin grew up.  And so I remember seeing her father.  I didn't see her, but I saw her father, and I knew that that was where she grew up.  So, I remember seeing a lot of black business owners.  I grew up thinking you could own a business.  I grew up thinking you could be a judge.  I grew up--because my best friend Debbie Ford [Deborah Bledsoe Ford], her mother was a judge.  I remember--and my other best friend, Galene [Galene Edwards (ph.)], her father was a doctor.  So I remember seeing business owners, doctors, firemen, you know, educators.  My parents, my mother [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard] was a teacher.  My father [Stratford Hilliard] was a medical administrator, he was a lab technician.  And then he ran one of the drug programs in Detroit [Michigan].  So, I grew up thinking you could kind of be a businessperson if you wanted to.  You could be whatever you wanted to be, because all my role models were right in my neighborhood.
Story_ID: 614714
Speaker 1: Tell me about your family.  You have siblings.
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me your--you have all sisters, is that right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All sisters, yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me their names--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --order of birth, and where you fit in.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit, something about them during that time, during your elementary years [at Roosevelt Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Okay.  My oldest sister is Pamela Adele Hilliard Owens [Pamela Hilliard Owens].  She's twenty-two months older than I am.  And I, then I'm number two.  And then my youngest--my next sister is Gloria Aileen Hilliard Banks [Gloria Hilliard Banks].  And then under her is my youngest sister Wendy, but her full name is Gwendolyn Lee Hilliard Mensah [Wendy Hilliard Mensah].  So I am in the middle, I'm a middle child.  And my older sister, Pam, I used to follow her around all the time, because she was only twenty-two months older than me.  And I remember she was like, you know, "Why do you always follow me around?"  I wanted to do everything she wanted to do.  And she used to just get angry because my mother [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard] would always say, "Take your sister with you."  And she's like, "I don't want to.  I want to do it with my friends."  And I was always kind of the tag along with her.  And, and, she, she also did very well in school.  And she was a musician, she played clarinet, violin.  She was always in the band.  I remember that about her in that younger stage.  But we were also kind of competitive, because I was always trying to kind of get in with her friends.  And so she was always trying to be the older sister, and I didn't want to let her be the older sister.  Gloria, the one right under me, she was dyslexic growing up.  So she--my mother and father [Stratford Hilliard], while they pushed us to do very well in school--I mean we couldn't bring home Cs without having an issue about it.  And so my parents were very much about, "You are, you can do well in school, and we expect you to do that."  With Gloria, you know, because she couldn't, because she had a hard time learning how to read and what not, they kind of let Gloria do whatever she wanted to do.  And she's so funny.  She still to this day is a, is a riot.  But she didn't have that pressure of doing well in school.  They just, my father said, "Just leave her alone, and let her do what she can do."  And so she, you know, kind of learned at her own pace during that time.  So, Gloria was always happy.  She was always laughing, I remember back in those times.  And my sister Wendy was the baby of the family, and so we spoiled her, you know.  We just--I remember very much Wendy being born.  I don't remember Gloria being born, but I remember my mother saying she was crying, and I had to carry her down the steps.  And I carried her down the steps with a blanket trailing me, and my mother was very calm about not scaring me so I wouldn't drop the baby.  So I took care of my sisters.
Story_ID: 614715
Speaker 1: We're going to continue talking about your family. And your sisters, we just were introduced to your sisters.  So tell me, what were holidays like at your home?
Speaker 2: Oh, goodness, holidays were really special.  My parents [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard and Stratford Hilliard] made a big deal out of holidays, particularly Thanksgiving and Christmas.  Halloween was a big holiday because my sister Pam's [Pamela Hilliard Owens] birthday was October 27, and so it was always close to Halloween.  So her birthday party was always fun, because we always celebrated Halloween together, and we always had pumpkins at the tables, and we could dress up for Halloween.  But Thanksgiving was also very important, where we'd always have a formal Thanksgiving at the dinner, dining room table of turkey, dressing, the whole bit, some family members there.  At one point my cousin Tommy [Thomas Smith]--Aunt Sue's, one of Aunt Sue's [Thelma Sue Hilliard Smith] sons, was living with us in Detroit [Michigan] and going to school, and he was there.  So we'd always have family around for Thanksgiving.  And Christmas was just the best.  My dad and mom made Christmas such a big deal.  They would not let us come downstairs, you know, until we were, they were ready.  And so it was always a big deal.  We'd wake up at the crack of dawn, and we're like, "We want to come downstairs."  And my father would be downstairs and he would say, "No, you can't come yet.  Santa Claus is still here.  You can't come down until he goes, and you got to go back to bed."  And we'd go back to bed, and like, "Daddy, Daddy, can we come yet?"  And he would make us almost just go nuts with anticipation about when we could come.  And he had movie cameras back then, and so he'd have to get all of his equipment set up.  And when he would tell us we could come downstairs, it would be like a floodgate.  We would tumble all over each other down the stairs to the tree.  And we didn't have a lot of presents.  We didn't because we couldn't afford it, but the ones we had were very special.  And the anticipation of, you know, just going into the stockings, we had stockings.  We'd put stuff out for Santa Claus.  My parents made it very special.  They made us feel like we were very well to do, and we weren't, you know.  But they made us feel that way by the rituals of Christmas, you know, the Christmas cards and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: I was going to ask was there any tradition that, you know, just your family did that you realized other families might not have done?
Speaker 2: Well, the decorations--going to get the Christmas tree.  We had a live Christmas tree, and that was something that we would do.  My father would always take us and we'd get to pick out the tree, and then we as a family would trim the tree together.  And I know that a lot of kids didn't have that, you know, growing up.  And yet, you know, we would buy the tree from the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)].  So it was, you know, a cheap tree, but it was a tree that we could afford.  And they made sure that we had that ritual of decorating the tree together.  We didn't go to Midnight--to church Midnight Mass, but we would sometimes go to church on Christmas Day.  And we always had, my mother has, to this day, a china manger scene.  And that ritual of unwrapping each piece--and it was, you know, baby Jesus in his manger, the Three Wise Men.  And this was, they were china or porcelain, so it was very, very delicate.  But we had to all sit, and each of us carefully unwrapped that and put it on our piano.  And that was one of the first things that we did.  It wasn't just the tree.  We also knew it was baby Jesus' birthday.  And to this day we still, my mother still has that set and it's on the piano every Christmas.  But that was a big ritual for us, was unwrapping the manger scene.
Story_ID: 614716
Speaker 1: You talked about your mother [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard], that she was in school [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan].  Tell me more about your father and his work this, at this time.
Speaker 2: Okay.  He was a lab medical technician at Herman Kiefer Hospital [Detroit, Michigan].  So he would do blood tests, you know, when they would do blood tests for medical work.  He was in charge of that testing facility, because he studied medical technology in school as a preparation for ultimately going to med school.  So, that's what he did.  And I remember my mother and father would always make sure that we saw where they worked.  I remember going to where my mother taught, but I remember the best times were going to the hospital, going to see daddy at work.  And we'd go down this long hall, and it smelled really medicinal.  And I remember my father in his lab coat, you know, Stratford S. Hilliard [Stratford Hilliard]. He'd have his white lab coat, and him sitting at the bench with all the tubes of blood and what not, testing the blood.  And his best friend, Hank Waddles [ph.], Uncle Hank and daddy, they'd both have their lab coats on, looking very officious and important.  And they let us sit and watch them work and, you know, we would do that.  Sometimes my mother would bring them lunch, or we'd pick them up after work and she would bring us.  I used to just love to watch them, you know, at work because it made me feel very proud of my father.  And I'd meet his secretary, and it was--I don't remember her name, but it was--they were always very formal.  It was Mr. Hilliard and Mrs. So and So.  And you know, she would always treat us very well.  But he took his work very seriously, and he was very well respected, I remember that.
Story_ID: 614717
Speaker 1: You mentioned Midnight Mass.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And church.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was your family active, very active in church?
Speaker 2: Very active in church.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your first memory of going to church.
Speaker 2: We went to Grace Episcopal Church [Detroit, Michigan].  Again, it was on 12th Street in that same neighborhood right across from the pharmacy on Webb [Street]--was it Webb?  No, Virginia Park [Street], 12th and Virginia Park.  And my first memories of church, I just remember going to church every Sunday with my parents [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard and Stratford Hilliard] and then sitting with them.  But my real memories start when I was kind of in elementary school [Roosevelt Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], being in the choir, in the junior choir of Grace Church.  And to get into the choir was very important.  And we had our robes.  They were maroon robes with these maroon little beads.  And we had to make sure that they were pressed before, you know, church; laying our clothes out and getting to church early enough for choir--going to choir rehearsal.  And in our home, you didn't do anything on Sunday if you didn't go to church.  So there was no, "I don't feel like going to church."  It was like you went to church, and if for some reason you really didn't want to go to church, it was like, "Okay, then.  You know if you do not go to church, you don't do anything else today.  You stay in the house."  So, going to church wasn't really an option.  My parents were very regular about us attending church on Sunday.  I remember our church was an active church.  Father Henri Stines was our minister, and we had a minister before him, but I don't remember him.  Father Stines was from Haiti, a very, very handsome man.  And I remember he was, he was more the Creole side of Haiti, not, so his skin was lighter, and yet he had this lilt, this Haitian lilt to his preaching, and he had a deep voice.  And so, and so the French side of him would come out sometimes, and he was just wonderful.  And his daughter, Suzette Stines [ph.] was in the choir with me and we were friends.  We got confirmed together, I remember going through Confirmation.  I remember Sunday school, going to Sunday school regularly after church.  I remember going to church camp, bible camp.  We'd go to bible camp, bible study in the summertime.  Pancake suppers, we'd have pancake suppers as fundraisers at the church.  And Aunt Jemima herself, or someone who was made up to be Aunt Jemima, would actually come.  But the men's fellowship would cook, so it was great to see all of the men of the church flipping pancakes in our church kitchen.  And we would run around, and you could just see all the pancakes that you ever wanted on a Wednesday night.  So, having pancakes on a Wednesday night was always fun.  My mother was in the women's auxiliary, so she was active.  And it was a great church.  We had youth groups.  One of the things I remember well is my sister [Pamela Hilliard Owens] when she was like in junior high school and I was in high school, I mean in elementary school.  The Young, Y, YLC, leadership--what was it?  EYC, Episcopal Young Churchgoers [sic. Episcopal Youth Community], or whatever.  And the EYC club, you had to be, you know, kind of junior high school to be in the EYC.  But they would meet on Sundays from four to six [o'clock] and you'd study, you know, Godly things from four to five, but from five to six would be kind of like a dance hop, you know, you could do the dances and what not, and they'd play records.  And I'd always want to tag along, and so I remember my mother made her take me to an EYC meeting once.  And I saw what happened from five to six, those guys were dancing.  Oh, boy, that was too much fun in the basement of the church.  So I really would go home and I'd practice, so that I could dance with the big guys at EYC.  And I remember Claude Payne [ph.], and what was Darrell's [ph.] last name?  Claude and Darrell, they were guys in church.  They would come, and they were the dancers.  And to have Claude or Darrell ask you to dance, you had to know how to dance.  So, I would practice at home.  And they never treated me like I was a little sister.  They always treated me, you know, like I was in their group.  But they taught me how to dance, and to this day, you know, I step now, because of the way Claude and Darrell taught me how to do the Detroit bop.  They were serious about it, and I was serious about it, but it was all through the church.  So it was, it was a wonderful thing.  I remember too, you know, our church was active political, a politically active church.  So I remember our city councilman speaking there over time.  It was just, it was, it was a wonderful way to grow up, it really was.
Story_ID: 614718
Speaker 1: Let's go to junior high school.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And first, tell me the name of the junior high school that you attended?
Speaker 2: I attended Mettetal Junior High School [Eugenia Mettetal Junior High School] in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Spell that for me.
Speaker 2: M-E-T-T-E-T-A-L, Mettetal Junior High School.
Speaker 1: And this would be what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen six--no, no.  Let's see.  I graduated from high school [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] in 1970.  So this would have been like 1966--1965 to '67 [1967], somewhere around there, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what's your memory of junior high school?
Speaker 2: Integrating it.  Because my class was the first class that integrated Mettetal Junior High School.  We were bussed, we were part of the first bussing system.  It was north toward the--it was in Detroit, but it was going towards the suburbs.  So we had to take a bus to school every day, you know, a regular Detroit bus, Detroit city bus.  But I remember they had a meeting with all the new incoming students, because we were the first class to integrate that junior high school, and they called us in the auditorium.  And it was a Jewish neighborhood, and I remember the principal saying, "You are the first Negro students to come to this neighborhood for school.  You know, this is part of the Detroit bussing--integrated system.  And, you know, we expect you to behave yourselves.  We have rules."  In essence they were saying, you know, "You guys are coming to our neighborhood, and you'd better behave."  So, whenever they'd have a meeting for all the Negro students they would call it, "This is a meeting for all the kids who take the bus."  They would never say this is for all the Negro or black kids.  "We have a meeting after school for all the kids who take the bus," and we knew that was us.  So, periodically they'd have these meetings.  But what I remember most is that I was the only black student in my seventh grade class.  And--
Speaker 1: How did that make you feel?
Speaker 2: It was an interesting feeling, because I wasn't that way.  I came from a class in elementary school [Roosevelt Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] where it was all black.  And then I went from that to being the only black student for the first part of my seventh grade.  And I remember walking in there and looking around, and saying, "Ooh, this is interesting."  But they told me I was going to be the only black.  They pulled me aside, my counselor, I don't remember her name; I remember her face.  Her first name was Naomi [ph.].  But I, she pulled me aside and she said, "I just want you to know that you're going to be the only black student in your class.  Are you okay with that?"  And I said, "I think I will be."  But my teacher, Miss Patreski [ph.] I think her name was, she wasn't okay with it, and I remember being treated differently.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember very clearly that she wouldn't call on me when it would be time to participate in class.  I'd raise my hand, you know, to answer a question.  She'd call on the person in front of me, she'd call on the person behind me, she'd call on the person to either side of me, and she would not call on me.  And that, I remember being very frustrated about that.  I remember also that I had a necklace that I would wear to school sometimes.  And it was just, it was a nice necklace with some sort of ornamentation on the front.  On the back of it was a mirror.  And I remember after being frustrated about not being called on once, I would just kind of look at myself in the mirror to bide the time, because she wouldn't call on me.  And I remember her pointing me out for doing that, and saying, "You stop that.  In fact, you come see me after class.  You shouldn't be doing that."  And she was very mean about it.  And I remember very well, that, you know, she made me come after school to talk about, "You shouldn't be playing with that mirror."  And I told her, I said, "Well, you won't call on me.  So, I had to do something."  She said, "What do you mean, I wouldn't call on you?"  I said, "You wouldn't call on me."  I said, "You called on--," and I told her.  I said, "You called on everybody but me. The person in front of me--."  I was kind of militant I guess, because my mother [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard] would--, "You called on the--," and I'll tell you a story about that, how I got that way.  "You called on the person in front of me, and back of me, and on either side of me, but you didn't call on me.  And I know you didn't call on me."  "I would never do that."  I said, "But you did."  Well, she sent me to the counselor because of that attitude.  And I told the counselor, I said, "You know, I'm not making this up.  She didn't call on me."  And apparently she and the counselor had a meeting about it, and that behavior stopped.  Now I got to that point of standing up for myself, and not being afraid of being the only black student standing up to her.  I got that from my mother, because this is when I was in elementary school.  My mother's sister [Aileen Russell Woodson] lived in Los Angeles [California], and I remember when I was four or five years old we took the train from Detroit to Los Angeles to visit my sister's family--my aunt's family in Los Angeles with my mother.  And we were going through Texas at this point in time.  So I was four or five years old, and this was in the '50s [1950s].  And I remember we got off the train to get lunch at a stop.  And we went up to, you know, the lunch counter in the train station and we got our lunch.  And we were going to sit down to eat it, and the person behind the counter told my mother, she said, "You can buy your lunch here, but you can't eat it here."  And my mother looked at her.  And this is somewhere in Texas.  And she said, "Excuse me?  Didn't we just pay for this with the same money that those people paid?  We are going to sit here at this lunch counter and we are going to eat our lunch."  And I just remember my mother saying that to this person, standing up to her.  She had on a black jumpsuit, you know, a traveling jumpsuit.  And she just said, not in a militant way, but she said, "Didn't we just pay with the same money?  Then we're going to sit here and eat.  We have the same right to eat as these people do."  And we sat there and ate our lunch.
Story_ID: 614719
Speaker 1: Did you understand what was going on at that time?
Speaker 2: I just remember my mother [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard], her resolve.  I'd never seen her so determined and resolved about, you know, somebody slighting her.  I didn't know about discrimination at that point, because in Detroit [Michigan] we didn't have any of that; we ate wherever we wanted to.  And I thought it was kind of--I remember it feeling unusual saying, "You can't eat here."  I was like, you know, what was that about?  And I remember my mother, you know, just saying, "Absolutely not.  We have the right to do that."  And I have never forgotten that.  And so when this teacher told me that, you know, she wasn't going to--she wasn't--I knew she was discriminating against me by this time.  I wasn't having it, and I was in the seventh grade [at Eugenia Mettetal Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan].  And you know, and she stopped it and then I got very good grades out of her class.  She was my homeroom teacher, and we came to a good understanding of respect after that, you know.  Because she knew I was a smart child, because, you know, you had to kind of test to get in there.  And I, but I would work hard, especially for any report.  It was, I had to work very hard there.  And my mother was my partner in that, because she was an educator.  We would sit up until midnight doing reports, and we'd do reports.  And my mother saved every Life magazine, every Ebony magazine, every Jet magazine, and Look magazine.  We had subscriptions, and in our attic we had piles of these magazines.  She never threw any of them away.  So when it was time to do a report on whatever subject in the world, I could just go upstairs to our library.  And my mother, we would get pictures.  And all my reports had these fabulous pictures from these magazines.  And we'd cut them out and we'd glue them, and we had to have them.  And my mother would just work with me to make sure my report was just wonderful.  So I'd get A's all the time.  And this teacher started having to, you know, respect me because of--she couldn't not give me what was due, because it was really, really good work, and I just remember that.  Then by the eighth grade, we had Joanne Gotley [ph.], another black student who came into my class.  And so I remember her, we were the only two blacks.  But I also remember, going back to the seventh grade, I used to get along with all the kids, the white kids.  It was the teachers who had the problem, it wasn't the kids.  The kids and I got along great.  Robin Levine [ph.], she sat behind me.  She was my best buddy, Robin Levine.  So, she was Jewish.  But she had the best clothes.  She had gogo boots, and I wanted gogo boots.  And my mother was like, "We can't, we can't afford gogo boots."  Well, Robin Levine had on gogo boots, and I used to want her gogo boots.  But she was just fun.  And she had this, she used to roll her hair up in orange, orange juice cans because she had this thick, straight hair.  Of course, my hair was nothing like that.  But I was just fascinated listening to her.  I remember Candice [ph.], another girl, Candice, who was very, very popular with the girls.  And so all the girls, we'd always hang out.  Robin, Candice, myself, and a couple of other girls, we'd always have lunch together.  And then I remember them talking about going to Hebrew school.  They'd always go to Hebrew school in addition to regular school.  And I was like, "Wow, you guys got to learn Hebrew?"  So they would teach me a few Hebrew words.  I remember during Passover they would bring their matzah crackers to school, and I, they'd give me some of them.  I'm like, these things are really--they don't taste good.  These are really not good.  And they would tell me the story of unleavened bread and why they were doing that, and how important it was to their religious upbringing.  And so I found it rather fascinating.  But I also remember in the seventh grade that the girls would sleep over at each other's homes on the weekends, but they'd never invite me.  And I remember asking, finally, you know, you know, "Why can't I come over?"  And they would ask their mothers, they would say, "I'm going to ask my mother can you come over tomorrow."  You know, and they would come back the next day and say, "I'm sorry, you can't," and they would look really sad.  And finally I said, "Well, what did your mother say?"  And one of them finally told me that, you know, because I was Negro, they couldn't have me to sleep over.
Speaker 1: Did you ever think about asking them to come to your home?
Speaker 2: No, because I lived far away.  I think I may have asked them, but because of the buses and everything--I was used to taking the bus to their home.  But I didn't really ask them to come to my home.  And that's a good question, because I didn't.  I always wanted to go to their home.  I had my own friends at home, but I was really curious about their home.
Story_ID: 614720
Speaker 1: You alluded to the fact that--well, I guess it shouldn't really be a question.  The kids that were chosen to take the bus, they were very--their academics, their grades were very high.  They weren't just--
Speaker 2: Not all of them (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: That was not the case?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The class that I was in was an accelerated seventh grade class, so I got into that class [at Eugenia Mettetal Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But these, the kids were from all parts of Detroit [Michigan], and that was part of the busing system, which is a very good point.  Because there were some folks coming from very tough neighborhoods, and so there were times on that bus when it was rough.  There was a young little girl, Demetria [ph.], she was about four feet tall, but she would beat up anybody.  And you used to want to be her friend, because you did not want to be on the wrong side of Demetria, because she'd slug you, you know.  And she would swear.  And I was like, "Who is--," you know, and I was like this is totally foreign to me.  But boy, she was mean, but I got along great with her.  It was like, you know, she was, we were cool.  And she wouldn't bother me, but there were some kids who would, they'd be fighting on the bus.  That's why we'd have these bus meetings all the time, because they'd be loud, music playing, and the bus drivers would complain.  And we'd have a meeting for the kids on the bus, and they'd tell us to settle down.  And she was the ringleader of it all.
Story_ID: 614721
Speaker 1: What other activities in junior high school were you involved in?
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved junior high school, even with those issues of not being able to go to their, the girls' homes.  I was in the drama club, I loved drama.  My favorite teacher was Pauline Tomky [ph.], and she was the drama teacher who taught us Greek mythology.  And I just used to sit--that class was the most fun, where I'd love about Prometheus, and 'The Odyssey' [Homer], and 'The Iliad' [Homer] and 'The Odyssey,' and all the Greek gods.  And she would just, she would bring them to life.  And so, I wanted to be in plays.  And so, you know, I was in the drama club.  I was in the student council.  I was elected the vice president of my graduating class in ninth grade, so I gave, I got a chance to give a speech at graduation.  But I was involved in the student council from seventh through the ninth grade, and the drama club, softball team, and oh, (laughter) girl groups, because The Supremes were really hot then.  And one of my closest friends, and still is one of my closest friends today, Lydia, Lydia Price [ph.], her dad and my dad [Stratford Hilliard] were in the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] together, because my father had no sons, so he was very, very active in the Boy Scouts.  He won Silver Beaver [Silver Beaver Award].  I mean, nationally he was very involved in the Boy Scouts.  And he would do that with Lyle Price [ph.], Mr. Price.  And so Lydia and I were great friends, and we all took the bus to Mettetal [Eugenia Mettetal Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan].  And so Lydia, Acquanetta Hurt [Acquanetta Hurt Pierce], who also lives in Detroit [Michigan], and Chiquita Ross, those three girls, they had a girl group.  I couldn't sing as well as they could, so I would kind of help them with their outfits.  And so it was the Acquaneers [ph.], or something like that.  They would always be rehearsing to be the next Supremes, and I would just kind of help them and watch them rehearse.  And so I would, we'd be in the talent shows at Mettetal.  And also, Mettetal used to have movie nights, movie afternoons, where they would rent movies.  So, and that's why I fell in love with, for all things, Elvis Presley movies, because they'd always have Elvis Presley movies.  'Viva Las Vegas,' you know, the movie about, with Ann-Margret where they--what was the name of it?  'Bye Bye Birdie.'  You know, all of his--'Blue Hawaii,' all of Elvis Presley's, I loved Elvis Presley movies.  And also I just liked movies from that time, because--the movie about mad, mad money ['It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World'] when they were chasing the money.  I forget the name of that movie, with all those stars in it.  So, it was good, it was a good time.  They had a lot of different activities at the school, and I liked to get involved.
Speaker 1: And outside of school, at home with your friends at home--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --what type of things were you doing?  Now you're now in junior high school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And even at church [Grace Episcopal Church, Detroit, Michigan], you're now really officially a part of this group?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  By now, in seventh grade, I can be in EYC [Episcopal Youth Community] for real.  So I was very much involved with EYC.  I was a Girl Scout.  I was, I remember being a Brownie vaguely.  But I remember more being a Junior Girl Scout with the green outfit, and the Brownie stuff I would wear.  And I didn't sell that many cookies.  They weren't big on selling cookies.  I don't know why, I don't remember cookies.  But I do remember selling perfume.  I would go into my backyard and take petals off my mother's rose bushes and soak them in little bottles of water so that the rose fragrance would get into the water.  And I'd sell them in the neighborhood for about ten cents.  And my mother [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard] was just livid, because I really--you know, I was supposed to only gather the ones that had fallen, but sometimes I would get the ones that hadn't.  And I'd just make this perfume and I would sell it.  The other activity that I had going on in my neighborhood was babysitting.  I had a lock on the neighborhood.  I babysat for everybody, and I would, you know, when anybody needed--all weekend I was making money.  I was like having fun, because I babysat for everybody.  I could babysit for like three kids at a time.  And you know, it was great, because I had a babysitting job almost every Friday and Saturday night.  So, I did that.  And then also in the seventh grade, I also had a job.  I was a page at the library.  The library was in walking distance to our home, and I could work there from like 4:30 to 6:30 during the week.  So I was always working, so I had a job.  I was a page, it wasn't too exciting.  I'd put books away, you know.  When people would return the books, somebody had to put them away, and so that's what I did when I was in junior high school.  So I, I worked from a very young age.
Story_ID: 614722
Speaker 1: So you also said that you enjoyed reading--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --from a young age.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you had a library at home. What books did your family have in their library?
Speaker 2: Family books, I don't so remember family books.  I remember atlases, we had a lot of world atlases.  We had a full set of encyclopedias at home, and I used to like to read them.  I used to like to just kind of pick one, and just read about it.  I used them for school, but I also remember just being intrigued by just picking out a letter and seeing what I could find in the encyclopedia.  My favorite personal books were the Nancy Drew mysteries, you know, I had every one of them.  And I used to love those, and I used to bring them to bible camp and read those with a flashlight.  Or after the lights were out, I would read my Nancy Drew books.  And well, Dr. Seuss books when I was really young.  I mean my mother [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard] had all the Dr. Seuss books and I would love those, and I'd read those over and over and over again, because I loved the rhyming of those.  Grimms' fairytales, you know, my mother would read those.  But then she'd also read the story of the little guy with the seed.  And he would plant the seed and he would--and that book is still around, because I just saw it.  Henry [ph.], I think was his name, and he would plant this seed, and he would water the seed and he would wait for the seed to grow.  And there's a story about you got to wait for the seed to grow.  You can't pull it up out of the ground, because you'll destroy it, I remember that.  And he was a little black boy, I remember that.  So my mother and father [Stratford Hilliard] tried to show us books that had little black children in them.  I remember those, for example.
Story_ID: 614723
Speaker 1: You said that you were in the student council--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in school.  Did you have to run for that office?
Speaker 2: I did.  I had to run for office to be in the student council.  And then I also had to run to be a class officer of the graduating class.  And that was unique, because I was the first Negro child to ever hold office at the school, you know, in a graduating class.  And so I was able to, I had to give a speech at graduation.  I remember that time as feeling very special.  Mrs. Tomky [Pauline Tomky (ph.)], who was my drama teacher, helped me with my speech.  And she was just, she was just so wonderful to me.  And I remember my mother [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard], you know, making my dress.  Because again, you know, we did what we could do.  And my mother would sew often, and she'd also, she shopped on sale for us.  So, we always were dressed well.  She would, she taught us how to shop on sale.  She was the queen of the clearance racks, so we would go, you know, to Saks Fifth Avenue, all the big stores.  We would go, always go on clearance.  And so we always were dressed well, and people thought we had a lot more money than we did.  But when it was graduation time, she made this dress that I helped her design.  And we got the pattern, and the dress was one way.  And I said, "But mama, I want sheer sleeves."  And she was like, "Well, I don't know if we can do this."  And she looked, and she goes, "We can do that."  So we designed this dress together.  And I remember feeling like the belle of the ball, because I had this white dress on that was lace with sheer sleeves, and it looked very couture, because it was very unique.  And I had on my white shoes, and my hair was just so, because Galene [Galene Edwards (ph.)] helped me with my hair.  She was into hair, and she could flip it just so, so she flipped it.  And I remember standing there as the vice president of the class giving my speech.  And I think--my mother saves everything.  I think she sent me the program from Mettetal Junior High School [Eugenia Mettetal Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan] last year (laughter) with me being the vice president.  So, it felt very special to be elected to that office and to have, you know, all the students, predominantly a white student body, elect me.  It felt good.  The other thing that happened in junior high school during that time that I don't want to forget to tell you about, was that was the Detroit riots in '67 [1967].  And I remember those vividly.
Story_ID: 614724
Speaker 1: Tell me what you remember.
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness.  I remember the city being very tense.  I remember my parents [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard and Stratford Hilliard] being very, watching the news all the time.  I remember that all of a sudden you know, we couldn't go outside; my father wouldn't let us go outside to play.  And then I remember the night of the worse rioting, looking out the window.  Because the worst rioting was on 12th Street, right near where I told you all those businesses were that I remember.  That's where the worse rioting was.  So, it's two blocks away from where I lived.  I remember looking up in the sky at midnight and it was bright orange.  Everything was on fire.  It was so--I was scared, very scared, because we didn't know what was happening.  And I remember hearing gun fire.  I remember hearing people running down the street.  And this is what I will never forget.  It was, I remember coming downstairs in the morning and seeing my father sitting in a chair in front of our front door with a shotgun across his lap.  I freaked out, because I didn't even know my father had a gun.  And I'm like, "Daddy, you have a gun?"  I woke him up, and he's like, "Yeah, I have a gun."  "Daddy, you have a gun?"  He goes, "Yes, I do."  I said, "Why do you have a gun?"  He goes, "Because I will shoot anybody who comes to this house and tries to take away anything or hurt my family."  And this was a side of my father I didn't even know existed.  But he was clear, he was unequivocal, and he was sitting there; he was protecting his home.  And so I was like, "Oh, boy, this is serious stuff."  And I had been planning to go to my Uncle Herbert's [Herbert Hilliard] that summer.  That was always part of the plan, so I had been looking forward to going.  I had gone the year before in '66 [1966], and so in '67 [1967] I was thinking maybe I wasn't going.  And my father said, "No, you need to go.  And your mother and your other sisters are going to go to your grandmother's house," because that was away from where the rioting was.  So they took me to the airport, and I went on to Annapolis [Maryland].  And my father stayed in that house every night with that shotgun across his lap.  And my, it was my grandfather's rocking chair.  And that image will never leave me, because he was a church man, he was a Boy Scout [Boy Scouts of America] leader, you know, he was a man of the community.  But he had a gun, and he was going to shoot anybody.  Because I remember hordes of looters going down the street with TVs hanging out of their convertibles, and just making all kind of noise.  And this is before I went to Annapolis.  I remember tanks coming down the street where C.L. Franklin's house was, and I remember seeing armored tanks coming down the street to, with bullhorns, "Get in your house.  You have a curfew."  And then I remember afterward coming back from Annapolis where they had shot up C.L. Franklin's house.  You know, I remember seeing that beautiful masonry that I told you about with gun marks in it, you know, with holes in it where the troopers had shot, where they were shooting up the neighborhood.  It was a terrible time, and I just, I'll never forget that.  And that happened when I was in junior high school [Eugenia Mettetal Junior High School Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Did you realize why all of this was happening?  Is this something that your family even discussed?
Speaker 2: They did discuss it.  They discussed the police brutality, you know, with the blind pig that, you know, the police raided that night.  I knew that they had raided this place where they were drinking and shouldn't have been drinking, and gambling where they shouldn't have been gambling.  But I remember my parents saying that people were upset, because you know, they didn't feel that they were getting the best jobs at this point.  They were-- discrimination was becoming more prevalent in certain levels of Detroit [Michigan].  And so there was, there was kind of like the schism of, you know, the haves and the have nots becoming wider, and people being upset it.  My parents told us that, you know, the police brutality is what started it.  But they were very clear that it was black people hurting black neighborhoods.  They could not understand why they were burning down our own neighborhoods, and I couldn't understand why they burned down Mr. Grady's [ph.] store.  Why did they burn down Mr. Jefferson's [Melvin Jefferson] store, and Mr. Morgan's [Louis Morgan] Superior Beauty and Barber Supply [Detroit, Michigan]?  Burned to the ground.  And I remember the sadness in my parents of, you know, this was our stuff, and they burned it down.  And they didn't understand it, and I didn't understand it.  But I remember them rebuilding, and I remember the day when Superior [Superior Beauty and Barber Supply, Detroit, Michigan] opened back up and when Mr. Grady opened back up, how proud we felt about that.  And I remember my church [Grace Episcopal Church, Detroit, Michigan] was a center of, it was like a control crisis center where people would go in who were burned out.  They were going for refuge at our church, and my parents talked about them going to the church and helping, you know, during certain hours of the day when they could.  So, it was, it was an incredible time.
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you want to share about that time?
Speaker 2: No.  But there's, you know, in '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: In '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: It was when I was in high school [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan].  It was when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, I remember that (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 614725
Speaker 1: Going on to high school.  What high school--this was 1968 that you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-seven [1967]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, the fall of '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: That fall?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what is the name of the high school you attended?
Speaker 2: It's Cass Technical High School in Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this also an integrated school?
Speaker 2: Yes, that school was integrated.  It was about, I want to say 60/40, 60 percent African American and 40 percent Caucasian or other.  It was a magnet school.
Speaker 1: Was it in your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: No, it was in downtown Detroit.  It was right in the downtown area, and it was a magnet school.  So kids--you had to test to get in.  And kids came from all over the city.  It was the best high school in the city, one of the best in the state.  And so, you know, if you told people you went to Cass Tech--you know, sometimes people went to the neighborhood schools--like Northwestern High School [Detroit, Michigan] was my neighborhood high school--they would think you were snobbish or call you--you were one of those elite kids who went--so, there was some backlash to that.  My sister [Pamela Hilliard Owens] went to Cass Tech, so I came--she graduated in '67 [1967] and I came in the fall of the year that she graduated.  So, you know, I grew up seeing her go through Cass Tech, and what a great school it was.  Diana Ross went to that high school, so we all would always go there.  They have pictures of all the previous graduating classes, and this picture mechanism where you could actually flip the pages of each graduating class.  And so we'd flip to get to Diana's picture, you know, to see it.  But it was great, I enjoyed Cass a lot.  The fact that it was downtown meant that during lunch we could walk downtown to go to J.L. Hudson's [J.L. Hudson Department Store; J.L. Hudson Building, Detroit, Michigan] which was a big department store of the day, very much like Marshall Field's [Marshall Field and Company Building, Chicago, Illinois], Macy's [R.H. Macy and Company Store; Macy's Herald Square, New York, New York] now.  And I had great friends, you know, a whole group of us who would kind of do everything together.  And I loved high school.
Story_ID: 614726
Speaker 1: I want you to think about sounds, sights, and smells that take you back to your neighborhood, whether it was in elementary school [Roosevelt Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], junior high school [Eugenia Mettetal Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan], or high school [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan].  What would you say?
Speaker 2: The sounds in my neighborhood growing up, you know, in elementary through junior high school, was music, you know, because you know Motown [Motown Records] was really just getting started then.  And so my babysitter, Anita [ph.], she always had the latest sounds.  And so people were always giving backyard parties.  And the block club parties were phenomenal with music, with food.  Everybody would bring food.  And they would be, it would be in the alley, and the alley was right next to our house.  So every block club party was always in the alley.  So, laughter, you know, people having a great time, and food and music, you know, soul food; fried chicken, potato salad, you know, barbeque ribs, summertime food would always be a great memory of growing up in the neighborhood.  And my parents [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard and Stratford Hilliard] would have barbeques with their friends, or my mother's bridge club card parties, which would be really, really something.  Because if you were the host of the bridge club party you had to cook for, you know, they were--she had three tables of four, so twelve ladies.  And those ladies would--I mean she would cook for days, and those ladies would play bridge into the wee hours of the morning.  I remember going to bed and hearing all these women in the, downstairs just laughing and cackling.  They'd drink beer, and they had, you know, their little beer glasses, very elegant.  And they probably had, you know, other things besides beer, because the laughter would get pretty loud. And they would play bridge.  My mother today is a competitive bridge player.  She can play bridge, she's eighty-four years old, and she wins tournaments.  But boy, back then, getting ready for Mama's bridge parties were something to behold.  And then my parents would have Christmas.  Sometimes we'd have Christmas dinner with all the friends coming to our house.  My mother would do Christmas dinner, and I used to enjoy it, but it was a lot of work.  And my sisters used to always complain, because we have to clean the house from top to bottom.  And we'd wash all the dishes and, you know, help her cook.  And I used to think it was fun setting the tables and making it festive.  So, you know, I just remember music, laughter, dancing, in my neighborhood growing up a lot (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 614727
Speaker 1: Tell me, what were your desires as far as a career?  It was a given that you were going to go to college?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But what were you thinking about?
Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting.  I liked fashion from a very young age.  And when I was in high school [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan], I believe it was high school.  I don't think it was junior high school [Eugenia Mettetal Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan].  But it was right when I got to high school, I was selected to be on the teen fashion board of J.L. Hudson [J.L. Hudson Company, Detroit, Michigan], which was, you know, you could be, you were selected.  You had to interview to be like on the teen advisory fashion board of this major department store.  And being on the teen fashion board at J.L. Hudson, I used to, I could see more of the store than you would just shopping there.  And that's where I found out what a buyer was, a fashion buyer was.  And so from tenth grade I was--originally in tenth grade I wanted to be an actress.  And so, coming out of drama club and what not in junior high school, I actually majored in performing arts when I was in high school, because I was going to be an actress.  And then I found out that most actresses and actors moved to New York [New York] and lived in cold water flats, and were waitresses and didn't make any money and had to scrounge.  I'm like, no, I don't want to do that.  So, then I went back to my love of fashion, and that's when I decided I wanted to be a buyer.  By the time I graduated from high school, I wanted to be a fashion buyer.
Speaker 1: What did you find out about a buyer?  What did a buyer do that fascinated you--
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to--
Speaker 1: --that made you want to become a buyer?
Speaker 2: They bought clothes; that was their job.  They used to go to the fashion shows.  Going to fashion shows was their job.  I remember the buyers coming in and telling the teen fashion board what their jobs were like.  And I remember the buyers saying--you know, who were buying the high fashion--saying, "What I do for my job is I go to New York, and I watch fashion shows, and I get to select which fashions are in this J.L. Hudson store [J.L. Hudson Department Store; J.L. Hudson Building, Detroit, Michigan]."  And I thought, "Wow, does that sound like fun.  That's what I want to do."
Story_ID: 614728
Speaker 1: Who helped you decide what college you would apply to?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, my parents [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard and Stratford Hilliard] were involved, my mother was involved.  But I had, I was fortunate that I had family, my cousins.  You know, my whole--college and education was very important on both sides of my family.  So, I had cousins that had gone to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], other schools.  But I had, I was on the debate team at Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan], and found out that I could get a scholarship, a debating scholarship.  Mrs. Burgess [ph.] was the debate team teacher.  She was, everybody hated Mrs. Burgess, but I liked Mrs. Burgess.  She was mean, but she ran the debate club, and I liked being on the debate team.  And she inspired me to try out for a scholarship, and I found out that I won a scholarship, a debate team scholarship to Howard University.  I also had a full scholarship to Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan].  I applied to Michigan State, Howard.  My sister [Pamela Hilliard Owens] went to Eastern Michigan [Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan], but I didn't want to go there.  So I think it was Michigan State and Howard.  I can't even remember where else I applied.  But I knew I wanted to--it was either Michigan State or Howard, those were my top two.  I got a full scholarship to Michigan State and I hadn't heard about what was going on at Howard.  So my mother was like, "Well, you have a full scholarship to Michigan State.  That's it."  And I was like--and I did not want to go to school in state.  Because I knew my sister, when she was at Eastern, she was home every weekend.  My parents were going up there to see her every weekend, and I wanted to be independent.  I was like, "No, I want to go out of state."  So I was very adamant that I wanted to go to Howard, and, because my cousins had gone there and, you know, Howard was a black school [HBCU]; I'd read all about it.  And so when I got the debate team scholarship and my tuition was paid for, I was like--and it wasn't--my tuition was paid for, but my room and board wasn't.  But my tuition was, and I said, "I want to go to Howard," and I was, that was it.  I--my parents were not happy with me, but I said, "I want to go." And I--"That's where I want to go to school," and I was very determined.
Story_ID: 614729
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Before we go further, talk to me about 1968.  This is when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is assassinated.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that time.
Speaker 2: Well, that was April.  And I won't forget it, because my mother [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard] was due to graduate from, get her master's that June [from Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan].  So, she had been studying and going to class late at night.  And I remember sitting in front of the TV.  He had just been assassinated, and my mother was walking in the door.  She didn't know, because she was in school that night.  And I remember her walking in the door and I was just in tears, saying, "Mom, Mama, they killed Martin Luther King."  And she almost fainted right at the door, and she couldn't believe it.  And we were just, we sat there gathered around the TV just in shock, you know, that Martin Luther King had been assassinated.  And so, I remember that very, very vividly because of the reaction of my mother, and that she didn't know when she walked in the door and we having to tell her that.  And that was also important because in 1963, he--before the March on Washington, he marched in Detroit [Michigan].  And I remember my father [Stratford Hilliard] taking me to see that march, and to see him.  And I, to this day can see Martin Luther King marching down Woodward Avenue.  And I climbed--I couldn't see him.  I was on my father's shoulders, and we were standing next to a lamppost.  And then the people started swarming and I couldn't see, and I climbed up on a lamppost so I could see Martin Luther King.  My father let me climb up to the top of this lamppost and I'm peering down, and the policemen were saying, "You get down there, young lady."  I'm like, "But I want to see Dr. King."  And I saw Dr. King marching down Woodward Avenue.  So I vividly, I remember seeing him.  So when he was killed, that was devastating to me.  It was just, it was devastating to me and to my family.
Speaker 1: So, you understood his importance at that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I remember very much watching his march on Washington [D.C.] in our kitchen on our black and white TV.  I remember the live version of the I Have a Dream speech.  I watched it; my mother insisted.  And my [maternal] grandmother [Gussie Smith Russell] insisted, you know, that we watch that.  My grandmother was, you know, very, very involved with all of that.  We grew up knowing our history, and black history was very important in our household.  So it was, it was very, very, hard, '68 [1968].  And then I saw my mother graduate that year, and so it was kind of, you know, all the things that Dr. King wanted for black people, and my mother graduating at that time was important.
Story_ID: 614730
Speaker 1: Now, you're preparing to graduate from high school?  Did you go to the high school prom?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I went to the high school prom.  I was very active in high school.  I was a cheerleader.  I was the first cheerleader in my family.  I wanted to be on the cheer team.  My mother [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard] had us in ballet school when I was in junior high school [Eugenia Mettetal Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan].  I forgot to mention that I took ballet three times a week, because at one point I thought I wanted to be a ballerina.  But then I'd gotten, got my toe shoes, and I got those on and those hurt a little bit too much.  So, I still--my mother saved them, I still have my first toe shoes.  But I decided I didn't want to be a ballerina, but I liked the athleticism of, you know, working out.  And so, Chiquita Ross, my friend from junior high school; Deborah Ford [Deborah Bledsoe Ford], my friend from nursery school; and Linda Farmer [ph.], who was a friend of mine from church [Grace Episcopal Church, Detroit, Michigan].  Linda was already, she was a year ahead of me.  Linda was already on the cheer team, so when they had tryouts she said, "Amy [HistoryMaker Amy S. Hilliard], you should try out."  I couldn't do a split.  She said, "You got to learn, you got to be able to do splits to try out for the cheer team."  And I couldn't do one, so I would come home every night and get two chairs, and I would just practice.  I would just warm up, and then I would bounce every night for weeks until I could easily do a split, leading up to the tryouts.  And they told us how we had to try out and, you know, be real peppy and (gesture) cheerlead and what not.  And I made the team, Debbie made the team, and Chiquita made the team.  And we had the best time; we just had the best time.  I used to create cheers, I wrote cheers.  In fact, they still do two of the cheers that I wrote for Cass Technical High School [Detroit, Michigan].  I went back to some reunion, and I heard them do the Big CT, give me a C for Cass Tech, that I wrote.  And they still do that cheer today.
Speaker 1: What is the cheer?
Speaker 2: It's called, give me a C for Cass Tech.  It's (gesture) "Give me a C for Cass Tech.  Give me an A for Cass Tech.  Give me an S for Cass Tech.  Another S for Cass Tech.  Who's the best all around?  Cass Tech, the best in town.  Cass Tech."  I mean it was silly, but it was fun.  And they still sing it, and I'm just proud of that.  And so I was the first cheerleader, so I was very involved with the guys on the, on the basketball team.  We never won anything, because it was a school for academics.  All the other high schools used to beat us to a pulp in the athletic department, but we had the best cheer team.  We used to go to cheer team competitions, because we really liked being, you know, on the cheer team.  I remember I had a fall.  My mother used to, my mother was great.  She used to let me do what I wanted to do.  I wanted--
Speaker 1: The hairpiece?
Speaker 2: The hairpiece fall, that you'd kind of attach, and I would wear these two long pigtails.  I wore false eyelashes to school every day, because I was in fashion.  My mother let me do this because my grades were good.  But she let me kind of do what I wanted to do.  So I remember on my high school senior picture, I have these false eyelashes.  But you know, that was back then, and she let me do it.
Speaker 1: So, did you ever wear an Afro?
Speaker 2: Not until I got to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  But not in high school, because it wasn't that popular then; it was just getting to that part.  Because this is '67 [1967] when I was--it was '67 [1967] to '70 [1970].  So by '70 [1970], Afros were big, but not in my high school.  It was still the falls and stuff like that.  So, I have that picture.  But I went to the prom with Gregory--what was Gregory's last name?  Gregory Plummer [ph.].  He wasn't my first choice.  My first choice took another friend of mine to the high school prom.  He, we were friends but I had a crush on him, Steve Parker [ph.], and he took Gail [ph.] to the prom.  So we double dated though, and it was fun.  And we went to a restaurant for dinner, and I remember trying to be very grown up and the waiter saying, you know, "What would you like?"  And I said, "I'd like some grape wine."  Because, you know, at church you had grape wine for communion, so that's the only thing I knew about wine.  I said, "I'll have some grape wine, please."  And he was like, "How old are you?"  And I was of course underage.  He goes, "I don't think you're old enough to drink," and I was totally disappointed because I thought I was being very sophisticated, but blew it right out the box.  So, we had a good time at the prom.  It was, you know, it was fun.  My outfit was really cool, but that's all I remember about it.
Story_ID: 614731
Speaker 1: Tell me more about your preparation to go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and your transition now from leaving Detroit [Michigan]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and being on your own for the first time at Howard.  Tell me about that experience.
Speaker 2: Howard was eye opening for me, but it was also a continuation of growing up in Detroit with a lot of great role models.  When I was preparing to go to Howard, you know, getting on that--getting that debate team scholarship was very important, because we had to compete for it.  And that's where I met Dr. Tom Jonas [ph.], I believe his name.  He was, he was the debate coach at Howard, and we had to talk with him, and he had to select us.  We had to write papers and everything.  I was, I still did well in school.  I was in the, I was still in--preparing to go to school, I was still in the drama club at Cass [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan].  So I was in 'The King and I' [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II] and all different plays and what not.  But going to Howard and applying for it and writing my essays, it felt like I was fulfilling my mission, because I was living Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] dream.  I wanted to go to a black school [HBCU] because I wanted to be around black people, I just did.  So, when I got to Howard, you know, my parents [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard and Stratford Hilliard] drove me down.  They loaded everything in my father's--we had a Chrysler LeBaron.  And I had so much stuff because, you know, by then I was totally into fashion.  So I had so much stuff that we broke the shocks in my father's car by the time we got there.  But I remember getting to the quadrangle, the women's dormitory.  And this wall, they called it the wall, and all the upperclassmen guys would sit on the wall and watch the young freshmen ladies coming to check into the dorm.  And so I was kind of prepared for that, I knew that that was happening.  But I went there with a sense of purpose, that, oh, my god, I'm around all these black people, all this history.  All these great people would go through Howard and I'd see their names, you know, on the buildings; Frederick Douglass Hall [Frederick Douglass Memorial Hall].  You know, and I just felt like I was living history.  And I tell people to this day that Howard was instrumental in who I am.  Because it was the first time in my life, because I was in an all-black environment, that I did not feel like a minority.  That whole curtain of, you know, discrimination, being a minority, or of other people being a; that was gone.  And for four years, I didn't have that on me.  So, you could just be who you wanted to be.  You could aspire to whatever you wanted to be, because that cloak of discrimination was just not there.  And it was just an amazing time, just an amazing time.
Speaker 1: Who was the president and the dean at the time?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Dr. James Cheek [HistoryMaker James Cheek], I'll never forget him.  He, Dr. Cheek was the man; he ruled that campus.  He was, he was a short guy, but everybody respected Dr.--.  When he walked the campus it was like you wanted to salute, because Dr. Cheek said, "Howard is it.  And you are here to fulfill the mission of this school.  You will do well at this school.  We don't take any mess."  And he just made you want to be proud.  And so I used to love to hear him speak.  He just made you proud to be a part of Howard.  And yet, you know, he allowed you to have fun.  I mean, it was, it was big fun going there.  I mean the fraternities, the sororities, the parties, the bid whist tournaments, all that was all part of Howard.  But you were there to do well and to fulfill the legacy of Howard, and he instilled that in me.  It was great.
Story_ID: 614732
Speaker 1: Now, this is 1970?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And did you hear anything about the student activism during the civil rights era?  What did you hear, and what did you feel about being a part of any of that, if you were?
Speaker 2: Well, it was interesting.  Because there was a student--almost a riot at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] the year before, where they took over the administration building, and I was dating a sophomore guy who was all part of that.  And he had a huge fro.  He was, you know, in the student council or the student--the undergraduate student council [Undergraduate Student Assembly], whatever they called it back then.  And I, I heard all the stories, because it had just happened the year before, where they shut the A Building [Administration Building] down.  And this was in the days of Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] and black power.  So it was hot, hot, hot, at that time.  So when I got to Howard, I did not have an Afro.  But within weeks I had an Afro wig, because I'm like, I've got to get my hair to go natural.  But I still had a perm, so I had to let it grow out.  But I went and got the biggest Afro wig I could find, and I wore it every day.  And so, I wanted to be part of that.  I wanted to be--not on the radical side of it, but I was involved, I got involved with student government right away.  I was, I joined the student government as a freshman, and wanted to be a part of the political scene at Howard.  During those days, [HistoryMaker] Minister Louis Farrakhan would come to Howard on a regular basis.  And you know, I didn't know about, you know, the Muslim activism and Malcolm X.  I wasn't that into the Malcolm X part of it.  But Minister Farrakhan would come and speak, and his speeches were some of the most eye opening, electrifying speeches I had ever heard in my life.  He would make history come alive, in terms of your role as a black person in the global sense of things.  And it would be standing room only at Cramton Auditorium [Washington, D.C.] whenever Minister Farrakhan would come.  So I'd go to hear him speak.  You know, I would just hear, you know, people come to the campus.  And so I was involved in that at a young age, at a young time.
Speaker 1: Had you heard about the Orangeburg [South Carolina] and what happened before you got to Howard?  Or was this something that really came alive for you once you got there?
Speaker 2: It really came alive once I got there.  You know, I had heard about the sit-ins in North Carolina, you know, those kind of things.  But it really became much more immediate to me once I got there.  I mean, we would have protests, and we would protest--we were protesting discrimination in Washington, D.C., where we would do our marches to--you know, they were still discriminating about certain things in D.C., and we would go and march against those things.  So, it really hit me when I got to Howard.
Story_ID: 614733
Speaker 1: Talk to me about your time at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]  Who were your influences?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a lot of influences there.  Some of my professors were very influential.  Dr. Frank Snowden [Frank M. Snowden, Jr.], he taught humanities, which was one of my favorite courses there, because it's similar to Greek mythology when I was in junior high school [Eugenia Mettetal Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan].  But he made the humanities come alive, and he--to hear it from--to hear about the world and literature and art from a black perspective was amazing.  That's when I found out Hannibal was black.  You know, I had no idea, I really didn't know that.  And he would talk about the great kings and queens of Africa from the ancient times.  And to be at Howard and hear him talk about it, and bring all that to the current was great.  So I just love Dr. Snowden.  And then Dr. Anthony [ph.], I can't remember Dr. Anthony--he had a hyphenated black name.  But his first name was Anthony, and he was really cute.  But he was, he was our, he was my professor.  I had a crush on him, but that's as far as it went.  But he was our professor of African American history, and boy, did he bring it home.  He was not playing at all.  I mean he would know that stuff, and he'd expect you to know it as well.  So, he taught us that.  I majored in home economics because I wanted to major in clothing and textiles, and I minored in business because I wanted to be a buyer at that time.  And so the school of home economics, one of the leaders of that school was Dr. Adele McQueen, who was old school all the way.  I mean, Dr. McQueen did not play.  She--you know, you had to go through a period of, in home economics where you live in what was called the home management house for six weeks in order to graduate.  And during that six weeks, you had to take a position of management in the house.  You would either be the cook, the housekeeper, or the budgeter, or whatever.  And so when you had to be the cook, you had to cook three meals a day for six women on a budget of fifty dollars a week, and at the end of it give a party of some sort.  And I gave a dinner party, and she was the type of woman that if you were the housekeeper, she would run around the house with a white glove and do the white glove test.  If you were the cook and you were doing your event, she said, "I want the food so hot, I want it to steam on the plate.  I want the tea to boil in the cup."  And so, I learned from her how to entertain.  And she gave me an A on my entertainment, and I was really happy about that.  I still have her picture.  And of course, Dr. Cheek [HistoryMaker James Cheek].  But the women and the men, just the students at Howard, seeing so many black people, all of us striving to do well, was important.  One of the most devastating things that happened to me when I was at Howard was my best friend was murdered.
Story_ID: 614734
Speaker 1: Which friend?
Speaker 2: Linda Boyd [ph.].  She was my best friend at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  I didn't meet her until I got to Howard.  When I got to Howard, you know, being independent as I was, my parents [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard and Stratford Hilliard] were giving me twenty-five dollars a month for spending money, or some ridiculous sum.  And I was there for two weeks, and I said I knew that wasn't going to work.  So I needed a job.  And I've always had a job, so I went down to Georgetown [Washington, D.C.], which was kind of the boutique area.  And I walked into the--I looked around and I said, "Okay, what's the most fun looking store?"  It was called Joseph's [Joseph R. Harris Company, Washington, D.C.].  The place, it was big and flashy.  I walked in there and I told the manager that I knew how to sell clothes.  I'd never sold clothes; I was, you know, just fudging it.  But I was on that teen fashion board at Hudson's [J.L. Hudson Company, Detroit, Michigan], and of course, I could sell clothes, and I needed a part time job.  She said, "Sell me this pair of hot pants."  And I said, "Okay, you're going to look great," sold her these hot pants.  And I got a job, and Linda was there.  And so she assigned Linda to kind of mentor me to learn the store, and we hit it off immediately.  And we were, you know, best buds, we'd talk on the phone.  She was at George Washington University [Washington, D.C].  No, she was at American University [Washington, D.C.]  And so she was in college and I was in college.  And we just, we, we, had such fun.  We sold hot pants together, we just did fashion together.  And then she went to sell at another store called Rosy Tomato [ph.], which was Betsey Johnson's kind of outlook.  And so, she was selling there.  And one day, you know, she didn't come to work, and I knew she was supposed to be at work.  She was living with her boyfriend at the time, her fiance at the time, Teddy [ph.].  And so during this time before this happened, she came to my dorm room one weekend.  And I said, she just came over, I said, "Linda, what's the matter?"  She said, "I got to stay with you this weekend."  I said, "Why?"  She said, "Because Teddy is really mad at me."  And she showed me a bruise on her chest.  She said, she, "He put a gun on my chest and said if I ever left him, he would kill me."  And I'm like, "Linda, you've got to leave him.  You can't--."  Because I noticed whenever I would call there, he would answer the phone more than she would.  And I just, I didn't like him.  And so, he only knew my name was Amy [HistoryMaker Amy S. Hilliard].  That weekend I got a phone call on the floor of my dorm.  They didn't have phones in the room, just a floor--hall payphones.  And I came to the phone and I said, "Hello."  He goes, "Amy, this is Teddy.  And I know you have Linda with you."  He called every floor of every dormitory on Howard's campus to look for Amy, and there aren't that many Amys, to find Linda.  And I told him, I said, "I don't know anything about that, Teddy.  Linda's not with me.  She's--I don't know what you're talking about."  I lied, and went back in the room.  I said, "Linda, you can't go back there, because Teddy is angry, and he did this."  She said, "I won't go back.  I'll go stay with my mother."  Well, she didn't.  The next Monday I went to work, and she was supposed to be there at 4:30, and she didn't show up.  And so, you know, the owner of the store said had I talked to her?  And I talked to her the day before, but, you know, I expected to see her that Monday, and she never showed up for work.  And then her mother called the store and said that Teddy had shot her, shot her in the head.  My boyfriend at the time took me to the hospital, and my last vision of her is where her head was three sizes its normal size, all wrapped up.  She hadn't died yet.  But I was nineteen, and it was hard.  I still remember her.  She had the biggest dimples in the world, giggled.  Fun, fun, fun, loved her to death.  And it, it really was devastating.  I was pledging Delta at the time.  I was pledging Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], a sorority at the time.  And I remember I did that.  I went through that whole period almost in a fog, and I continued to pledge because it kept my mind off of going through that situation.  But I remember, you know, being a Delta and going through that kind of in a fog.  But, you know, it helped me to get over it.  I had thirty-one line sisters, and we were the untouchable thirty-one.  And they shored me up during that time.
Speaker 1: Was that the first time that you had to deal with death?
Speaker 2: Pretty much, yes, yeah, at nineteen, um-hm.  It really was, because none of my immediate family had passed.  I hadn't--my grandmother [Minnie King Hilliard] had died before.  No, that's not true.  My grandmother died in 1965, and I remember going to her deathbed and telling her goodbye.  But at that time it was, you know, I just, I kind of remember that, and I remember kissing her goodbye.  She died of breast cancer, and I remember her, you know, kind of talking out of her head.  But that was the first time it hit me like that. Because it was, she was my absolute best friend, and my grandmother's death wasn't as sudden as Linda's was.  So, that happened at Howard.  And you know, it to this day has ramifications for me because of, you know, what he did.  And then the next, the next homecoming, Teddy was at, on the hill, you know, where all the Greeks were dancing and what not.  I saw him on a, watching me.  I was a Delta by that time, and we were doing our Delta thing at homecoming, and he was watching me.  He got off on insanity; he pleaded insanity, and he was free.  And I saw him looking at me, and he looked at me with a look of, yeah, I did it, and I know you know I did it.  And then he left.  And it took me up until this year to forgive him.  I forgave him this year.  But--
Speaker 1: Let's--
Speaker 2: --that was interesting (laughter). Interesting time (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 614735
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's talk more about your preparations to leave, you know, to decide what it is that you are actually going to do once you leave Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]  So, tell me more about your time there.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, studying clothing and textiles was my major.  I didn't like to sew, but I liked clothing, I liked fabric.  So, I had do to some projects to sew in order to graduate.  But I minored in business, so that's where I got marketing, advertising, all of that, the business side of life.  And I married those two, and I wanted to be a fashion buyer.  And so Howard at the time was recruiting, they had a lot of good recruiters.  And Bloomingdale's was the number one store in the country at that time.  That was, you know, it was it.  And so that's where I wanted to work.  And so I interviewed, I talked to the recruiters and I interviewed for Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.], I interviewed for Hudson's [J.L. Hudson Company] in Detroit [Michigan], and Bloomingdale's.  And so I got into the Bloomingdale's interview and I told them at the time, I said, "I want to work in the designer dress area."  And they were like, "No, you can't start there.  You know, no one ever starts there as a, right out of college."  I said, "Well, can I just talk to the buyer?  You know, I know what a buyer does, and I want to talk to the buyer."  And I talked to the buyer, and Elaine Monroe was the buyer of the designer dress area for Bloomingdale's.  And I said, "I really want to work here.  I did all this stuff."  I told her about my selling clothes, and the fashion board.  We hit it off, and she said, "I want her to be my assistant."  I got the job, and I started working at Bloomingdale's.  I had a car, a Volkswagen bug, and I got that because my junior year at Howard I was a Polaroid camera girl.  I got that job because a guy saw me selling clothes from Polaroid in this store.  He said, "You're such a good salesperson.   We're going to launch this new camera called the SX-70."  That was that first camera that had the instant photography that developed outside the camera.  He goes, "We're launching this nationwide, and we need a team of people to train retailers on the SX-70.  You really know how to sell.  We want you to be a Polaroid camera girl."  So that summer, I traveled the eastern United States by myself with a team of Polaroid people.  But I was the lead all up and down the East Coast to the Walgreens [Walgreens Company], to the drugstores, or wherever, the camera stores.  And I would lead teams of people to show people how to sell this new technology.  And I was, again, like twenty years old at that time.  But I saved my money there, and I saved my money the next summer when I was a secretary in Detroit.  I stayed home that summer while the rest of my family went to California on vacation.  I stayed home and worked, because I wanted a car.  My father [Stratford Hilliard] said he wouldn't buy me one unless I came up with a down payment.  I said, "Fine, I'll stay home and work."  So, I got the down payment.  And my father came home from that vacation from California and he put his bags down from the vacation.  I handed him the check, and I said, "Let's go get the car."  He couldn't even put his stuff down.  But I got my Volkswagen, but I remember putting everything I owned in that Volkswagen after graduating from Howard University, everything I owned, driving by myself to New York City [New York, New York].  And the view of the New York City skyline as I came over the George Washington Bridge, you could have peeled me off the ceiling.  I am a graduate of Howard University, I am going to Bloomingdale's, and I'm going to live in New York City.  And Linda Farmer [ph.] was going to be my roommate.  We lived in a one bedroom on the Upper West Side of New York, and it was an amazing time, because, you know, I was living my dream.  And I was in a designer dress area, so my job, just like I heard about it from that buyer at Hudson's was to go to fashion shows and buy clothes.  And I'm talking about Valentino, Bill Blass, Geoffrey Beene, Yves Saint Laurent.  This is what she was buying, because it was the top of the line, and I was going with her as her assistant.  So, I would usually go to 7th Avenue before Miss Monroe and get our seats.  We sat in the front row.  I'm sitting in the front row of these designer people's shows in New York City.  And I many times would get to the showroom before she would.  And I'd, you know, come to the door and they'd say, they'd look at me and they'd say, "Oh, deliveries are in the back," because no one black sat in those shows.  And I just would say, "Oh, no, I'm not here to deliver anything.  I'm the assistant buyer for Bloomingdale's, and I'm here for our seats."  And I would just sit down with her.  And then I'd watch--at that time all the big designers, Halston and everybody, they used black models almost exclusively.  So I'd see [HistoryMaker] Pat Cleveland, Naomi Sims, Billie Blair, you know, all of the black supermodels before it was a term.  I used to see them and it would make my knees weak, just the clothes coming across there.  And it was, it was great fun.  I enjoyed it tremendously.  But I knew I wanted to go--my mother [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard] told me, she said, "You know, get some insurance.  You need to think about grad school."  So, I got to Bloomingdale's and got the job.  But I had applied for grad school before I left Howard, because my mother had always said, "You know, you probably need to, you always need to be able to take care of yourself.  So think about grad school."  I didn't know about grad school.  All my friends were in politics.  They were going to law school.  I didn't want to go to law school.  And a friend of mine who was going to law school, he said, "You should apply for your M.B.A."  I said, "My master's in business?"  She said, "Yeah, your M.B.A., master of business administration."  I said, "Okay, that sounds like a good idea.  It kind of funnels with my business training."  He said, "Where are you going to go apply?"  I said, "I really don't know, because I hadn't thought about it."  He goes, "You should apply to the top schools."  He said, "You're smart."  And Jeffrey [ph.], Jeffrey--oh, god, what's Jeff's last name?  He was--I can't remember his last name, it's terrible.  But Jeff was the one who said, "You should apply to the top schools, and only apply to the top ten schools."  He said, "Because you'll probably get into one of them."  And that's how I applied to Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], to Stanford [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California], to Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], all the top--Columbia [Columbia Business School, New York, New York].  That's all I applied to, because I--he said, "I'll help you with your application," and he did.  And I got accepted to Harvard Business School before I left Howard, but on a deferred admittance.  They said, "You need to work for two years, and then you can go to business school."  So all my friends were going right into law school.  And that's when I said, "Well, fine, I'm going to go be a buyer for two years."  And that's when I really focused on getting that job at Bloomingdale's.
Story_ID: 614736
Speaker 1: You graduate from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], your undergrad in 1974.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then you go to New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you stay at Bloomingdale's for two years, so now we're in 1976?
Speaker 2: Right.  I stayed at Bloomingdale's for a year, and then I went (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) One year?
Speaker 2: --and then I went to the May Merchandising Corporation [May Merchandising Company], because my buyer left and then they put me in this other department that I didn't like so much, and didn't like the buyer.  So I got a job in a buying office, which I still was able to go to all the designer shows.  So that was a different experience.  So I worked for Bloomingdale's for a year and the buying office for a year, and then I went to Howard--Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Do you know any of the other buyers for some of the other stores like Saks [Saks Fifth Avenue] or Macy's [R.H. Macy and Co.; Macy's, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: I knew a woman who used to be a buyer at Saks, Renee Hunter.  She ultimately came to Bloomingdale's.  But in my travels I did meet other buyers, because there was an organization called the Black Retail Action Group with all the black buyers who were in the area, in New York at the time, so we'd all get together.
Speaker 1: So, was your buyer black?
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Elaine Monroe was white, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about Phyllis Davidson.  Did you know her?  She was a buyer for Macy's during that time.
Speaker 2: The name sounds very familiar.  I know I met--I met a lot of the other blacks who were in retailing at that time through the Black Retail Action Group.  J.J. Thomas was the president of it.  And he was the recruiter at Bloomingdale's, so he made sure we knew everybody. Gloria Hartley was a buyer, another buyer at the time.
Story_ID: 614737
Speaker 1: Let's talk just a little bit about the buying line.  Because there weren't, as you said, very many allowed to even be on the buying line.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And I know Macy's [R.H. Macy and Co.; Macy's, Inc.] had--and I want to know whether Bloomingdale's as well, had a manager in training program type thing, where they even had those people who would ultimately be a buyer.  And none of them were black at all.  Did they have something similar to it at Bloomingdale's?
Speaker 2: They did, and they had more blacks there.  They had actual black buyers.  Gloria Hartley was a buyer in the men's department, and there was another young lady, Nadia [ph.] was her name, and Renee Hunter, and myself.  They had several people going through the training, the buyer's training program at Bloomingdale's, but that was because J.J. Thomas, who was in human resources, was the advocate.  He was the president of the Black Retail Action Group, and he made sure we had a shot--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at the buying.
Story_ID: 614738
Speaker 1: You went to this other buying institution?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so what happened next?
Speaker 2: Well, I was at the May Merchandising Corporation [May Merchandising Company].  I worked for Kitty Hart [Kitty Carlisle Hart] and, she was, you know, she would take me around and we'd do the same sort of thing.  But there I had to learn how to write, because I was buying for stores who weren't in New York [New York].  All the May Merchandising stores were outside of New York, so I had to write trend reports and tell the buyers what I thought they should buy.  I would preview the lines before the buyers would get to New York.  So that was really interesting, because I had the right to say, "You should buy this style and not that style," because this was, this is on trend, et cetera.  And I did that for years, so it really helped me to hone my writing skills in that particular job.  And at that point, you know, I wanted to go to Paris [France].  You know, remember, I love French.  And I wanted to go to Paris while I was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]  I tried my best to get a job for the summer at Galeries Lafayette, which was the main department store in Paris.  They didn't have any internships, and I didn't have any way of getting there.  And that was a big disappointment, that while I was at Howard I couldn't work in Paris for the summer.  I was willing to go to Paris and be a waitress.  My mother [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard] wouldn't let me and my father [Stratford Hilliard] wouldn't let me.  They said, "No, you can't go that far by yourself."  So I wanted to--I almost didn't go to Harvard because by the time I was at May Merchandising I was doing really well.  And they were saying, "Okay, we need to take you on the international fashion shows."  So, by this time I'm having a blast in New York.  I'm living with my roommate [Linda Farmer (ph.)], we have an apartment on Central Park West, I'm going to dinner parties at Calvin Klein's house, and now I'm supposed to stop all this and go to Harvard Business School in Boston [Massachusetts].  I remember coming home to tell my father and mother I was--I changed my mind; I am not going to business school, I'm going to stay with fashion.  And I remember walking into the breakfast room, and I was going to tell my father, "I am not going."  And he said--and he was eating breakfast.  And I was, I sat down and he goes, "It's really good to see you.  I'm so proud of you.  You're going to be the first person in our whole family to go to an Ivy League school.  I'm so proud of you.  I just, I'm just so proud."  And I couldn't tell him.  And at that point I said, suck it up.  You got to go, because I would not disappoint my father.  But I was ready to throw Howard--Harvard out the door and just be in the fashion world.  So, that's how I got to Harvard.
Story_ID: 614739
Speaker 1: Tell me about the transition from New York [New York] now to Boston, Massachusetts.
Speaker 2: Well, that was interesting, because again, I still had my little Volkswagen, I kept that.  So again, I packed up everything I owned and drove from New York to Boston.  And I remember getting on that campus, and my first memory was there is real ivy on these walls.  I have journals, I keep journals a lot.  And I remember writing in my journal, "I am really at an Ivy League school.  There is real ivy on these walls, and I am at Harvard."  They had a meeting for the students, the African American incoming students.  Of a class of seven hundred, there were thirty-one new students coming in of that first year class.  So the second year students had a meeting to kind of help us get acclimated.  And the first thing they said was, "Look to your left and look to your right.  One of the two people on your, either side of you is not going to be here at the end of the year, because they're going to fail."  That's the failure rate.  It was 50 percent of the black students did not make it out of the first year.  So, me being me, I looked to my left and looked to my right and I said, "It's not going to be me.  I'm graduating."  So, I became super focused on school.  I didn't do a lot of partying or whatever; I was like I'm getting out of here.  And so I studied all the time, and I was very serious about school.  But I liked it, I liked it a lot.  It was, it was, I met some really great international friends that I still have today.  But I was getting out of Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: So this was, you had been in a situation where you were the only black, and then you went to an environment where it was all black.  And now you're back in a situation where, as you said, at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] you had that weight off your shoulder.  Did the weight come back on your shoulder at that time?
Speaker 2: It did, but in a different way.  They were in a section, everyone had a section.  In a section of eighty students, there were two, three black students--me, Linda Walker Bynoe, and what was her name?  Leslie Yee [ph.], I think it was.  She was, she was, there were only three of us in this section.  And so there were times when you felt, you know, some of the students weren't comfortable even being with you.  Because some of these--I mean, this is Harvard.  So, a lot of these kids who were at Harvard had never been around black people ever in their lives.  They hadn't sat next to--and I remember one of the students in my section saying, "This is the first time I've ever sat next to a black person on a daily basis."  So, I was, you know, hearing that.  But the balance of that was the international students who, you know, they were just worldly and they didn't care.  I mean, my best friend was Nicholas Field Johnson from London [England].  And he used to come into class--he'd be out all night carousing and what not, but he had that deep London accent.  And of course, I'd take copious notes, because the professors would call on you at random, and 50 percent of your grade was class participation, and you had to be able to crack the case and lay it out.  And I remember Nick not studying anything and him being called on, and him cracking the case and everybody believing him, and he's doing no notes.  I said, "You just got over because of your voice."  He goes (adopts British accent), "Yes, I know.  I have an accent, and I use it."  You know, so there were fun things about being a black person, but I felt more global at Harvard than American.  And I, but I was still very much involved with the black--the African American Student Union, I was an officer in that.  I helped them create the African American alumni weekend, which I wrote the manual for.  And we brought all the alumni back from Harvard to come back, and it was an empowerment and a conference with the blacks who had done well in business.  We had them speak just to us.  It was covered in Jet magazine.  So I still stayed true to my blackness, but I had fun understanding, you know, and meeting the global students as well.
Story_ID: 614740
Speaker 1: What did you think about--that you would do after Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting.  When I went to Harvard, my dream was still to go back and become a buyer.  But when I got to Harvard, my favorite class was marketing.  It was my undergrad, you know.  When I did the business minor at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I loved marketing, and that's when I first found out about it.  But when I got to Harvard and I had marketing, that's when I learned about brand management.  And my professor, Professor Steve Starr, he was just my heart.  He was the most arrogant person you'd ever knew, but he knew marketing.  He made--I fell in love with marketing because he made you just feel it; about, you know, why people buy what they buy.  How to you inspire people?  What advertising?  And the first couple of days of class he called on me to open a case, and I had prepared.  And he said, "Miss Hilliard [HistoryMaker Amy S. Hilliard], this is a case about, you know, Buy Rite Paint.  What do you think we should do?"  And my knees were shaking, but I remember he looked me dead in the eye.  "What do you think?  You're the brand manager.  What do you think you should do?"  And I remember saying, "We need to raise this ad budget by $5 million."  My knees were shaking, I had no--I just knew I had to say what I had to say.  And he pushed me, and he said, "Why do you need to do that?  What is this going to do?"  And I had to lay that case out.  And from that day on I loved marketing, and I knew I wanted to go into marketing and advertising.  So, Steve Starr helped me to understand that.  And so, I wanted a job at an ad agency in New York [New York] as my summer job.  At that time, they didn't have summer internships at the ad agencies.  So I started, I looked up, researched my magazines from my mother, you know.  I looked up in Black Enterprise, I looked up in all these magazines looking for anybody black who was in advertising in New York.  I looked up Caroline Jones [Caroline R. Jones], she was the only vice president of creative--at an agency in New York; she was at BBDO [BBDO Worldwide].  Carol Williams [HistoryMaker Carol H. Williams], who owns her own agency now was a copywriter at Leo Burnett [Leo Burnett Company Inc.] in Chicago [Illinois].  I wrote to them both.  Frank Mingo [Frank L. Mingo] was an accounts supervisor at McCann Erickson [McCann Erickson, Inc.].  I wrote them all.  I said, "I want to work in advertising."  And none of them had any internships at their agencies, but they were so wonderful to me.  They, I was able to go to New York and have lunch with them and learn what they do.  And I said, "Oh, I want to be in advertising."  So Young and Rubicam [Y&R] was the number one agency in New York at the time.  What I learned from applying to schools was to go the number one anything.  If you can get in there and you can do well, at least it'll be a great thing on your resume.  So I wrote to Young and Rubicam, I wrote to the president.  I said, "I want to work in--you know, I'm at Harvard Business School and I want an internship."  He gave my letter down to somebody and gave me their name, and I kept writing to them.  And I kept calling them, and they kept saying, "We don't have an internship."  But this is in November of my first year of grad school, for my summer job in June.  And I was just, "I want to work at Young and Rubicam."  And so they finally said, "Okay, we'll create an internship program, because obviously maybe this is a good thing."  And so I was the first intern at Young and Rubicam ad agency.  And I worked for Marie Mandry [Marie T. Mandry], and I worked on the Sanka brand decaffeinated coffee business when Robert Young was the spokesperson.  They trained us; we always had to say, "Sanka brand decaffeinated coffee."  I learned about trademarking, because that was a trademark.  We had to say it that way, we had to write it that way.  I had a blast, and I worked for Ed [Edward Ney]--oh, goodness, this is terrible, I can't remember his name now, the chairman, Ed, of Young and Rubicam.  I thanked him for giving me the job, and he offered me a job to come back to Young and Rubicam after I graduated. And he, Ed--oh, gosh, this is terrible, I can't remember his last name.  He was wonderful.  But anyway, the chairman of Y and R wrote me a personal letter asking me to come back to work there at Y and R.  And so I went back to business school, and I was working there.
Story_ID: 614741
Speaker 1: And by this time, in the second year you got to take retail courses.  And I still loved retail.  And so my professor in retailing was a black woman at Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], the only black professor at Harvard Business School, Claudia Malone [sic. Claudine B. Malone].
Speaker 2: What was her name?
Speaker 1: Her name was Claudia Malone.  She was a CPA [certified public accountant] by training, so she taught accounting, but retailing was her first love.  So, she was on the boards of some of the federated--she was just really big as a consultant, because she was brilliant, just brilliant.  And I had to take her course.  I used to hear that she was one of the toughest teachers at Harvard, but I didn't care.  She was black, she was in retail, and I had to have her course.  So I took retailing under Claudia Malone, and fell back in love with retail because of her.  She was, she was just an astounding person.  And I just, we used to talk for hours about retail, and I loved her class, loved her class.  And so I also took a real estate course at the time, because you could take electives.  I loved real estate.  In my real estate class we had to do a paper on a developing area of the country where you would, if you were a real estate developer, where you would go.  My area of the country--and you had to partner with somebody--was the east coast of Florida.  This was before Disney World [Walt Disney World Resort, Orlando, Florida], this is 1977.  My partner was Andy Traub [Andrew Traub].  Andy Traub was the son of Marvin Traub, the chairman of Bloomingdale's, who I had met when I used to work there.  And I'll never forget.  You know, Mr. Traub was an amazing man.  He would walk that floor at Bloomingdale's as a chairman, checking things and making sure--he said as a merchant you need to walk that floor every day, and feel your business and feel your customer.  Well, I'm working with his son now as a partner, because his son's there.  I went to school with Linda Bloch [Linda Bloch Lyon], the daughter of H and R Bloch [sic. Richard Bloch], you know, all these people.  So, by that time, I'm kind of getting interested back in retail, and they were interested in me.  So, Mr. Traub convinced me to go back to Bloomingdale's, and that's what I did.  I went back to Bloomingdale's when I graduated, instead of going back to advertising.  But I still loved advertising.  That's why I'm in marketing today.
Story_ID: 614742
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name for us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My name is Audrey Sharmane Amy Hilliard [HistoryMaker Amy S. Hilliard].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And we are finishing up an interview that we started, you know, attempting to, anyway--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --an interview that we started in July [July 14, 2008].
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I believe.
Story_ID: 614743
Speaker 1: Think we had you on the verge of going to Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  So, you probably discussed it, but how did you decide to go to Harvard Business School?  I think you were working at Bloomingdale's after graduating from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], right?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  I had actually decided to apply to business schools while I was at Howard. My mother [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard] raised us to, as girls, to believe that education was important, and you always needed to have that extra bit of education for insurance in case you ended up supporting yourself.  And so, a lot of my friends were going to law school or medical school.   Those things didn't interest me at all.  I wanted, I liked business, and so I started interviewing and applying to business schools.  And one of my friends said, "You know, well, just apply to the top ten.  Why apply to anything but the top ten?"  And I hadn't even thought about it that way.  He said, "You know, you can get in one of those schools.  There's ten of them."  And that's how I got to apply to Howard, I mean Harvard.  That's how I made that decision, because they were number one at the time.  And so I figured what did I have to lose to try to go to Harvard.  None of my family had ever been in the Ivy League schools, and so when I applied, I applied to all ten of them, and some of them let me in, most of them did not.  Harvard sent me a conditional acceptance letter.  It was called a, what was it called?  It was called a deferred admittance.  And when I got the letter, I didn't even understand what it was.  All I saw was this letter from Harvard that said, "You have been accepted to the Harvard Business School for the class of 1976."  And I was like, okay, but this is 1974, and I thought I was going that fall.  And I didn't realize it until I read it to my parents, and they said, "What about going in the fall?"  And I read the whole letter, and I'm like "They want me to wait for two years."  So, that's when I went to Bloomingdale's and worked for two years and then went to Harvard.  And when I got there, you know, I remember very much going to that campus and seeing that there was actual ivy on the walls.  And that was my first memory of going to the Ivy League school, was that there was real ivy on the walls at Harvard.  And I remember actually before getting there, going home to Detroit [Michigan] to say goodbye to my parents.  And by that time, you know, even though I was accepted to Harvard, I was having a great time at Bloomingdale's, and I was like I didn't really want to leave the fashion business.  And so, I made up my mind I'm going to go tell my parents, "You know what?  This Harvard thing is okay, but I'm going to stay in New York [New York] and stay in the fashion world.  It was big fun."  And I walked into the kitchen to tell my father [Stratford Hilliard] this.  And as soon as he saw me, he said, "Oh, here comes our Ivy League graduate.  I am so proud of you.  Our family is so proud of you."  And I knew I couldn't disappoint him, so that's when I said okay, I'm going to go ahead and go.  And when I got there and saw the ivy on the walls and saw the history of the place, I was just overwhelmed, because I felt a very significant responsibility to graduate.  And I was very serious when I was there.  I was very focused on graduating, because it was a tough program.
Story_ID: 614744
Speaker 1: I was there a couple years ago, and I know they dedicated a building or a wing or something to one of the black business professors there who was starting a program.
Speaker 2: Naylor Fitzhugh [H. Naylor Fitzhugh]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--exactly.
Speaker 2: Yes, one of the earliest graduates of the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], and an executive with PepsiCo [Pepsi-Cola Company; PepsiCo].  And I met Naylor, Naylor Fitzhugh several times before he passed, and he was an amazing man.  I mean, to have gone through Harvard Business School in the '30s [1930s] when he went through was astounding.  Because when I went through, there were thirty-eight African-Americans in a class of 750 students.  And so, we had a meeting with the second year students to bring the first year students an orientation.  And the first thing that they told us, they said, "Look to your left and look to your right, because half of you won't be here next year."  The failure rate was 50 percent the first year and the second year.  And so, that's what my first introduction to Harvard was, was that 50 percent of the black students are going to fail.  And I made up my mind it wasn't going to be me.  And so, I really just, there are times when I don't remember much other than just studying all the time.  And I didn't party, I didn't have a lot of social outlets.  I was just there to make sure that I graduated.  And it was, but I had a lot of fun anyway, but my focus was real clear.
Story_ID: 614745
Speaker 1: Who were your specific mentors or important, I guess, contacts at Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Well, there were a number of people there.  My professor of marketing, Steve Starr, he was extremely important to me, because that was, marketing was what I wanted to do and what I liked.  I didn't know why, but I just liked it.  And he encouraged me.  He was the one who would expect excellence, and 50 percent of your grade was in class participation.  And so he would randomly call on a student to open the class.  And he called on me like the third day of class to open the case for--it was a painting case, like Schwinn Painting Company.  And I was the vice president of marketing, and he said, "Miss Hilliard [HistoryMaker Amy S. Hilliard], what would you do with this ad budget?"  And I said, "I would raise it $5 million."  Well, I had no clue about doing things like that, but in my analysis it said this ad budget needs to be raised.  Now, my knees were shaking underneath my desk, but he made me learn how to present well, and how to present with conviction your point of view based upon the facts and analysis.  And so he was a strong mentor and he never doubted me, and that was very encouraging.  Another professor there, Claudine Malone [Claudine B. Malone], she was one of the, she was the only African American female professor at the business school.  And she taught retailing, and because retailing was in my background, of course, I took her course.  And she was just such a brilliant woman; she is such a brilliant woman.  And encouraged me to be excellent also.  And I just loved her class, because she brought all kind of retailers to the class to speak, and she understood that world.  And to see a black woman teach the way that she could teach was very inspiring to me.  Ann Fudge [Ann M. Fudge] was in the senior, the second year class.  And so she inspired me because she was the one who taught me, or told me, what product marketing and brand management was; I didn't know.  And so, I told her I loved marketing, and she said, "Well, you should look at brand management as a career, because then you get to market and build a brand."  And so Ann Fudge was very instrumental to me.  Linda Keene was also a second year student and she was also in marketing, and she was very instrumental.  Paula Sneed [HistoryMaker Paula Ann Sneed], these three women went on, were kind of like the class before me of going into marketing.  And so I looked to them, because all three of them went into brand management.  And so they were my mentors, and they--I said if they can do it, I can do it.  Let's see--
Speaker 1: So, they were students ahead of, just ahead of you?
Speaker 2: They were students ahead of me, um-hm, um-hm; they were students ahead of me.  And then there were people from all over the world that were just wonderful.  That was the other piece of Harvard that I loved, because I have friends to this day that I met there, and that was thirty years ago--that are from London [England], from India, from China, that I still keep in touch with.  And it's really great to have those international relationships.
Story_ID: 614746
Speaker 1: When you finished Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], you were focused on brand management as a--?
Speaker 2: Actually, no, because I wanted to go into brand management or advertising.  I had interned the summer between at Young and Rubicam advertising agency [Y&R].  I got them to create an internship for me.  They weren't doing internships, but I kind of hounded them until they did.  And Caroline Jones [Caroline R. Jones], Caroline Jones who had an ad agency, but at the time she was the only African American vice president of advertising at BBDO [BBDO Worldwide] in New York [New York], she was a mentor to me.  Because she said, "You should try to work for an ad agency," and I got a job with Young and Rubicam.  So, I really was thinking about going back into either advertising--because I had a job offer--or retailing was still calling my name, because Bloomingdale's offered me a job after business school.  And they were relentless in their recruiting, so I went back to Bloomingdale's actually, and continued my buying career.  But it was after being at Bloomingdale's and learning buying from a different angle, because there I wasn't buying designer clothing anymore.  I was buying towels, I was in the towel department which seems really boring, but towels was the most profitable department in the store.  So I learned the importance of being where the profits are, not necessarily where the glamour was.  And so I learned how to develop catalogs and do the white sale catalogs.  I helped Bloomingdale's do their first ever television advertisements.  And so it was a great place to be, but I was living in New York and got held up at gunpoint in my apartment building after work, in those horrendous Christmas hours you hear about that retailers do.  Well, I got--I wasn't paying attention, and somebody followed me from the bus stop home at 9:30 at night, held me up at gunpoint, took my purse that I had gotten in Italy--I'd gone to Italy after graduating from business school--and took my purse.  And I was mad, and so I chased this guy down the block.  I said, "You know, he's got my purse that I got from Italy."  I'm shouting to people, and then people started following him, and then I said, "Oh, by the way, he also has a gun."  And they were like, "Are you crazy?"  I said, "Okay, fine."  You know, but I decided it was time to make a move and leave New York, you know, after that episode.
Story_ID: 614747
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You just didn't feel safe there?
Speaker 2: Well, no, I didn't feel safe.  And I actually got Bloomingdale's to transfer me to the Boston [Massachusetts] store, and so I worked in retail for a bit longer in the Boston store.  And then my mentor, Linda Keene, said that there was a job opening at Gillette [The Gillette Company], which was headquartered in Boston, and did I want to try brand management?  Because I couldn't get into marketing within the retail environment.  At that time they didn't hire people into marketing; you had to be through the merchandising channel.  So I went over to Gillette and I interviewed, and I got a job.  And I started as an assistant brand manager on White Rain hairspray and Adorn hairspray.  And so I started at the bottom rung of brand management at Gillette, and this is 1981.  And I stayed--
Speaker 1: Now White Rain, that was real popular at one time.
Speaker 2: Yes, it's a very old brand.
Speaker 1: I don't know if it still is, but, you know, I don't see--you don't see the commercials with the flowing hair.  You know, all through the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], White Rain shampoo--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --was on television, you know, all the time.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Now they kind of, I don't know.  They seem to--
Speaker 2: Well, White Rain was a very popular and large brand by the time I left Gillette, and it's still on the shelves.  They actually sold off that business, but you'll still see White Rain on the shelves.  But they don't advertise it anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But when I got to the business it was just the hairspray, White Rain and Adorn hairsprays, which, you're right, they used to advertise all the time.  And they figured, you know, those were, at that time those brands were almost thirty years old.  So they figured that, you know, I'd be able to learn without screwing them up.  And so they put me on those brands and I had a blast, I loved them.  And we started seeing--I was getting letters from people, because they had discontinued White Rain shampoo.  But I was getting letters from people.  I was getting at least ten letters a week from people saying, "You should bring back that White Rain shampoo, we miss it."  And so, I started hounding the division people.  And I'd started getting promotions by this time, and then they promoted me to brand manager on the White Rain hairspray business.  And I'm still getting these letters.  And I said, "You should let me, you know, bring back the shampoo."  And the president of the division finally said, "Okay, okay, okay, I'll let you launch, relaunch the shampoo.  You have six months to do it.  You cannot increase your budget, but you can do it."  And that's all I needed, was a yes.  He let me do, and so we brought back, my team brought back White Rain shampoo and conditioner.  And when I left Gillette that brand, the whole brand was a hundred million dollar brand, and when I started on it, it was a $25 million brand.
Speaker 1: So, this is 1981 to 1985, I guess?  That's what I have here.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Is that true?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so you left in '85 [1985]?
Speaker 2: Well, no.  I left Gillette in 19--actually I left Gillette in 1989, '90 [1990].
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I was the brand manager during that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, all right.
Story_ID: 614748
Speaker 1: I had a different assignment.  I not only was running the White Rain business, but I was also the brand manager for the Miss America promotion when Vanessa Williams was crowned Miss America.
Speaker 2: Right.  Now there's a lot of drama in this one.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: This is 1984?
Speaker 1: This is 1984.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This is 1984.
Speaker 2: I remember, you know, the anguish that people felt when she lost her crown.  And--
Speaker 1: It was unbelievably hard.
Speaker 2: The first black Miss America.  The runner up was Suzette Charles, she's African American too.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But watching the event, the pageant, was a tradition at Gillette [The Gillette Company].  Gillette was a major sponsor of the Miss America, Miss America pageant for years, so it was always a tradition.  And once you got the assignment of being the brand manager--to watch the pageant--so you'd see who you were working for, working with as Miss America.  So, you know, all of us are gathered watching the TV.  And we see, you know, that there're two black women that are in the top ten.  How exciting is that?  When Vanessa won, it was almost like when Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] won.  People were like, "Oh, my god.  We have a black Miss America."  And I was black as a brand manager.  The sales manager also happened to be black at Gillette, so we couldn't believe our good fortune.
Speaker 2: This was the first time for this I guess at Gillette?
Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That there were black people running the Miss America promotion, and Miss America happened to be black.  So, it was quite a heady time to be there.  And when she had to resign--and she was wonderful, she absolutely was one of the best Miss America's Gillette had ever seen.  She was the most personable, popular, she was wonderful to work with.  And when she had to--when I had to stand at the fax machine--because the ad agency in New York [New York] said, "Have you seen--?"  They called me and they said, "Have you seen the pictures?"  I said, "What pictures?"  "Go stand by the fax machine."  And they faxed those nude photos of Vanessa Williams to me.  I'm standing at the fax machine looking at these photos, knowing that within an hour I was to go into a big meeting with the president of the division to present the promotional plans for Miss America and send out fifty thousand displays to Kmart [Kmart Corporation] next week with Vanessa Williams' picture on it, you know, on our headstands and on all of our promotional materials.  And I'm looking at these pictures, I had to walk--I was going to have to walk into the meeting and tell the president, "We have a problem.  Vanessa Williams has these nude photos in Penthouse Magazine, and it's rumored that she's going to have to resign."  And they looked at me, he looked at me and said, "Amy [HistoryMaker Amy S. Hilliard], you are damage control center, central.  You're damage control.  We don't want to lose an account over this.  We don't want to lose any of our promotions over this.  You have to fix this."  So that week I had to go through and strip her picture off of fifty thousand displays, and put up a generic picture of a crown and some roses and a scepter in its place.  I would work like a crazy woman during the day, and I'd come home at night and just cry, because I just, it was so devastating that that happened.  After it happened we went on and did what we had to do, we didn't lose any business.  But we went to the next Miss America pageant where Suzette Charles by this time had taken over, and she was passing the torch.  Vanessa Williams sent me a note thanking me for, you know, being there for her, and letting me know how strange it was to watch the pageant from her living room TV.  And I have that note framed with the picture that we took when we were doing the promotions when she was in her crown.  And, and, I'll never forget it.  And I've seen her since, subsequently, and she remembers that time.  And she's just a gracious person, so I'm happy for her success now.  But that was a very challenging time to be in marketing, and yet I learned a lot from that crisis; that you have to go on no matter what.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, her story is she seems to have a lot of perseverance.  Because we, you know, people thought that she was finished probably, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: --at that point.
Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 2: And she'd go on to be probably the most successful Miss America I guess.
Speaker 1: Ever.
Speaker 2: You know, I guess Anita Bryant is the only one I can think of that may have--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --come close.  But--
Speaker 1: That's right.  And her story is one of perseverance, belief in herself, belief in her talent, and knowing that this too shall pass.  And she did it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, you got through it too (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, I got through it too.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: You know, so it was--
Speaker 2: Nobody tried to blame you for it, or jump on you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, no, I had nothing to do with it.
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: I just had to fix it (laughter).
Speaker 2: But I know how people are sometimes.
Speaker 1: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 614749
Speaker 1: So this is 1984.  And, so you were, you were in that position until '85 [1985], and then you took another position at Gillette [The Gillette Company]?
Speaker 2: Well, I was still brand manager of that business.  And then I took a new products position, where I was really just overseeing a lot of new product development for Gillette.  And in that position, I was asked to become a part of a new business development team that was interested in acquisitions.  We had seen that [HistoryMaker] George Johnson, who owned Afro Sheen--Johnson Products Company, the hair care company, became public around that time.  And so, that was the first time that major corporations saw how much profit was made in black hair care.  They had no idea until that time.  They, I remember very specifically Gillette passing around the annual report for Johnson Products Company, saying, "Do you see these margins?  This is a money maker.  We have to get in this business."  So, I was part of the taskforce that was to get Gillette into the black hair care business, either in two paths.  Either we were going to acquire a company, or we were going to develop our own line.  So, I was working in tandem.  I was working on developing our own, the Gillette line of products for black hair care.  But also, I was working on acquisitions to, for Gillette to acquire a black hair care company.  So at that time I met and talked with every major black hair care company in the United States.  They sent me to go talk to these people and ask them did they want to sell their company.  I'd never done acquisitions at all.  They said, "But you can do this."  Because I was the one who at Gillette--you know, I don't know.  I get on a soapbox.  I'm like, "Gillette, you know, before you do these acquisitions, you at least need to advertise in Ebony and Essence and Jet with our products that we have--Right Guard hair, Right Guard deodorant, White Rain hairspray.  We use hairspray.  We use, you know, deodorant.  How come you're not advertising in these magazines?"  So I was kind of a rabble rouser for that, and that's what got me on the taskforce for the black hair care project.
Story_ID: 614750
Speaker 1: I remember those days.  There was an association of black hair care.  ASAHBI, I think it was called?
Speaker 2: AHBAI, the association of black hair care manufacturers [American Health and Beauty Aids Institute], it was--yeah.
Speaker 1: And it was like every--they had the Bronner Brothers in Atlanta [Georgia], Pro-Line [Pro-Line International, Inc.] down in Texas [Dallas, Texas] and California.  And you had, you know, Johnson Products [Johnson Products Company] here.
Speaker 2: M&M Products in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, and Soft Sheen [Soft Sheen Products, Inc.] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Soft Sheen.
Speaker 2: Luster Products [Luster Products, Inc.], all of them.
Speaker 1: All of them--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --making--you know, basically the Jheri curl was making--
Speaker 2: The Jheri curl was hot.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was amazing.  So those were really, really, heady times, because they were all making fantastic sums of money.  And I remember sitting across the table with these titans of business, and asking them, "Are you interested in selling your company to Gillette [The Gillette Company]?"  And I remember several, most of them saying, "No, we're not.  We're not going to sell."
Speaker 1: What you have is, as I recall, was almost like a war.  It was almost a cry.
Speaker 2: It was a war.
Speaker 1: I mean, a flag was raised in the black community. You know, the white companies, Revlon [Revlon, Inc.] and all the rest of them wanted to take our hair care--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --business.
Speaker 2: Well, that's interesting that you raise that.  Because I remember when I was doing my research, going to the New York hair show and seeing Ed Gardner [HistoryMaker Edward Gardner] of Soft Sheen passionately stand up and defend his company, because Revlon was trying to say that his relaxers had damaging chemicals.  And he said, "This is an African American owned company.  It's going to stay African American owned as long as I have anything to do with it.  And our heritage is important."  And I never forgot that.  So when Gillette wanted to go after the business, none of the black major companies wanted to sell.  I talked to Comer Cottrell [HistoryMaker Comer Joseph Cottrell], I talked to all of them.  They said, "No," (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Comer Cottrell.
Story_ID: 614751
Speaker 1: There was a company called Lustrasilk [Lustrasilk Corporation], which was owned, which was out in Minneapolis, Minnesota, which had the, a product called Luster Curl, and Right On Curl maintenance products.  All these products were doing very well in black hair care.  The company was never owned by black people, it was owned by a German guy.  The company was started by a Mexican guy who was a chemist for 3M, and found out that he had a product that would straighten sheep's hair.  So he figured there're a lot of wooly headed people in this world, and a lot of them are black.  So, let's use this product to straighten some black hair.  And that's how Lustrasilk got started.
Speaker 2: I can't see the image of a sheep with straightened hair.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So that's, you know, that's how that company got started.  But they're out in Minnesota, this is a $50 million company.  And Gillette [The Gillette Company] sent me out to have dinner with this guy.  Sitting across the table just like I'm sitting across from you, and said, "You know, how much would it take for us to buy your company?  We can buy it for at least--you're doing 50 million, we can buy it for 50 million."  And he took me on a tour of his plant at midnight that so nobody would know he was thinking of selling.  And that's the company that Gillette ultimately bought.  And that's what brought me out to Minnesota in 1989, well, actually 1987.  They bought the company and asked me to go out there as director of marketing for Lustrasilk.  And so that's what moved me to Minneapolis, Minnesota.  I had been married since 1982.  I had just had my first child, Angelica [Angelica Jones].  She was born in 1986, and I was just going back to work when they asked me to go and move to Minnesota.  So, I basically commuted for six months back and forth with a six month old daughter, who stayed in Boston [Massachusetts].  But I went ahead to Minneapolis to get a house ready for us, and commuted every two weeks.  Sometimes my baby would come with me and stay with me for two weeks while I was learning a new company, getting the acquisition transitioned into Gillette.  And then stayed with them, launched new products with Lustrasilk, and stayed with them through 1989, '90 [1990].  And that's when I left Gillette.  And I left Gillette because at the time there were a lot of acquisitions starting, and Gillette was under fire to be acquired by a larger company.  And so they had a plant in St. Paul [Minnesota], a big plant for Gillette in St. Paul, Lustrasilk had a big plant.  They started consolidating, and they said "We're going to move the Lustrasilk operations back to Boston," and I didn't want to move back to Boston.  I'd done, I'd moved my family across the country, I wasn't interested in moving them back.  And that's when I said, "No, I'm going to resign and stay in Minnesota and stay here and find something else to do."  And it was a tough decision, because, you know, Gillette wanted me to come back.  But I stood my ground and said, "No, I'll take, you know, the package and stay here."  But the saddest thing I ever had to do was when they--was to help them close the Lustrasilk plant.  These were people who were, when we got there, they knew nothing of Corporate America, but yet they had built a $50 million business.  The books were still kept by hand, and these were people who gave their all to this company.  And when we got there, I just, I loved them all, you know.  I had to go down many times to that plant floor when we were launching new products and say, "Look, guys, we need to make this happen.  You know, who's got a new--I need a name for this new product, I don't have one."  We'd have a contest.  So, I had people who were workers in the plants submitting names for our new products, and they would get so excited.  To have to go there and stand in line, shake each person's hand, and give them a mug that said, "Thank you for your work at Lustrasilk.  We're sorry, we're closing the plant," was something I'll never forget.  I'll never forget it, because that was their livelihood that they gave.  And Gillette--you know, this is what big companies sometimes do, and they just closed the plant.  And it taught me a very valuable lesson.  I had tried actually to buy Lustrasilk from Gillette when I knew that they wanted to move the operations, because I didn't want to close that plant.  I wanted to keep the company going as an independent company.  I raised $75 million with a team of people who worked at Gillette.  You know, the general manager for Lustrasilk was a black man.  The head of sales was black.  I was black.  The three of us were together.  And I went to a venture capitalist and we raised $75 million to buy it, and Gillette wouldn't sell it.  And that's when I said, "I'm not going back to Boston."  So they rolled it back to Boston and they did their thing, and I stayed in Minneapolis.
Story_ID: 614752
Speaker 1: By this time I was pregnant with my second child, Nicholas [Nicholas Jones], my son.  And I--my sister, Gloria Mayfield Banks [Gloria Hilliard Banks], had started her career in Mary Kay cosmetics, and asked me to help her, help her sell Mary Kay [Mary Kay Inc.].  So, I started selling Mary Kay cosmetics.  I was off work and had a new baby, so that worked well.  And I started doing that, and I was on my way to directorship selling Mary Kay.  But that really wasn't my passion.  I didn't, I liked parts of it, but I didn't particularly see myself selling cosmetics and lipsticks as a living.  So when Pillsbury [Pillsbury Company, LLC, Minneapolis, Minnesota] called, by this time Linda Keene--again, my mentor from Gillette [The Gillette Company]--had moved out to Minneapolis [Minnesota].  So she's godparents to my daughter [Angelica Jones], she and her husband.  They, she was at Pillsbury, and she said, "You know what?  There's a job opening at Pillsbury.  Do you want to come interview?"  So, I said, "Sure."  And I went over to Pillsbury and interviewed for director of market development for the baked goods division for Pillsbury.  And this was a position that was newly created in order to help Pillsbury--understand, this is 1990.  This is when the census first started charting the fact that 25 percent of Americans were going to be people of color, and that the country's diversity was changing.  And they wanted to get at multicultural marketing, so that was what I was hired to do.  So I'm here at Minneapolis, Minnesota, which is--the whole State of Minnesota had less than 1 percent African Americans.  And here I am telling this major company, the Pillsbury company, that they need to market their products to more African Americans, Hispanics, and Asian consumers.  And this was a tremendous opportunity, because I had to educate this company, this corporation, on the fact that there is business in diversity, and that the color of the country was changing.  They couldn't see it in Minneapolis, but I told them, I said, "You just go to Los Angeles [California].  Go to LAX Airport [Los Angeles International Airport, Los Angeles, California], stand in that airport, and don't say a word.  Just watch who's coming in and who's coming out.  That's what America looks like.  You'll hear languages you've never heard before.  You'll see people of every color you've never seen before.  That's what America is, and that's where the growth is in this country in terms of--the perimeter of the country is most ethnically diverse.  And if you see where the census is growing, that's where your business is going to come from in the future, and we need to understand that."  So, I was able to take a lot of their senior people on food tours.  I took the head of Pillsbury kitchens on a soul food tour.  We ate in every soul food restaurant from New York to California.  We sent product to Hispanic consumers, from Chicago [Illinois] to Texas to Miami [Florida].  And we'd send them a box of Pillsbury food and we'd say, "You cook it the way you cook it.  We're coming for dinner."  The stuff that people made with Pillsbury food was so amazing, and it had nothing to do with what was in their normal box.  We put this information together in a food seminar that we brought to Pillsbury called Savor the Cultural Flavor [ph.], which we put on.  And we cooked all this ethnic food with Pillsbury products, invited the chairman and all the big mucky mucks, you know, all the VPs to come and taste this food.  And that's what opened their eyes to the fact that, hey, there's a big market out here, and people are using our food differently.
Story_ID: 614753
Speaker 1: I know some black people that open Pillsbury biscuits and eat them for lunch or breakfast or that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: But you're talking about something more than that.  Right?
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  I mean we took for example--with Pillsbury [Pillsbury Company, LLC, Minneapolis, Minnesota], the cake mix, the yellow cake mix--we were able to show them that for African Americans, yellow cake mix is an ingredient; it's not the end.  They would take the cake mix and add a little bit of this and a little bit of that, to make it the way that they wanted the cake to taste.  And Pillsbury saw this and they were amazed at it.  Because traditionally--their traditional customer would take the cake mix and make it exactly like what's on the box.  African Americans, we put more butter in it, we put more sugar in it, we put more flavor in it, because we wanted it to taste the way we wanted it to taste.  And so by doing that, for them to see this in actuality--and then we had experts come in to talk to them about the food preferences.  We had one of the owners of Aunt Kizzy's Back Porch [Marina del Rey, California] come in and talk to them from California--which was a very famous soul food restaurant--about soul food, and Jessica Harris [HistoryMaker Jessica B. Harris] who is a culinary expert, to talk to them about soul food as well, and then Hispanic culinary experts.  And they saw that the products didn't have to be changed, but how they marketed the products had to be changed.  So, we developed commercials that showed African Americans doing what they do with Pillsbury food--eating a lot of Hungry Jack biscuits.  In fact, that's what we saw, that the core of business of Hungry Jack came from African Americans.  And we had pictures of African Americans using the all ready piecrust, not to make apple pies, but to make peach cobbler, because that's what we like to do.  And we would just cut it up and make it--and put it in the peach cobbler.  And we were eating a ton of those Hungry Jack biscuits.  And so instead of just having a regular commercial for Hungry Jack--which was at that time a lumberjack in the forest cutting down trees saying, "Are you hungry, Jack," we had commercials--and we we hired a black agency, UniWorld [UniWorld Group, Inc.]--and our commercial said, "You look hungry, Jack," a totally different way of positioning it.  But by doing so, African Americans knew that we were talking to them.  It was great.
Speaker 1: You know, it never occurred to me that the Minnesota frame of reference is a lumberjack.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know, and all that.
Speaker 2: It was a lumberjack (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's true, yeah.
Speaker 2: And I told them, I said, "African Americans cannot relate to a lumberjack, but we can relate to being hungry, Jack," because that's how we talk.  So, it was fun, it was a lot of fun.
Story_ID: 614754
Speaker 1: There's a note here that says one of your proudest moments was the--an ad that featured the Pillsbury Doughboy and some people of color.
Speaker 2: That's right.  Yes, we had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What happened?
Speaker 2: We had--the Pillsbury Doughboy--we had a commercial that we did for the cake mix.  And at that time, everything was done with clay.  It was, there was no computer animation, so every movement of the Pillsbury Doughboy was an actual little clay figurine.
Speaker 1: Stop motion?
Speaker 2: Stop motion.
Speaker 1: Animation?
Speaker 2: Animation.  So, one commercial, one thirty second commercial cost six hundred thousand dollars.  So, I said to them, "We can't just do a commercial and have white folks talking about the cake mix, when you see that there're people who use it differently."  And Pillsbury [Pillsbury Company, LLC, Minneapolis, Minnesota] was like, "But we can't afford three six hundred thousand dollar commercials."  And so by talking with the agencies and talking with the team, I said, "Well, let's get creative.  Let's use the same set, but have different casts of characters, but the Doughboy stays the same."  So we got three commercials out of one set, and two casts.  Because the Hispanic family, instead of having a blonde family for the American family, we had a family that had a brunette hairstyle, but they could be Hispanic or American.  So, we did the English version with the brunette family.  We did the Spanish version with the same brunette family.  But when it came to African Americans, we brought in a new cast of an African American family.  But the Doughboy's movements were still the same, so we saved money.  So, we called that the browning of the Doughboy because that was the first time that the Doughboy ever spoke Spanish in a commercial in America, and it was the first time the Doughboy had ever been filmed with an African American cast.  And it was so important to me, because the Pillsbury Doughboy was actually created by a black woman, yes.
Speaker 1: Who was that?
Speaker 2: Carol Williams [HistoryMaker Carol H. Williams], Carol H. Williams.  She has one of the most successful ad agencies in the country today.  She was a copywriter at Leo Burnett [Leo Burnett Company, Inc.], and they were, they had the Pillsbury business.  And I remember reading about it in Black Enterprise that in a meeting, you know, she cracked open a can of dough and saw the dough ooze out, and said, "Oh, we can make a character out of this called the Pillsbury Doughboy."  And I wrote to her--and this was, you know, before I ever got to Pillsbury--and told her how proud I was of her.  And so, later on in my career I had an opportunity to be on a panel with Carol, and Carol and I are friends to this day.  And I always tell her, I said, "You know, you created the Pillsbury Doughboy.  And when I worked with the Pillsbury Doughboy and had him in a television commercial with black folks, it was one of the proudest moments of my life."
Speaker 1: So, how do you do the finger at the end?  Now you have like two casts, but you know, the finger pokes him in the tummy.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Did you have to have a black finger do it, then a white finger--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --poke him?
Speaker 2: Yes.  But we had to film it so--you know, we had the poke in the tummy, which is a great thing that you remember.  That had to be filmed out of sequence.  So that, when we were filming that we had to have a black hand and a white hand and a Hispanic hand, so we're not, you know, again, causing a lot of money to have to do the film.  And we had to be very creative.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, commercials are expensive.  So, a lot of what you had to do was figure out ways to, you know, make those commercials affordable.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And still reach a lot of people.
Speaker 2: That's right.  It was great training.  I was very--what I call intrapreneurial, because I was an entrepreneur within Corporate America.  And I loved it, because I never liked doing things just the regular corporate way.  I always wanted to do things differently.  I was--John McCain isn't the only maverick in town (laughter).  I was a corporate maverick.  I liked to work in non-traditional ways within Corporate America, and it was great training for me ultimately becoming an entrepreneur.
Story_ID: 614755
Speaker 1: You were director of marketing--director of market development in the baked goods division?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any other stories from that era?
Speaker 2: Well, it was real interesting.  Because the first day I walked on the job at Pillsbury [Pillsbury Company, LLC, Minneapolis, Minnesota], it just talks to how still the country has to get used to seeing African Americans in roles of authority.  Because I remember very, very clearly showing up for work at Pillsbury as the new director of market development, suit down, briefcase in hand.  I get to the elevator banks on my floor, and it was early in the morning before everybody got there.  So I couldn't get in, I didn't have my code yet.  So, I'm banging on the door, and some junior product manager assistant comes rushing to the door.  And he opens the door and he looks at me, and he goes, "I am so glad you're here.  We've been waiting for the temp to get here forever.  You know, we're so glad you, the temp, is here, because we got this typing we need you to do right away."  And I looked at him and I said, "Good morning, I'm not the temp.  I'm the new director of marketing for the baked goods division."  Now, he turned nine ways of red, he was so embarrassed.  But I didn't hold it against him.  He ultimately ended up working for me.  So it was, it was just one of those moments that you don't forget.  You know, here I am showing up for, you know, a senior management job and this guy looks at, takes one look at me and assumes that I'm the temp.  So, some things don't change.  But you roll with it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was a great experience at Pillsbury.
Story_ID: 614756
Speaker 1: Did you have many black staff members at Pillsbury [Pillsbury Company, LLC, Minneapolis, Minnesota]?
Speaker 2: I did.  I was able to hire a black staff member who worked directly for me, Rosalind Bell, and she helped with our team.  We were able to get other black staff members in research.  I was able to definitely get them to hire a black ad agency, I insisted upon it.  And so, we were able to broaden the landscape, if you will, in terms of what marketing could mean for a company like Pillsbury.  We created a cookbook, a soul food cookbook called 'Mississippi Mud and Moon Pies' [ph.] that we produced.  And so, we got people to submit their favorite soul food recipes and we created a cook book from that.  And to get the Pillsbury kitchens to create all this food for this seminar, with traditional soul food recipes but using their ingredients, was something that we were very proud of.
Story_ID: 614757
Speaker 1: You were at Pillsbury [Pillsbury Company, LLC, Minneapolis, Minnesota] until '92 [1992]?
Speaker 2: Ninety-two [1992].
Speaker 1: Now, what happened?  Why did you leave them?
Speaker 2: Well, my husband at the time had gotten accepted to graduate school in Chicago [Illinois].  And so to support him, we moved to Chicago.  Now, I had been introduced to Tom Burrell [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell] back in my days of Gillette [The Gillette Company], actually back in my days of the Miss America pageant.  I met him in person in New York [New York] at a dinner, and I had been following his career, I knew who he was.  I knew he had the Burrell Advertising Agency [Chicago, Illinois] because of all the great commercials that he had done for McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation] and Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia].  So, he was an icon to me.  And I remember at this restaurant somebody pointed out and said, "That's Tom Burrell over there."  And I walked over to him and introduced myself.  I said, "I'm one of your biggest fans.  I work at Gillette, and I just think what you're doing is great.  And one day I want to work for you.  Nice to meet you."  And he, you know, laughed, and we laughed.  But he gave me his card and he said, "Keep in touch."  And this was in 1984, '85 [1985].  And every year, every six months or so, I'd send him a note.  You know, if I saw a wonderful ad I'd send him a congratulatory note.  And so he said, "Well, when you're ready to work with me, let me know."  And I actually interviewed to work with him right before I started on the acquisition team at Gillette.  And I was going to quit Gillette and go to Chicago, but then I found out I was pregnant with my daughter [Angelica Jones] so I stayed in Boston [Massachusetts].  So, when it was time to move to Chicago in '92 [1992], I wrote to him.  And I said, "You know, it's--you said if I ever needed a job in Chicago to let you know.  Well, I do need a job.  My husband is going to grad school and we're moving to Chicago."  And he said, "Okay, let's talk," and he and I talked.  At that time he had an advertising agency, Burrell advertising, Burrell--he had three separate companies--advertising, promotion, and public relations.  And he said, "I want them all to come into one corporate entity, and I want to call it Burrell--you know, I want to have a Burrell company that has everything together, a communications company."  And I, he said, "Write me a proposal for the job of integrating my company."  So, I wrote him a proposal to become senior vice president of integrated marketing services for Burrell Communications Group [Chicago, Illinois].  My job was to integrate the three disciplines--to create new marketing materials, new collaterals, a new logo for the company, a new selling brochure for the company, and a new selling platform, to sell Burrell Communications as the totally integrated marketing services company geared to the African American consumer market.  So, that's what he hired me to do.  I had to--though before he gave me the job, I had to present my proposal to his board of directors.  On his board of directors was [HistoryMaker] George Johnson of Johnson Products Company, so I was able to reconnect with him.  On his board was Larry Levy of Levy Restaurants here in Chicago, one of the largest food service companies in the world; I was able to meet him.  So, it was a great opportunity to present what I saw as a vision for Burrell Communications to be integrated.  And they gave me the job in '92 [1992], and I moved my family to Chicago from Minneapolis [Minnesota].  And I was glad to get here, because you know, coming from Detroit [Michigan] and living in a city that was majority black--and then I'd went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]--again, majority black.  So, I've been around diversity all the time.  Living in Minneapolis was very challenging, because I just didn't see a lot of black folks.  I remember getting to Chicago on one of my interviews, and getting to O'Hare airport [Chicago O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois] and then getting to the rental car bus.  And there was a brother on the bus, and he had Motown [Motown Records] music playing.  I was, I was so happy.  I was like, "Oh, my god, I'm with some black people."  I remember walking down Michigan Avenue speaking to people I didn't even know, "How are you doing?  How are you?  How are you doing?"  I was just so happy to see black people.  They looked at me, and they just spoke right back.  And I said, "Wow, I'm in Chicago."  I've always wanted to live in Chicago, it was always a big city.  And so when Tom Burrell gave me that job, I was one happy camper.  I was working at a black ad agency that I had known about and dreamed about for years; it was my dream job.  It was, it was fantastic.  And my office was directly down the hall from his.  So, I could stand in my office and see him coming and going.  It was an extraordinary experience in watching an entrepreneur build a company, because I saw him every day, you know, walking the halls, building his company.  And I would just, through osmosis, watch what he did.  Because I told him that when I did go to work for him, I said, "You know, Tom, one day I want to be an entrepreneur.  I'm telling you this upfront, because I don't want to surprise you."  And he was so gracious.  He said, "That's fine.  I believe in entrepreneurship.  The only thing I ask is that if you, when you're ready to go out on your own, do not give me two weeks' notice.  Give me some time so that we can make this happen for you and for me in the best way possible.  That's all I ask."  So, it was great.
Story_ID: 614758
Speaker 1: You were with Burrell [Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois] until '94 [1994]?
Speaker 2: Right, I was at Burrell until '94 [1994].  It, and that time at Burrell was terrific.  I worked with all of his major accounts, Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia], McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation]--
Speaker 1: Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Procter and Gamble, Prudential [Prudential Insurance Company of America; Prudential Financial, Inc.], all of them.  We went to Africa twice, because McDonald's had a return to the homeland sweepstakes that I was working on.  So, I got to go to Africa with the, with the team.  And then Tom [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell] was also going to, was looking into expanding his business internationally.  And so he took a team of his top executives over to South Africa to make presentations to open up a branch in South Africa.  And this--we got to present Burrell Communications' credentials to Nelson Mandela's cabinet members.  It was an unbelievable trip, where we were presenting to the members of Nelson Mandela's cabinet.  We didn't present to President Mandela; he happened to be out of the country at that time.  But to meet all of his ministers, to meet some of the lions of the apartheid movement, to have dinner in their homes, it was unbelievable.  And then to be in South Africa and presenting--and we, you know, we made some snafus.  Because we were saying--and the minority market is important, and then we had to remember where we were.  We're in a country where Africans were not the minority, they were the majority.  And so we had to really--this is after apartheid had just fallen.  So we had to reeducate businesses to the fact that you no longer can just act like you are the majority, because you're not.  And that's why you need a black agency, because blacks are in the majority in this country, and now you have to recognize that fact.  So it was, it was, it was an amazing time to have gone there.
Story_ID: 614759
Speaker 1: What were the differences I guess in representing, I guess, the needs of South Africans versus African Americans to advertisers?
Speaker 2: Well, it was something very unique to them, because they had never really talked to South African blacks before; they talked to the white Afrikaners.  And you'd go--what was so disconcerting was when we flew into Johannesburg [South Africa], it looked like we were flying into Chicago [Illinois].  It had four leaf clover highways, super highways; big, tall buildings.  I was really disoriented when I looked out of the window and they said, "We're getting ready to land in Johannesburg," and I looked out and it looked like Chicago.  Because when we went to Senegal earlier that year, when you were flying into Senegal, it looked like you were flying into Africa.  But this looked like we were flying into a major metropolitan city in America that African, black Africans, had no power in at all.  We were able to sit in a session of the parliament and hear de Klerk [F.W. de Klerk] make some remarks at the time they were getting ready for the transition of the government.
Speaker 1: Right, because the election was right in '94 [1994].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so they were getting ready for all of that, and so we were able to really see it.  But we had to present to business owners and to people who would be potential customers that you needed to change your marketing strategies to now embrace the majority of the consumers in your country, and let them know that you want their business.  So it was a very different shift, but it had similarities, in that white South Africans had not recognized the power of the black South African dollar.  And in America, white corporations were just beginning to recognize the power of black Americans' dollars.  So it was, there were some similarities, but we were in totally different countries around the world to do it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there a difference in, I guess in, I guess representing the black South Africans to these business people?
Speaker 2: Well, for me it was representing black people.  And you know, there were certain language issues that you had to deal with and cultural differences, in that--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the demographics, the cost of living, the available consumer dollars to spend were different.  Because this is a relatively poor population, that when you went into Soweto [South Africa], even though it was a 5 million person city, it was still largely low income.  And so you had to change how you talked, and encourage people to go into the marketplace, versus in America where you had more of an economic stratus to deal with.  So, that was a different change.  But it was quite amazing to go into Soweto and still see that Soweto itself, that's where all the Africans--that's where all the black Africans lived no matter what their income level.  So we went through Soweto and saw some of the worse poverty you could ever imagine.  And then you go into different areas of Soweto and you see middle-class and upper-class black Africans living in that township.  And to look out over that, to see it was just amazing.  And interestingly enough we're at one of the mountains, the Cape of Good Hope, on just a tour.  And who do we meet at the tip of South Africa but Comer Cottrell [HistoryMaker Comer Joseph Cottrell] of Pro-Line [Pro-Line International, Inc., Dallas, Texas].  He's standing on top of the mountain getting ready to go on a tour, and we're standing out there on the mountain getting ready to go on a tour.  I'm like, "Mr. Cottrell, what are you doing here in South Africa?"  And he said, "Girl, have you looked at Soweto?  There're 5 million people who need some relaxer on their head" (laughter).  So he--all the black hair care companies were starting to come to South Africa, because it was, it was amazing.  They had people who needed black hair care products, so they were expanding their business.  So to be there to see another black entrepreneur there, and to be there with Tom Burrell [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell] as an entrepreneur, a black entrepreneur, was a heady time.
Story_ID: 614760
Speaker 1: Comer Cottrell [HistoryMaker Comer Joseph Cottrell], he's quite a figure (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's quite a guy, quite a guy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  And he had some interesting stories to tell us about how he got Pro-Line [Pro-Line International, Inc., Dallas, Texas] started.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, interesting guy, interesting guy.
Speaker 1: So he was--
Speaker 2: So, you know, I'm at Burrell [Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois] and I'm doing all these things, and selling Burrell.  Now, Tom [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell] had me--after I did the selling presentation, I did a whole PowerPoint presentation, redid what his business development team would do to go out and get new business.  He looked at what I did, and he goes, "This is really good.  Now, you should go out and sell it."  I said, "Tom, I'm not a salesperson."  He said, "But you wrote this, and it's really good.  I think you could bring in some new business.  So, I want you to head up new business."  I'm like, "Okay, you know, if that's what you want me to do."  And so I started leading the new business pitches for Burrell, and selling Burrell.  And we, we were able to bring in some new business.  In fact, he told me on the eve of his twenty-fifth anniversary celebration, he said, "You know what?  You're really good at this."  He said, "You've brought in more new business in one year than the entire twenty-five year history of Burrell.  You have brought in a lot of new business."
Speaker 1: More than, in one year?
Speaker 2: In one year.
Speaker 1: Than the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, because the business was coming, it came very slowly in this first twenty-five years.  But the way that we sold it was from the--we had the census to back us, up that the numbers were changing.  And we were able to convince people strategically that they needed to look at the African American market, even if it was just to start consulting.  So I was able to bring in large consulting contracts to Burrell, to say, "Not only do we want your advertising, but we'll do the consulting part first, so strategically you'll know why this customer base is important."  And that started bringing new dollars into Burrell.  We brought in Dial soap [Dial Corporation].  We brought in--we got the Prudential business [Prudential Insurance Company of America; Prudential Financial, Inc.].  We got, you know, some nice--Hasbro [Hasbro, Inc.] came in.  And so when he told me that, that's when I told him, I said, "Well, Tom, I'm looking at these consulting contracts coming in, and I think there's a way that you can have consulting as a new revenue stream for your company.  And I'd like to joint venture with you, and let me start the consulting business and be a joint venture with Burrell.  But I would like to run it.  That, I would like that to be my business."  And he thought about it and he said, "That's a good idea.  But I don't want it to split off from Burrell.  You can be a division of Burrell."  And that's when I looked at him, and I said, "No, it's time for me to start my own business.  If I can do this for you, I've got to try it for myself.  And I want to start Hilliard Jones Marketing Group [The Hilliard Group, LLC, Chicago, Illinois]."  And he said, "Okay, I get that."  He said, "Let's transition so that you're not leaving me in a lurch, and we'll be bringing the right people in."  And Tom Burrell became my first customer.  He gave me a contract, he gave me office space for six months on Michigan Avenue, and he paid for my administrative assistant for six months so I could start the Hilliard Jones Marketing Group.  Amazing, an amazing mentor to me.  He helped me get started.  So I left Burrell, and ultimately moved the business and worked it from my home.  But I had, I was able to get terrific contracts.  I had Fortune 500 companies that I consulted with on the business of diversity.  I'm talking about American Express [American Express Company], IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], Gap [Gap, Inc.], Ford Motor Company, General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], where I would go into these companies and really strategically lay out a business plan for them to go after consumers of color.  And it was, it went very, very well.  I was traveling all over the world.  I was presenting in London [England], I was presenting to a number of different people.  And it was, it was growing.  But I had two small children, you know, at the time, and I was divorced also.  I'd got a divorce by that time.  And I remember my daughter [Angelica Jones], when she was in the eighth grade getting ready to graduate that June--this was in the fall--and she said, "Mom, my graduation is June 12th."  This is in September, the prior September.  She said, "I want you to put that on your calendar right now, because I want to be sure that you're here for this."  I was traveling that much.  And when my daughter did that, it was an epiphany for me.  I said, you know, I can't keep traveling like this.  This is now getting into 1997, that kind of timeframe.  And I started thinking that even though I loved being an entrepreneur, having the flexibility, the travel was too much.  And I said I might have to look at going back to Corporate America for the stability of my family.
Story_ID: 614761
Speaker 1: And at that time is when I got a call from a recruiter, the Soft Sheen company [Soft Sheen Products, Inc.] had just been bought out by L'Oreal [L'Oreal S.A.].  And they were looking for a senior vice president of marketing, and they called to talk to me.  So, you know, stars line up as they should.  And I said, "Oh, my god, I can go to work for Soft Sheen?"  I'm in my mind going back to Ed Gardner [HistoryMaker Edward Gardner] and his legacy that he stood up and fought for.  Now, he had sold the company, but I looked at that as an opportunity to do what I, whatever I could to ensure that--yes, this was sold to this large French multibillion dollar conglomerate, but you were going to be true to the African American needs in hair care.  And I interviewed for that job, they gave me the job, and I went to go work for Soft Sheen at the beginning of 1998.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did they retain a lot of the Soft Sheen staff?  I mean, were they still in place?
Speaker 1: At that time they were.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They had pretty much kept a lot of the staff.  Mr. and Mrs. Gardner [HistoryMaker Bettiann Gardner] left.  Gary Gardner, who was the president, left.  And his sister, Terri Gardner, became the president.  But the, and the marketing chief obviously had left; she was married to Gary, Denise Gardner [Denise B. Gardner].  And so they brought me in to be the senior vice president of marketing.  But the senior VP of sales, Ethan Foster [Ethan G. Foster], who built that company from, you know, a half million dollars to, you know, the hundred million dollars when it was sold, was still there, and a lot of the sales staff (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hang, hang on a minute. What's the name again?
Speaker 1: Ethan Foster.
Speaker 2: Ethan Foster, okay.
Speaker 1: He was still there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The sales team was still there.  And I inherited, you know, a brand management team that was still there.  I had a staff of about thirteen people.  The R and D [research and development] staff was still there.  So, and they still had their plant on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois].  So, I walked into an incredibly challenging environment, because L'Oreal was changing all of the computer systems, changing all the reporting systems, changing all the ways that they tracked the business.  And they wanted me to launch new products, because they had paid a lot of money for the company, and they said, "We want to see a return."  Additionally, they said, "There's no need for a plant in Chicago when we have plant in Kentucky that can produce these items.  And, oh, by the way, we don't like any animal proteins in the products.  So you have to change all of the products over to having protein that comes from plants instead of protein that comes from animals in all these products, and move the manufacturing to Kentucky."  And that's what I walked into.  And, they wanted me to launch new products.  So, it was an incredible time, but we got it done.  I had a very good relationship with Ethan Foster, and I said, "You know, I'm in marketing, and I like to work with sales.  So we got to get these new products launched."  We launched two new product lines, one called Breakthrough [ph.] and one called Charisma [ph.], is a hair care color line.  The Breakthrough line was an anti-breakage line using L'Oreal technology in shampoos and conditioners and maintenance products for African Americans.  It was the first time that we incorporated the L'Oreal--and they had great technology that basically stopped your hair from breaking.  And we put it into a line of products called Breakthrough, and they did $5 million the first year.  And yet, I was still traveling a lot.  I had to go to New York [New York] once a month to present to L'Oreal.  I had to move all those products.  We had to reengineer those products and move all of the manufacturing to Kentucky.  I remember one particular instance where Terri Gardner was standing on the plant floor in Kentucky, and she was very, very quiet.  And she was, you know, very emotional.  And I walked up to her, I said, "Terri," I said, "are you okay?"  And she goes, "I am."  She said, "But--." At that time we were watching Care Free Curl come off of these huge machines. (Makes sound) You know, millions and millions and millions of bottles were just flowing off this machine.  She said, "I remember my father cooking up Care Free Curl on our stove in our house.  And now, look at this."  It was an incredible moment of transition for her.  And I felt it was very important that L'Oreal be true to the needs of the African American consumer because of what the Gardners had built.  So, we had times where I would get into pretty significant battles with the head of R and D of global L'Oreal, who would insist that a shampoo was supposed to feel--make your hair feel squeaky clean.  And I said, "We don't like squeaky clean.  We want a shampoo that makes our hair feel silky and soft.  If our hair feels squeaky clean, it feels dry."
Story_ID: 614762
Speaker 1: We were talking off camera about a theory I had about the movie, 'Coming to America'--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that depicted a black family sitting on a couch leaving a Jheri curl stain behind--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and me thinking at that moment that's the end of the Jheri curl.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then Comer Cottrell [HistoryMaker Comer Joseph Cottrell], when I interviewed him in Texas he said that that was it.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: That that was the end of it.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So, how--my question to you is like, how did that affect these big white owned companies, the big industry leaders--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that bought the black Jheri curl empire?  How did they--did they go down with the ship, or did they diversify or what?  What happened?
Speaker 2: Well, they didn't go down with the ship.  They diversified, but the sales never ever had that spike like they did when there was no Jheri curl.  I mean, you went from nothing to a hundred million dollars because of this product.  Now they diversified into relaxers and to shampoos and conditioners and maintenance products, so they were able to sustain a level of growth.  But they had to diversify, because people stopped using Jheri curls to that extent, because they saw those stains.  It was greasy, it was messy, and people didn't like it.  So, you saw the rise of the relaxer kit.  You saw the rise of the Luster Products Pink Oil Moisturizer, you know, maintenance products that would keep the hair in a certain way.  But what happened was, what I saw, you know, at L'Oreal [L'Oreal S.A.] was that you really had to force the big global companies to maintain the product integrity of the black hair care products when they wanted to change them.  And so as I was mentioning, I would get into major battles with the R and D [research and development] chiefs who wanted products to be more like the general market products, and not understand that if you--and this is where some of them did falter.  If you changed the products from what the African American consumer was used to, and they didn't perform the same way, they stopped buying them; they stopped buying them.  And that's when you saw the rise of the Namaste company [Namaste Laboratories, LLC, Chicago, Illinois], which is Gary Gardner's company, who left Soft Sheen [Soft Sheen Products, Inc.] and started his own company with Organic Root Stimulator, which is, I think is $80 million now; where that company, because it's, it was independent, was able to stay true to the product needs of the African American consumer market and launch products like carrot oil and hair mayonnaise, olive oil mayonnaise, and just took the market by storm.  Because, you know, it's a very important lesson in entrepreneurship, because entrepreneurs contend to find a niche and make it work, because they understand the importance of the integrity of the niche.  Big companies see the sales, and they think they can do it better and broaden it, but sometimes you lose if you try to take what made the niche successful and broaden it out to everybody.  It's not always a viable business strategy to do that.  And that's what happened with some of the white owned companies who bought the black hair companies.  They could not integrate them to their general market systems because they--Gillette [The Gillette Company] had this problem with Lustrasilk [Lustrasilk Corporation, Minneapolis, Minnesota].  You know, Gillette was used to six months' lead time in sales projection, so they'd project that okay, the plant was going to produce product that wouldn't be used for six months, so their projections went out six months.  Well, in black hair care, you'd get an order from Kmart [Kmart Corporation], they'd want ten thousand cases next week.  And if you had your own plant, you could say, "Shut down line six, bring up line seven, and run those ten thousand cases," without talking to anybody, without, you know, making major projection changes.  Well, you couldn't do that in the big companies.  And so the small stores, these independent stores, or the Kmarts of the world, or the small beauty and barber supply stores which was a major channel of distribution, they weren't getting their product, because the big companies weren't geared to supply the smaller independents.  So, there was a seismic change in the industry.  The Koreans were coming in and buying most of the beauty and barber supply stores out.  You know, hair weaves were becoming popular, braiding was becoming popular.  So the industry is nothing like it used to be back in the '80s [1980s] and even the '90s [1990s], you know, when I was there in the late '90s [1990s] to 2000.  And, you know, when I started seeing the changes that were occurring, and knowing that, you know, in my heart I was still an entrepreneur, that's when I started really thinking about going back out on my own, was when I was at Soft Sheen.
Story_ID: 614763
Speaker 1: Back in 1988, you know, I had thought about taking my pound cake recipe, which was, you know, the only cake I make.  I'd bring it to every bake sale, and I'd bring it to every dinner party.  And people kept saying, "This cake is really good.  You should put it on the market."  In 1988 I said, "You know, maybe one day I will."  I wrote down some notes and called it the Butter Batch Company [ph.] and put it in a file and filed it away.  Well, fast forward, it's now 1998, 1999, I'm still traveling too much for my family.  I am still wanting to think about, you know, what am I going to do as an entrepreneur?  I'm launching product lines that are generating multimillion dollars of sales, and my percentage of ownership was zero, and my percentage of bonus was zero, or itty bitty comparatively.  And I said to myself, I said, "Shoot, I can do this for these companies.  Why not try to build a brand for my own family for once?"  And the only brand that I had, the only product that I had was my pound cake.  And that's when I decided to really get serious about launching a pound cake business.  And I hired a consultant in 1999 who used to work for me and who was on his own to help me write my business plan.  Because I was still working full-time for Soft Sheen [Soft Sheen Products, Inc.], but I helped, during that time, Soft Sheen to acquire Carson Products [Carson, Inc.].  So we were still in the acquisition game, so now Soft Sheen owned L'Oreal [sic.]  They bought Carson Products.  Carson Products had bought Johnson Products [Johnson Products Company], so we bought Carson.  So now L'Oreal [L'Oreal S.A.] owned three black hair care companies basically, and they wanted me to consider running all the marketing for all of these integrated companies.  They had been talking to me about being president one day of Soft Sheen-L'Oreal, you know, that whole division.  You know, they'd float those trial balloons up.  And that was intriguing to me, but at the same time, I wasn't feeling the fit.  And so that's when I said I'm going to hire this consultant and have him write a business plan for me.  And by the time it was--I had to make a decision.  This was at the end of 1999 when the people at L'Oreal said, "You know, we are going to be making some changes.  And we want to know what do you want to do?  Do you want to take over?  We just acquired this company, and we think it would be great for you to be the head of marketing for this new company.  And isn't it going to be exciting, these new products that you've launched?  We want you to take them global, and you can travel all over the world.  And isn't that exciting?  And aren't you excited about wanting to do that?"  And I looked, had looked at the president of the L'Oreal division in the eye and said, "No.  Actually no, I'm not excited about it.  I'll get back to you on Monday."  And I got to tell you, that weekend I had already seriously written my business plan for my company.  I'd already developed a name, the Comfort Cake Company [Comfort Cake Company, LLC, Chicago, Illinois], because over the holidays, you know, I was at a dinner party.  And I have a line of pound cakes that I pour liqueurs over.  And so, this one particular dinner party for Christmas, I poured a lot of Amaretto on this one particular comfort cake, brought it to the dinner party.  Everybody's eating this cake and they're like, "Ooh, this is a comfortable cake."  And they're like, "This is really a comfortable cake."  And everybody's feeling good and they knew I was going to start the company, and I needed a name.  And everybody's like, "Ooh, this is a comfortable cake."  And I'm like, "That's it.  We're going to call this company the Comfort Cake Company."  It was born, the name was born at the dinner table of [HistoryMaker] Renee Ferguson and [HistoryMaker] Ken Smikle, two dear friends here in Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 614764
Speaker 1: That's--so I had the company name, the business plan, and I went home that weekend and I prayed.  I prayed hard and long, and I cried.  Because that Monday morning I had to go in and tell L'Oreal [L'Oreal S.A.] yes or no.  And I remember that Sunday sitting on my porch.  I had been crying and praying, and it was very overwhelming, because I was making well into six figures.  I had a big house, I was a single mother, I had two children [Angelica Jones and Nicholas Jones] to put into college, and I was getting ready to walk away from it all and start a pound cake business.  And so I just went inside, because my neighbors were walking by and they thought something was really wrong.  So I said let me go inside, because I don't want to do all this crying on my front porch.  And I went inside and sat on the steps, and I just prayed, "God, what do you want me to do?"  And I heard him tell me very specifically and loudly and clearly; he said, "Take my hand and do Comfort Cake."  You know, and I'm Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], you know, analytical.  And I'm like, "I don't think that's really--I don't know.  I'm just upset, but I didn't really hear that."  And a few minutes later, that same voice came back very clearly, loudly and said, "Take my hand and do Comfort Cake."
Speaker 2: Now, you are, are you a religious person as such?
Speaker 1: I'm very spiritual, very much so.  I pray a lot.
Speaker 2: Are you a churchgoer?  Are you a member of--?
Speaker 1: I'm a member of Apostolic Church of God in Christ [Apostolic Church of God, Chicago, Illinois], yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I wasn't at that time.  I was a member actually of Trinity [Trinity United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois] at that time.  But I was raised in the church, and I'm very, very connected to God.  So, I pray a lot.  And, you know, I would--
Speaker 2: So you actually heard a voice?  Telling you to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, I actually heard it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Twice.  I heard him tell me that.  And that was the first time in my life that I said, "Okay, God, you are totally in the driver's seat.  I'm not going to question it."  I went in on that Monday morning and I quit my job and started the Comfort Cake Company [Comfort Cake Company, LLC, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay.  So this is in 2001?
Speaker 1: This is, this, by this time, let's see.  It actually was the, it was the end of 2000.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I quit my job, and so I started the Comfort Cake Company.  We incorporated February 15, 2001.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I had to quit my job.  I worked at Soft Sheen [Soft Sheen Products, Inc.] for two full years, and then I quit and then started the Comfort Cake Company.
Story_ID: 614765
Speaker 1: Well, how did things go now?
Speaker 2: Well, it was an incredible time to start the company.  I mean, I really had to get the support of my children involved in it, because it was their future that I was gambling with.  And I wrote the business plan and I started going to banks to get money to help with the business, and I could not get a bank loan.  It didn't matter to them that I had a degree from Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts].  It didn't matter to them that I had over, at that time, over fifteen years of corporate new product development experience.  They said, "Pound cake company?  That's a cute idea, what a cute idea.  Come back to us when you have some customers.  We're not going to give you any money."  So I was really in a dilemma, because I'm working the business out of my home, but I knew that if I wanted to support my children through college that I had to develop a business; this wasn't a hobby.  And so I said, this is not cute.  I have to raise some money to buy pans, to work with graphic designers--to hire people.  And I was sitting on, you know, in a big seven bedroom house.  And I said, "You know, wow, if I sell this house, I'll have some money to invest in my company."  And yet my kids loved the house; I loved that house.  It had a big backyard, the kids loved the house.  And I went to them, I said, "You know, Mom wants to start this company and I need money.  And the only money I have is sitting in this house.  What do you think if I sell the house?"  And I was agonizing over it.  And my daughter, you know, they said, "Well, Mom, we like the house."  But, you know, they were like, "We're okay with it."  My daughter said, "You know, Mom, a house is not a home.  A home is a place you live with the people that you love."
Speaker 1: Your daughter said this?
Speaker 2: My daughter said this.  She's fourteen, okay, at the time, and my son is, you know, ten or eleven.  And he goes--and I had a porch swing.  That's the same porch swing I was sitting on while making this decision to quit--that I loved.  I mean, that was my spot.  And I'm agonizing.  I'm like if we sell the house, I won't have a porch swing.  And my son goes, "Mom, we can get one of those swings that you can hang from the ceiling on the inside of a house.  We'll get you a swing.  You can do this."  So, with the faith of my two children behind me saying that we could do this, I sold my home and started the business and got the money to hire people to buy pans and start the business.  And the home was sold in August of 2001, but up until that time I used all my savings to put into the business, because I knew those savings were going to run out, and then that's when I had to sell the home.  But during that time, again, relying on my children--my children have always been involved in the business.  My son has always been the chief taste tester.  He would taste--you know, I have pictures on the website of him, you know, at six years old licking the spoon, because he'd always, you know, tell me if it tasted good.  And I sat them down at the kitchen table and I said, "You know, Mom's really going to do this Comfort Cake Company [Comfort Cake Company, LLC, Chicago, Illinois].  I need a slogan," because I'm a marketer and I know that you need a slogan.  So I said, "What do you guys think?  Give me a slogan."  So my son, he said, "Mom, I got it, I got it."  I said, he said, "Here's your slogan."  He said, "Mom's Comfort Cake, it really tastes good."  And I said, "Nick [Nicholas Jones], sweetheart, you keep your day job as a taste tester.  That, that, that's okay.  I appreciate it, sweetie, but that's not quite going to make it."  So he was like, "Okay, fine, but you know, that's what I think."  And so my daughter, Angelica [Angelica Jones], she said, "Well, you know--," and she's very creative.  And she said, "Well, I have something."  I said, "Well, what do you have?"  And she said, "Oh, I don't want to tell you."  I said, "Angelica, tell me what you have."  "No, I can't tell you."  She said, "I'll write it down."  And she wrote it down on a piece of paper and slid it across the table.  And I picked it up, it was on a little Post-it note.  And she said, "Mom, your cake tastes so good it feels like a hug."  She's fourteen.  She said, "Comfort Cake.  Pound cake so good it feels like a hug."  That slogan is our slogan today.  When anybody says, "What do you do?"  I say, "I am the owner of the Comfort Cake Company, where we make pound cake so good it feels like a hug."  We own the trademark for both the name Comfort Cake--my daughter has a trademark for that saying, "Pound cake so good it feels like a hug."  She made that saying when she was fourteen; I use it to this day.  Buyers don't forget it.  It is, so, you know, I feel really good that my family's behind me.
Story_ID: 614766
Speaker 1: The product line consists of your recipe for pound cake commercialized in six flavors of bundt cakes, slices, frozen batters, and the proprietary sugar substitute for baking--sugarless sweeteners.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the cakes are in Jewels [Jewel-Osco], Walgreens [Walgreens Company], Dominick's [Dominick's Finer Foods], Sam's Club, Club--Cub Foods, Giant Foods [Giant Food], Chicago Public Schools, Amazon.com [Amazon.com, Inc.] you can get them, Compass [Compass Group USA], Sodexo, and US Foodservice [US Foods].  McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation] has approved a test for the summer of 2008.
Speaker 2: The test is actually going into the market December 15th of this year.  Those are some of my customers I've had.  We've had, you know, different customers come and go, but we, you know, we are one of the largest suppliers to the Chicago Public Schools with our frozen batter.  We're in Jewels, Dominick's, Walgreens.  We're getting ready to sell to some other major chains--Kroger [The Kroger Company], Food Lion [Food Lion, LLC], Publix [Publix Super Markets, Inc.].  But the test at McDonald's is key.
Story_ID: 614767
Speaker 1: But our very, very, first customer was United Airlines.  United Airlines in 2001--I always go back to them, because you know, that's another lesson learned in terms of, you know, going after your dream.  United Airlines, I talked to Sandra Rand, who was the manager of suppler diversity.  And I told her I was going to start this Comfort Cake Company [Comfort Cake Company, LLC, Chicago, Illinois], and I wanted to hopefully get business with United Airlines because it's a hometown customer, it's a big customer.  I figured if I could sell to United, other big customers would come.  And I said, "Can I get an exploratory interview with the buyer of food at United?"  So Sandra said, yes, sure, she'd set that up.  And I talked to Bill Wallenbecker [William Wallenbecker], who was the buyer for food at United at the time.  And I said, "Bill, I'm starting this company.  I, we're still interviewing bakeries.  You know, I don't have my graphics ready, but I just need to know if I ever want to sell to United, what do I have to do?  What are your specs?"  And he told me how big the cake would have to be and what kind of price range it would have to be.  And I said, "Great.  When I'm ready, I'll call you back and try and get an appointment to sell to you."  Well, they called me back in two weeks.  They said, "I know you're interested in selling to United.  In thirty days, we're going to have a dessert review.  If you want to sell to United anytime between now and the next two years, you have to have samples to us in thirty days.  Can you do that?"  And I'm on the phone, and I said, "Sure, I can do that.  I can do that.  I'll have samples in thirty days.  I'll be ready."  I hung up the phone.  Didn't have a bakery, didn't have a logo, didn't have anything, but I was going to have samples in thirty days; I wasn't going to miss that window.  And I went to the people who I was testing the cakes with.  We were still commercializing the recipe.  And I had, we went to three bakeries that were in my final three.  I said, "Look here, guys, we have a chance to get into United Airlines.  So whoever can get me these samples, you're going to be my bakery."  And this one bakery got my samples ready, and we--I drove them out to United out, their corporate office is in Elk Grove [Elk Grove Village, Illinois].  I drove them out--the sample box--I have a picture of me with the samples, you know.  Like, I take pictures of everything.  And I gave them to United and, you know, just said a prayer for the next day, because they were going to taste it the next day.  They called me that next day, and they said, "This is," you know, he said, "this is Bill Wallenbecker from United Airlines, and we really like your cake."  And I was like, "Great.  Do you need some more samples?  I can get in my car and run some more samples out there?  I can be there in fifteen--you know, in a half an hour." Da, da, da.  I'm just talking a mile a minute.  He said, "Amy [HistoryMaker Amy S. Hilliard], no, slow down.  We really like your cake, and we want to buy 550,000 slices."  That was my first order.  Unbelievable.  This is in April of 2001.
Story_ID: 614768
Speaker 1: When you're selling to a big customer like that, you have to have different production run samples.  You don't just get the business and give them the finished product; they want to see that you can produce.  So we had to have test production runs.  So the bakery that did the samples, they couldn't do the production runs.  So we're headed toward--this first order is due in October of 2001, and the bakery in July of 2001 can't get my production samples done.  I had to tell United [United Airlines] I need--it was actually, it was actually due in September.  I said, "I need a month's grace period.  I will ship to you in October in 2001, because, you know, we're just working some things out."  I didn't tell them that I didn't have a bakery.  I didn't have a bakery.  So [HistoryMaker] Linda Johnson Rice, who's a friend, she--I went to an event at her home, and I was lamenting that, you know, I really needed to find a bakery.  And I talked to Marc Schulman [Marc S. Schulman], the owner of Eli's Cheesecake [Eli's Cheesecake Company] here in Chicago [Illinois].  And he said, "Oh, I know a guy, a bakery out in Wheeling [Illinois].  This is a bakery, they do contract manufacturing."  Because I never baked the cakes in my home.  Once I decided to have a business, I hired bakeries.  And he said, "You should talk to them.  They do pound cake for a lot of people, and I'm sure they can do your pound cake.  Tell them I sent you."  Now, I had been calling every bakery in the Yellow Pages trying to find a bakery.  This bakery wasn't even listed.  So, you learn things about certain industries--that there are people who know people, and you got to know--get out there and network to build your business.  He said, "Call them."  I called them up.  I said, "Look, this is, I'm Amy Hilliard [HistoryMaker Amy S. Hilliard].  I have this new customer, United Airlines.  This is a new company [Comfort Cake Company, LLC, Chicago, Illinois].  But I need somebody who can produce my cake.  Can you work with me?"  And they said, "We'd be happy to talk to you."  I came out there and told them what we needed.  They said, "We'll have samples ready for you in ten days."  When I walked back in there in ten days after I signed all the confidentialities to give them my recipe, they had pound cake on a table that was twelve feet long. (Makes sound) I felt like Mrs. Fields [Debbi Fields].  They treated me so well, they treated me seriously.  They said, "We can do this.  Taste these samples.  If you approve them, we'll get them to United."  And that's how we were able to get our product ready.  But understand that this is now August of 2001, and we all know what happened September 11, 2001 when United's planes went down.  After all this drama, we have 9/11.  So, I'm thinking, oh my god, I've lost this contract, because you know, one of their planes went down.  Well, United called me back and they said, "No, you know, even after 9/11, we want to keep you on board, because we think for our customers, a product called Comfort Cake is a good thing to have on board."  So they kept us on board, and we shipped in October of 2001.
Story_ID: 614769
Speaker 1: What happened was, the bakery that was working with me, that was so great to me, that was terrific, they had a lot of airline business.  So, after 9/11 [September 11, 2001], even though United [United Airlines] was still flying, you know, our product to their long flights to Hawaii, a lot of the airline business dried up.  And this bakery called me in November when I was getting ready to open up our Christmas--our website for Christmas--to ship five thousand red boxes for our bundt cakes.  He said, the owner said, "Don't ship the bundt cakes just yet.  We're doing a little restructuring."  And I'm saying to myself, "Restructuring?  Okay, fine.  You know, this is Friday.  When can I send them?  Next Wednesday?"  He goes, "I'll let you know."  It didn't sound right to me.  The lesson learned there was always--know somebody on the inside and get their home number.  I had the home number of the R and D [research and development] person at the bakery, and on Saturday I called her and I said, you know, I said, "What's going on?  Why am I not able to send my boxes?"  She goes, "I don't know.  But we haven't been paid in two weeks."  Monday morning, this owner of this bakery, as great a guy as he was, he called me.  He said, "I'm sorry to tell you this, but I've been trying to work on my financing package all weekend with the banks, the banks have not accepted it.  We're closing tomorrow."  Now, they had forty thousand dollars' worth of my pans in this bakery that I had to buy.  They had all of my raw materials.  They had everything.  And they said, "We're closing.  The bank is coming at noon tomorrow."  And so, I went to my staff of three people, and I had to tell them the bakery was closing.  And we--I said, "You know, we gotta to do something.  Because if they go out of business with our stuff, we go out of business."  And I said, "We can have a five minute pity party.  We can sit around our table and we can cry for five minutes.  And then we have to go into action, because they're not shutting me down."  And I said, "We got to--," and so we cried for five minutes.  And then I said, "What are we going to do?  We need to have a plan."  And they said, "Let's get a U-Haul.  And if the bank's coming at twelve to seize the assets of this company, we're going to be there at nine."  Because the company was having a meeting--actually we were going to be there at 8:30, because the company meeting was at nine.  We're going to be there at 8:30.  And so my team of three people, we got the U-Haul.  And I'm driving my car and my director of operations was driving the U-Haul.  And he got there before I did, because of course I'm stuck in traffic on the highway.  And I'm like, "Are you there?  Are you there?  You know, it's nine--it's 8:55.  Are you there?"  He goes, "Not to worry.  I got here.  Our stuff is on the truck.  We're just waiting for you."  And I walked in there and this staff is in shock, because the bank is literally coming, every paperclip that's on the premises, at twelve noon, the bank was going to own--but we got our stuff out.  And one of the purchasing directors was so incensed that the owner wasn't honest with them about the financial trouble he was in.  He called me in his office, and he goes, "Amy [HistoryMaker Amy S. Hilliard], we know we don't want--we don't want you to go out of business.  Here's a bakery that's, you know, down the road here.  They can help you, and they can take over this business.  They're pretty good.  We'll, you know, I'll call them for you."  Then he took me to his computer and he said, "Hold on a minute."  And he did some figures, and he printed out some sheets.  He said, "These are your real cost of goods.  I want you to have them so that when you go to the next bakery you won't be snowballed at all, and you will know how much it costs to really make your product.  We want you to succeed."  And that's how we kept going.  Our bakery went out of business.  I actually even went to the auction of this bakery and bought some extra equipment that I needed, some slicing equipment that I needed.  United Airlines gave me an additional bakery that's still with me today that we've worked with.  And so, fast forward now from 2001 to 2008.  For seven years I've been supporting my family with this pound cake business [Comfort Cake Company, LLC, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 614770
Speaker 1: My son is a freshman at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] this year where I went to school.  His dad went there.  My daughter, Angelica [Angelica Jones], is now the office manager for the Comfort Cake Company [Comfort Cake Company, LLC, Chicago, Illinois]; she runs my office.  And my son is still the chief taste tester; I still send him product.  He helped us to launch our chocolate chip flavor.  He told me, he said--you know, because I couldn't get it right at the bakery.  I'm like "Nick [Nicholas Jones], this still doesn't taste right."  So I brought samples home, and he took one bite and he goes, "Mom, there's too much flour in this recipe."  I'm like, "How do you know that?"  He goes, "There's just too much flour."  I couldn't figure it out, so I went back to the bakery the next day, sounding real--I said, "Oh, that sounds good to me."  I went back to the R and D [research and development] guy at the bakery and I said, "There's too much flour in this formula.  So you need to, you need to--that's what's wrong with it."  And the R and D guy said, "You know what?  That's right, there is too much flour.  It's not going to take much to change it.  We got it."  And it's one of our top selling flavors now.  So, my son still sells the cakes to his friends at Howard.  My daughter's working with me.
Story_ID: 614771
Speaker 1: I had a great relationship with my first office manager, Claudine Jordan, who helped me start the company, and she was my administrative assistant for The Hilliard Group [The Hilliard Group, LLC, Chicago, Illinois].  She came over to Comfort Cake [Comfort Cake Company, LLC, Chicago, Illinois], was with me for thirteen years.  She moved on to a different position now with Pepsi [PepsiCo].  And my daughter's [Angelica Jones] in the business with me now, and we're getting ready to ship our first test at McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation] on December 15th.  And I worked with McDonald's for five years to try and get them to put Comfort Cake in McDonald's, and we're finally going to ship that test.  So, it has been an awesome journey.  I've had tremendous support from the City of Chicago [Illinois], from friends here who have encouraged me.  I remember when I was going to start the business, a group of women, we went on a trip; you know, one of those Caribbean trips you take with your girlfriends.  We went to St. Martin and they had a life coach make everybody on the beach stand up and say, "What is your dream?  What do you want to do?"  And this is while I was still at Soft Sheen [Soft Sheen Products, Inc.].  And I stood up on that beach and I said, "I'm going to start a pound cake company."  And there must have been forty women there, and I can't tell you how many women still remember being on that trip with me who come up to me today and say, "I was on the beach when you said you were going to start that company.  And we are just thrilled that you're able to do what you're doing now."  I'm now a part of the nextONE class with the Urban League, the Chicago Urban League [Chicago, Illinois], which works with African American entrepreneurs, taking them to the next level.  It's been a terrific source of pride and resources that we are now able to align with to grow our businesses.  Steve Rogers [Steven Rogers] from the Kellogg school of business [Kellogg School of Management, Evanston, Illinois] is one of our professors.  He let me audit his class when I was starting the business.  He was the one who told me to be careful of how you name your company, so you're positioned to grow the company down the road if you want to sell it.  You know, make sure that you have certain things in place.  So I've been very, extraordinarily blessed with great customers who believed in Comfort Cake when no one else would.  Jewel [Jewel-Osco] has been a terrific customer for years.  They helped us to move from just the bundt cakes to selling slices.  Now we just sold three new items into Jewels this fall.  We have a Comfort Cake gourmet pound cake mix.  We're selling ring cakes, we're selling our slices.  Walgreens [Walgreens Company] is a key customer.  We're going into private label business, all from my own recipe. You know, my [maternal] grandmother [Gussie Smith Russell] helped me tweak it.  You know, when I started out, she goes "Baby, you need to put a little bit of this in it, and it'll be just fine."
Story_ID: 614772
Speaker 1: I stand here today, you know, a testament to living your dreams, to going for what you think you can try.  I have written a book about my philosophies about how we've done all these different things.  So, I've done all these different things because I truly believe that I'm not here just to make cake; that I'm here to share my experiences with other people who think that if they have a dream, to go for it.  And so, you know, I have these ten philosophies that I have written over the years.  I call them my power Ps.  The each start with P.  And it's, it's philosophies like finding your purpose; believing in possibilities; seeking positivity; gaining perspective; honoring your passions.  And I, excuse me, wrote a guide book called 'Tap Into Your Juice: How to Find your Gifts, Lose your Fears, and Build your Dreams' [sic. 'Tap Into Your Juice: Find Your Gifts, Lose Your Fears, and Build Your Dreams,' Amy S. Hilliard].  And Michelle Obama endorsed that book in 2004, as they were running for the [U.S.] Senate.  And to now sit here today and to see that we have a black president, [HistoryMaker] President Barack Obama, who's been elected, who had a dream, his wife has endorsed my book.  She said I could keep her endorsement, even if they won.  And to have that, it's just been extraordinary.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just extraordinary.
Story_ID: 614773
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major step that you would do differently now?
Speaker 2: Would I do anything differently?  Well, if I didn't have to, I wouldn't have sold the house.  That was a tough thing, because it really uprooted my children [Angelica Jones and Nicholas Jones] and it uprooted me.  And it was something that had I been able to work a real estate deal where I could just take all the equity out and keep the house, I would have probably kept it.  Because it was a source of comfort for them, and it was hard, you know.  I took many years to not miss my home.  So, I would, I would do that differently.  But other than that, not too much.  Because I know one of the reasons why I did Comfort Cake [Comfort Cake Company, LLC, Chicago, Illinois] was that I didn't want to wake up one day at eighty-five years old and say, "You know, I wish I had done that pound cake idea.  I wish I had just really just done it."  I didn't want to do that.  And I lived my life saying I don't want to live with regret.  So I tend to, if I really want to try something, I will do it.  I'll really go at it and see if it's the right path for me.  I looked at buying three restaurants; I wanted to be in the restaurant industry.  You know, my [paternal] grandfather [James Hilliard, Sr.], I get my food legacy from my grandfather, who was an executive chef who raised thirteen children on a chef's salary in the South in the '20s [1920s].  And so I looked at buying restaurants, I did the Mary Kay thing [Mary Kay Inc.], I thought about owning an ad agency, I've sold network marketing products.  So, I believe that life is not to be regretted.  You've got to jump in with both feet, but be willing to plan, be willing to do the work to get it done, because it's not going, it's not going to be easy.  Faith makes things possible; it doesn't make things easy.
Story_ID: 614774
Speaker 1: When you look at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I believe that my legacy is: don't do anything just for yourself.  Whatever you do, be a light for someone else because we all go through this life together.  If you can show someone else the way, if you can be a beacon of hope for somebody else, if you can give somebody else a suggestion so that they can move forward, I think it's important to do that.  And I want my legacy to be that here's a woman who decided to go after her dreams, but who stayed true to her community, who stayed true to her family, who gave back to others, and said that, you know, if she can do it, you can do it.  That's my legacy.  You know, I want little girls, little guys, women, older people--I didn't start--I started this business [Comfort Cake Company, LLC, Chicago, Illinois], you know, after, you know, many years in Corporate America.  I was forty-eight years old.  So, I want people to know that if you really want to try something, don't be afraid.  Have a lot of faith.  God will be there for you.  If it's your gift, don't deny it, but to go for it.
Story_ID: 614775
Speaker 1: I think about the future of your business.  I couldn't help but think about it.  I know you mentioned Mrs. Fields [Debbi Fields] earlier, you know.  And, but I thought about Wally Amos.
Speaker 2: Famous Amos, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Famous Amos.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: He had cookie stores--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --across the country--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that really just hit big, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in the early '80s [1980s] I guess.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Well, late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --when he really hit big.  Eventually like the Jheri curl came to--he had this--he sold, you know--
Speaker 2: Yup.
Speaker 1: --his company to a bigger outfit.  Do you see that happening to you at some point?
Speaker 2: It's certainly possible to do.  I don't know if it will ever happen.  But I certainly followed Wally Amos and his story, his saga, if you will.  Because he lost his business.  He sold it when he wasn't really ready to sell it.  And you know, it was a very hard lesson.  So, I read his autobiography so that I would learn from that.  You have to be careful, you know, who you decide to become partners with.  Would I ever sell Comfort Cake [Comfort Cake Company, LLC, Chicago, Illinois]?  I won't ever say, I'll never say never.  Because one of the other legacies can be that you can start a company--and this is how business is done.  You can start a company and sell it and use those proceeds to start another business or to leave funds for your children to start their dream.  Because I have never required that my children follow my dream.  They come into the business if they want to.  And if they don't want to come into the business, then you know, I'm--you know, at seventy-nine years old I can't be running back and forth to the bakery; I may sell it.  But I will still have a legacy of an African American owned business that got to the scale that it could be sold for a sum that could create another business for someone else.  And so, one of the things that I want to do down the road is to continue to speak more--I speak professionally to--. I'm a motivational speaker--to do that more.  And also to start a marketing venture capital fund company where I can offer marketing as a source of capital, because marketing is--capital marketing expertise is just as important as cash--in order to build a business.  And so I'm looking at that down the road as well.  But you know, right now I'm having the time of my life with Comfort Cake.  It's, you know, when you have a business it's like a marriage; you kind of fall in love with it and you kind of fall out of love with it, because it has been extremely challenging.  I mean, there's been times where you just have to really hunker down.  I've been on that dock slapping labels on cakes at twenty below zero [degrees] myself.  And I think back, I went to Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] to do this?  You know, there've been times when I hadn't had, haven't had a salary, but I make sure I pay my employees.  Or you're just watching every dime, and you want--it's just exceeding--it's been very, very tough, but I'm having the time of my life with it now.  And so to sell it, we'll see.  If it's God's will, it will happen.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, the community is very sensitive about these things.  We embrace a company, a black owned company, and we want to see it stay black.  And people got really upset when BET [Black Entertainment Television] was sold, you know, to Viacom [Viacom Inc.].  I mean, people were just--
Speaker 2: Well, it's my--it doesn't have to be sold out of the black community.  I'd be more than happy to sell it to an African American entrepreneur who wants to keep it going.  And the beauty of being a light to others is that I hope to be able to inspire someone else who might want to buy my company, who's African American, to do so and take it to another level.  So, I think that that's why it's important for African American entrepreneurs to be visible, to tell the real story of what it takes to build a business, so that some young person can say, "Well, hey, maybe I'll do that.  Or, maybe I'll, you know, after I get out of college, want to come work for this company.  And maybe I want to buy her company."  I think it's vitally important to be transparent enough so that people can see that hey, this is not some, you know, big dream in the sky that's not real, that you can do it too.  And so that's important.
Story_ID: 614776
Speaker 1: With the business climate today, stock markets crashed.  And, you know, but we've got a new political figure on the horizon.  I mean, a lot--what would you think things--what do things feel like to you now for a young black entrepreneur?  I mean, what's the climate like for them?
Speaker 2: Well, it's certainly a challenging time.  We're in a recession for entrepreneurship.  At the same time, it is an exciting time, because we're creating jobs.  Small businesses are still creating the jobs of America.  We--if you have a good product that people still want, your business can still succeed even in the worst of times.  But you've got to be very careful with the money and your finances, because the banks aren't lending like they used to.  And you have, may have to grow more slowly than you would like.  But the fact is that as an entrepreneur you're creating business; you're not relying on someone to say you can, you can keep your job.  As long as I keep my business in front of customers and they're buying, I have a business; my employees will have a job, and I can make that determination.  And that is an empowering position to be in, even in the worst of times.  So I think that, you know, with the landscape changing so with, you know, Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] who, you know, who was very supportive of Comfort Cake [Comfort Cake Company, LLC, Chicago, Illinois] when I started the business when he was running for the [U.S.] Senate and actually sampled with me.  I have a picture for my grandchildren of the first African American president in a Comfort Cake tee-shirt sampling at Real Men Cook.  Yeah, I'm okay with the climate right now.  And I think that we're going to be just fine.
Story_ID: 614777
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community in general today?
Speaker 2: You know, I sincerely feel that this is going to be, we're going to enter into one of the most progressive times for the African American community, if we make that decision to do so.  We have seen seismic changes in people's perceptions of African Americans because of the historic election of an African American president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].  We have seen that you can do things with no excuses now, in terms of we can't do something because we come from a single home, or we come from poverty, or we come from whatever background we came from.  If we make up our minds to do something we can embrace our true heritage, which is the fact that we are one of the most brilliant groups of people on the earth.  We created the, you know, dynasties of Egypt.  We've created, you know, incredible inventions.  We've had incredible breakthroughs in medicine, in politics, in business.  We can do anything.  It's our minds that we have to strengthen, just like a muscle.  You know, muscles are only built up if you lift weights.  So, let's do the heavy lifting that it's going to continue to take to take us forward.  And don't be afraid of it, and encourage our children to do so.  And, be willing to challenge each other to do so.  Stop this stuff that we don't talk to each other.  You know, if you see something going on in your community that you don't agree with, or a young person is, you know, using language you don't agree with, don't walk by.  Challenge that young person, and say, "Hey, what are you doing that for?"  You know, the whole concept of where--I grew up in Detroit [Michigan] where everybody knew everybody else.  And everybody, all the neighbors--you didn't go down the street and act up.  Because Mrs. Tyler would say, "Okay, I know your mama, and I'm going to tell her about it."  So, you were on your best behavior.  We've got to get back to that sense of community and not be afraid of each other, and work with each other and work in our communities.  Because it's all about all of us moving forward, and not just African Americans, but the whole race of the world.  We all have gifts to give.  But it's important that we take very seriously the need to make sure that our community is strong economically, spiritually, and educationally.  And those of us who can, do what we can to reach back to others.  But do so from a position of, a foundation of strength.  And you know, it's just like that mask they tell you to put on on an airline.  Put your own mask on first, then you can save your family.  So African Americans, put your own mask on first.  Get strong, and then make sure you're saving somebody else.
Story_ID: 614778
Speaker 1: Is there any more you need to tell us about your family?  Now, are your parents [Gwendolyn Russell Hilliard and Stratford Hilliard] still alive?
Speaker 2: My parents are still alive.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: By the grace of God, my dad is eighty-eight.  He's very, very, ill, but he was able to see Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] be elected, even though he's got, you know, dementia and Alzheimer's; he goes in and out.  He was able to be lucid enough to understand that he cast a vote for the first African American president.  My mother is eighty-four, she's an incredible woman.  Both my parents are just incredible.  They inspired all of us, I have three sisters [Pamela Hilliard Owens, Gloria Hilliard Banks, and Wendy Hilliard Mensah], to do whatever it is we wanted to do.  They were behind us and supportive of us.  My parents are the reason why I developed our sugarless sweetness ingredient, because they're both diabetics.  And my dad would keep eating my cake at Thanksgiving, and I'd come down in the morning and big hunks of it would be gone.  I'm like, "Daddy, you can't keep eating it."  And he would go, "Well, baby, make one that I can eat."  And when your daddy asks you to do something, you do it.  So I worked with a team of chemists, and we have a sugarless sweetness ingredient that's now being evaluated by a very large company to sell to them.  But I'm getting ready to really do more with our own line of sugarless sweetness products, because my daddy asked me to do it.  And my mother, I saw her have four children and then go to college and type out her--and then go get her master's degree [from Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan]--typing out her master's thesis on my [paternal] grandfather's manual typewriter.  She took over our dining room to get her master's in education, and still be a warm, giving mother.  My father worked three jobs so that we would never be without.  And I have some of the, I just have the best parents in the world, who still are there for us.  And what I see now, with the dedication and devotion of my mother to her husband of fifty-nine years who's totally bedridden, and who's, she's his primary caregiver--we have other help coming in--that's a lesson in love that I'll never forget.
Story_ID: 614779
Speaker 1: Is there anything we haven't discussed that I need to ask you about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I want people to know how important it is, no matter how busy you are, to stay active in the community, to volunteer.  You know, I volunteer with business groups, with community groups.  I speak at churches, I do things, you know, just to volunteer.  Because you're--yeah, you've got to build your business, and I don't have as much time to do as much volunteering as I want, but I always make time to do it, because sometimes that's the only thing that some young person is ever going to see that's going to inspire them.  You never know who you're going to touch when you're out there reaching out to others in your community.  So, I don't care how busy you are; I just want people to know it's important to volunteer to help somebody else, and to work within their affinity groups or community groups.  You know, be a community organizer, it's an important thing to do.  Yeah, that's, I want people to know that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I want to thank SuperValu [SuperValu, Inc.] for sponsoring me in this HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] event.  It's a great opportunity to share my life story, you know, to have it for my grandkids to see.  So, that's important as well.
Story_ID: 614780
Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as someone who believed that God had a purpose for her, and that through His wisdom and direction that she used her faith with love, strength, and balance to do His will; that my gift of marketing and business is my gift, it's unique.  And that she used that gift to pave a way, you know, to build something for her family, but to pave a way for others to live their dreams.  That's how I'd like to be remembered; as a loving, caring person who wanted to do whatever it took to embrace the gifts that God has given her.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
