Story_ID: 75357
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I am the interviewer today for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Sterns.  And, ma'am will you state your name and spell it for us, please.
Speaker 2: My name is Patricia Hill, P-A-T-R-I-C-I-A, Middle initial L, H-I-L-L. And, what's your birth date and place of birth?
Speaker 1: July the 10th, the year is 1951 [1951], and I was born in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 2: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 1: Today is June the 25th, the year 2-0-0-2 [2002].
Speaker 2: And, where are we?
Speaker 1: We're at the offices of the African American Police League, and the African American Firefighters and Paramedics Support Group.  We share office space at 6203 South King Drive, in Apartment 102 [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: And, what is your occupation?
Speaker 1: I'm currently a Chicago Police Officer.
Speaker 2: All right.  And?
Speaker 1: And, the Executive Director of the African American Police League.
Story_ID: 75358
Speaker 1: All right.  I have five "People Magazine" type questions I'm compelled to ask you.  The first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is chicken salad wrapped in green tortillas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: And, what is your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: And, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Probably, Puerto Rico.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I say it so often, I don't realize--I don't realize, I guess it is my favorite saying and that's just, "Right-on," Right-on.
Story_ID: 75359
Speaker 1: Okay, well let's talk about your background.  Could you give us your--the names of your mother and your father and spell them for us.  And, give us the date of their birth.
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Lucille Ferguson Fleming, her mater--, her mother was a Ferguson, of course her dad is Fleming.  My mother was born in Griffin, Georgia, September 1, 1920.  And, 1923 our parents moved from Griffin [Georgia] to Chicago [Illinois].  In the community that's called Lilydale [Chicago, Illinois], where my grandfather built a home, that is still standing and it symbolizes the family home.  My dad's name is Hercules Richardson.  He was born in Charleston, South Carolina, June 18, 1912.  And, as I can recall the story, once he reached adulthood, he moved to Washington, D.C., which was something common that a lot of African Americans did during that time.  And, he lived there for some time; moved to Evanston, Illinois, where he met my mom and they were married in 1950.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have--did they tell any stories about their ancestors or did they--have you found anything out about your parent's ancestry,--?
Speaker 2: Well, as far as my grandparents, my maternal grandparents, I knew them.  My grandmother lived until 1961 in the home that my grandfather built.  Her name was Trennie, and I named my eldest child, my daughter, after her.  I don't know very much about her mother, except her name was Millia (ph.) and her dad was Jim Ferguson, who was an Irishman.  My grandfather's name was Tomie, T-o-m-i-e Fleming, whose father was from Jamaica.  And, I remember a story being told about my--by my aunt, who was much older than my mother.  That when she first met her grandfather from Jamaica, it was the welts on his back was very noticeable, and that he was a freed slave.  And, that was interesting.  He'd come to America at some point.  But, he didn't live very long during their childhood, so I never met, met them.  As far as my dad's mother and father, my dad's mother's name was Mary Danzler.  And, as I remember the story being told, she was a very religious church going person.  And, she died when my dad was about twelve years old.  His father's name was Ned Richardson, who I remember lived until about 1956.  I never even met either one of those people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, your father was from like, Gullah Country?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Saint Matthew County, Charleston [South Carolina]; at the time, Saint Matthews County [South Carolina], and they were referred to as Geechee.  And, it was very obvious that dad was from somewhere, especially when he may have had a drink or two, his dialect would change.  But, it was interesting the cooking; dad cooked a lot.  And, his cooking was very reflective of the West Indies and we didn't know that that that's what it was.  We just thought that was the way daddy cooked.  But, always rice; rice he said was the staple of life.  So, we always had rice, and stews.  Meat was not the primary dish.  It was rice, and vegetables, and meat on the side.  Whereas, you know, American tradition, meat is the dish and other things supplement the meat.  But, he was a very colorful character.  He--his name was Hercules which may have been a curse of some sorts and not, because my dad, I doubt ever was taller than five feet five and my whole life knowing him, he didn't weigh more than one hundred thirty-five pounds.  He was a little guy, but he was a strong guy.  And, very, you know, determined in, in his sayings; didn't speak much, but as they say, when he spoke, we listened.  So, it was fun.  Daddy died in 1980.  So, we did have the pleasure of having him throughout our childhood because we were all adults by that time.
Speaker 1: Now, I know there's some kind of a possibility that he had some kind of link to the Civil War too.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was brought to our attention by one of our friends who often visits the internet.  That we had a cousin, a distant cousin whose name was also Hercules Richardson, who became a Sergeant in the Civil War within the Infantry that Martin Delany was the Major in, I guess the Major in [104th Regiment of the United States Colored Troops].  And, that was phenomenal.  We're gonna really research that, probably this year, 2002 in November, when I plan to go and visit my cousins.  Most of them are now in Columbia, South Carolina as opposed to Charleston [South Carolina].
Story_ID: 75360
Speaker 1: Now, what did you mother [Lucille Fleming] do for a living?
Speaker 2: My mother held various jobs.  Growing up, I remember her working for a factory, U.S. [United States] Rubber Company.  And, I remember they made U.S. [sic] Keds gym shoes, Keds.  So, we had all the different gym shoes in the colors and back then, that was cool.  The canvas gym shoes, the tie-up gym shoes, the zip-up.  They had all these styles, a lot of times didn't make the--they were prototypes sometimes.  And, I remember once, I had a science project we had to conduct and she said, "Oh, I have a great idea for you."  U.S. [United States] Rubber [Company] made foam.  And so, she worked in that lab where the foam was actually created.  So, she brought home the two chemical that if you put them together, it actually formed the foam.  You would see the foam rise, and so I had to memorize the names of the two chemicals.  One was a catalyst called whatever.  I can remember that part, that's all.  And, I had these jars going to school.  I labeled them and it was an actual experiment that was--it worked at the time, in terms of, it wasn't a still experiment.  It was a working experiment and the key was enjoy--I got a pretty good grade.  You would pour this one chemical and the other went in, it would rise up like a cake.  And, then within seconds it would harden and then a little while later you wait and you had this foam, this cushioning foam.  So, I made a lot of little foam things for people (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's the stuff that made you run so fast.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  I must've inhaled some of that stuff (laughter).  But, that was neat.  So, she worked at US [United States] Rubber [Company].  Then I remember her working at Johnson & Johnson Products.  The baby products at the time they were in Chicago [Illinois].  All of these factories--my mother was a skilled laborer, as a matter of fact, because she did, at the time, even have two years of college.  But, she was never a professional in that regard, she was a factory worker.  And, seemingly, she would always bring something home about her job that we could benefit from.  So, at Johnson & Johnson we had all the Q-tips and Band-Aids, and all those types of things.  They left Chicago [Illinois] and then she actually began working for the [Chicago] Board of Education as an attendant; attendant for children, handicapped children.  And, she retired doing that.  After she retired though, she did volunteer sometimes in schools and things like that.  And, then she took a part-time job with the Illinois Department of Employment [Security], and did that up until she passed away in 1997 at the age of seventy-six.
Story_ID: 75361
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what did your father [Hercules Richardson] do for a living?
Speaker 2: Daddy [Hercules Richardson] was--once he came to Chicago [Illinois], which was of course, when I was born.  I am the eldest of three children.  He actually was an auto mechanic, a certified auto mechanic.  But, as I recall him saying constantly, due to the racism, he never could get whatever that certification was, because he didn't get the certification in Chicago [Illinois].  I don't know where he got it.  So, he spent his entire working career as a porter with vehicles, automobiles.  Occasionally, they would--he told me that they would, when they have a problem with the cars mechanically, they--he would advise them.  But, he wasn't paid for it.  He wasn't recognized as such.  I think it took a toll on him, because he would really articulate that to his children.  And, he was angry about it, but he went to work and he made a living and he took care of us.  But, I know he wasn't happy with his status because he would talk about it all the time, you know.  And, that lets you know, a black man never can get what he deserves and so at times, he was bitter.  But overall, he didn't show a lot of bitterness, you know, towards us.  Also, was it was in that time, everybody worked for, you know, white companies and they would always hire the guys, maybe on the weekends to paint their summer homes, or to cut their grasses at their summer homes.  So, we had an opportunity a lot of times to go with dad to like Union Pier [Michigan] and Benton Harbor, Michigan on these people's estates while he cut their grass or whatever.  So vicariously, we experienced a lot of things that we wouldn't have ordinary experienced because he would take those jobs and make that extra money, and it was always outdoors.  We'd fish and we would enjoy, you know, some of the benefits that other people had attained.  Sometimes off our backs, and it didn't belong to us, but we had a good time.  My brother and I talk about that now.  We really had a lot of fun with that.
Story_ID: 75362
Speaker 1: Can you name your brothers and sisters, I mean, and where you fit in there?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.  My brother is fourteen months younger than I am.  He's Hercules, Jr.  And, my sister is actually five years old--younger than he is and her name is Lori.  And, we all still live in Chicago [Illinois].  My sister still resides in the place that we grew up in, which is on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] in Princeton Park.
Speaker 1: Now, that's an interesting (unclear), now you were born, I think in Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois] area, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, you had a famous baby doctor's-
Speaker 2: Dr. [Edward] Beasley.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Dr. [Edward] Beasley.  I recall him making those house calls.  We lived at 3612 South Park [Now Dr. Martin Luther King Drive] at the time, which was right across the street from the Supreme [Liberty] Life [Insurance] Building, which Dr. [Edward] Beasley's office was on the, I guess the second floor.  And, I remember my brother contracted pneumonia, must have been two or three years old.  And, Dr. [Edward] Beasley was right there with the little bag and treating my brother.  We even got our checkups there.  I mean, he was there regularly.  The interesting thing is, after I started having children, my oldest daughter--Dr. [Edward] Beasley was just retiring in '72' [1972].  She was born in '72' [1972], and I think he may have seen her a couple of time.  And, then the guy who took his practice, Dr. Parsons was the doctor in the Supreme [Liberty] Life [Insurance] Building [Dr. Martin Luther King Drive, Chicago, Illinois] at the time, which was still open, which is now not open.  Hopefully, we'll be able to get, you know, benefit from that.  But, yeah, he was a legend in the community.  Dr. [Edward] Beasley was everybody's doctor in Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois], of course, it was really Bronzeville as it is today.  But, it was just nice to have a doctor that you could call any time of night.  Just like on TV, in the nice little country town, but we were in the urban community in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: They named a school after him or something, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Beasley [Magnet] Academic Center, which is located not too far from his office at 51st and State Street [Chicago, Illinois].  Which is one of our better institutions and I'm glad that, you know, see that.  My youngest child [Donald Hill, Jr.] actually attended that school and graduated from there.
Story_ID: 75363
Speaker 1: Now, but, your family, you really grew up on the far South Side-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --In a neighborhood that was historically black and has some significance, it's been, it's been a black population out there for a long time-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --From what I understand, will you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well, the house that my granddad built, actually was like the nucleus for the family.  All of his children, at some point in time after they became adults resided in that home.  It was like they got their start and moved out.  So, we lived there for a while and that community is called Lilydale [Chicago, Illinois].  Which is about nine west of Chatham, 9300 South Wentworth, 9325 [South Wentworth, Chicago, Illinois].  And, so Papa [Tomie Fleming], which was my grandfather, he built the home in '23' [1923], 1923.  By about 1960, there was a development built right across the street from the house, called Princeton Park [Chicago, Illinois].  It was actually built in 1944 and the interesting thing about that is, I recall the family constantly talking about it used to be prairie and snakes and rabbits and all kinds of animal urban wildlife.  Lived--you know you could see them and those swamp--.  And, so for twenty years they had nothing over there and so in the '40's [1940's] they started developing.  So, in '60' [1960] our family moved over there.  My parents never owned.  It's a rental community.  It's always been black-populated even though it's not black-owned.  Never has been black-owned.  My understanding is part of the WPA [Works Progress Administration] Program and the Railroad [Chicago & Eastern Illinois Railroad] that runs almost directly behind Princeton Park [Chicago, Illinois], had something to do with this construction.  Interesting enough though, now my middle daughter [Stacy Hill Nash] who's moved back to Chicago [Illinois] with her family, she and her husband have just completed their Master's Degrees at Alabama U--A and M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University], are now living in Princeton Park [Chicago, Illinois]to get their start.  They live a block--a half a block from where I grew up.  And, I had the opportunity to talk with the owner.  Because I really wanted to facilitate my daughter moving there.  I wanted him to know that that was her.  I wanted her taken care of, of course, you know.  And, it was fun having that conversation and him recalling, you know, when they first built it.  He's one of these individuals, that's the Higgins [A. Higgins Co.] family, they really take a lot of pride in that development.  They've made major improvements.  They have, oh gosh, a crew, a construction crew.  It's just interesting working--watching that development.  It runs from 91st Street on the north to 94th Street on the south from Wentworth to Harvard Avenue.  It's about, I think they said 250 units or more.  There're like row houses.  Individually entrances, basement, front, back door, and I think the interesting thing about Princeton Park, I'm giving it a plug, is that you have a lot of freedom in the community.  It's still very stable.  There's an elementary school there, Charles Richard Drew [Elementary] School, that's been there since 1952, I think.  So, it was always a school that was self-contained in that community.  There was always two churches.  One, my grandmother [Trennie Ferguson] was instrumental in finding, which was Saint James African Methodist Episcopal.  The other one was Lutheran Resurrection [Resurrection Lutheran], which is at 93rd and Wentworth.  And, so it's always been a community that had what it needed in terms of the education program.  Gillespie [Elementary] School, which is about four blocks away, Frank Lyman Gillespie, is where my mother attended.  It was built in the '30's [1930's].  Interesting enough, it was school named after a black man in the '30's [1930's].  And, the feeder high school was Harlan [Community Academy] High School in 1957.  But, originally, people had to attend Fenger [Academy High School] which was many blocks away or Calumet.  But, Harlan in '57' [1957] became the feeder school.  So, everybody from Princeton Park and went to public school, public high school went to Harlan [High School].
Story_ID: 75364
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what kind of a little girl were you?  And, what are some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up in Princeton Park [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: The--I guess the thing that sticks out the most in my mind about Princeton Park [Chicago, Illinois] was the freedom.  There was no--it was like now fear and we were all so--the people who lived there were so closely knit, it was almost a sense of ownership.  And, we pretty must let--we built a reputation out in Princeton Park.  A lot of people knew, if you told them you lived in Princeton Park, the first thing they would say is, "Oh no, you get lost up in there, you may not come out," because we were very territorial.  And, the other thing that I remember about Princeton Park was they (ringing) are actually a lot of-
Story_ID: 75365
Speaker 1: You were talking about the territoriality of the--(simultaneously) in Princeton Park [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: I guess, I can confess, I mean, we had our own competitions, it was the--it was just like, I guess like any other neighborhood you move into.  One family is already established as, like the family, as a matter of fact the Hooks family lived in Princeton Park, they were the nieces and nephew of [HM Reverend] Benjamin Hooks who was the former head of the National NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  His brother was a mailman and their family was very highly looked upon.  I never knew why, all I heard was they had a lot of family in Memphis, Tennessee and that they were rich and everybody new them.  But, I wasn't impressed, because I hadn't been to Memphis [Tennessee] and I don't know these people.  But, when I moved into Princeton Park, it was like you had to be anointed or validate by the Hooks children.  And, the oldest daughter was the fastest runner around and I had some skill but I never considered myself a track star at the time.  The youngest member of their family, well next to the youngest member was the male who was a short guy who had a mean temper.  So, the males would have to get pass him.  So, of course, my first challenge was I had to enter into a foot race with this young lady.  And, it--you always intimidate not by losing but everybody was so cliquish, it was like nobody is every gonna bet the Hooks and you know, if you do, I thought--I was so naive, I thought if I beat her like everything was cool.  So, I beat her.  But, that wasn't the end of the story.  It was like, how could you do that, I had betrayed everybody.  I wasn't supposed to bet her.  Well, if I had a known, I would have lost on purpose (laughter), you know.  But, socially, it didn't allow you--it was like a rite of passage, so that was the first step.  And, it didn't allow me full entry into this--we lived in the cul-de-sac, so I wasn't fully accepted.  And, I'm going like, what else do I have to do, (laughter) you know, cut off my arm or whatever.  So, there were other little rituals that I really won't mention, but they were--they could have gotten you in trouble.  We had to throw rocks and do certain things.  So, I--after--over time I was--I got accepted.  My brother didn't have as hard a time for whatever reason, the boys--this was all girls.  The boys seems to be or had this comradery, that was like, yeah man, okay, you're in.  I mean, (laughter) you didn't have to go through all those changes.  So, it took about five years to actually, to really get accepted by the Hooks and all the people who worshipped them.  And, they're a very nice family so, I'm not saying it negatively.  But, that territorial thing was new to us because coming--even though we lived with our family a lot, our family had a lot of friends and, you know.  We just knew my grandparents' house was the nucleus and that's where everybody met.  But, we didn't ostracize people.  We didn't put people through a lot of changes.  So, I guess, it's part of socialization growing up.  But, that I remember about Princeton Park.  I remember [Charles R.] Drew [Elementary] School would have social center after school.  And, there you would enter into all kinds of games and competitions and checkers, and all types of things.  That was fun.  From there about Princeton Park that was also fun.  You would hear stories about when people went to high school or went to other--it was a close knit community and it always gave you something to strive for.  Or, you would hear about people that you would never meet.  Supposedly, great people out of Princeton Park.  That stuck in my mind so it gave me a sense of pride to come from Princeton Park.  And, if I would meet people in Morgan Park [Chicago, Illinois] and other places, oh, year, I know where Princeton Park--they always had something to say that made us tough or whatever.  I enjoyed--there were a form of protection, you know.  So, that was the most--that thought still stays with me.  I never attended [Charles R.] Drew [Elementary] School, though because when we moved into Princeton Park, Drew [Elementary] School only went up to fifth grade.  So, I had to go to Gillespie [Elementary] School and I felt very accepted there because my whole family went to Gillespie [Elementary] School.  And, from there, you know, was just a matter of developing, you know, all of our little characteristics in Gillespie [Elementary School] and comparing notes.  And, the community stayed together.  My mother went to Gillespie [Elementary School], all of her family, many other people family, a lot of the teachers that taught my mother, was still there.  And, so it was just a very close community.  The stores in the community were black owned.  We--the nearest shopping center of course was Evergreen Plaza.  I can only remember going there maybe once a year.  That was just before Easter.  You would go to the Fair [Department Store], which was Montgomery Ward, you know.  And, dad would take us there.  But, the barber shop, the shoe store, the grocery store, all were black-owned.  They were on 95th Street.  So, we didn't leave our community very often.
Story_ID: 75366
Speaker 1: We would go, on special occasions, the live show would be at the Regal [Theater] so, we would have to travel all the way to 47th Street.  And, that was a big deal.  You had to plan it for weeks.  Who's going, make sure you're chaperoned, all that kind of stuff.  And, as far as movie theaters, the Roseland community [Chicago, Illinois] had the movie theaters, the State Theatre, the Roosevelt Theater, and they were all white communities.  It was very difficult going to the movie theaters because of the fact there were always race fights.  Because they were territorial and they saw us as outsiders.  And, we would walk a lot of times.  So, going there you would encounter, you know, throwing rocks, hiding, calling each other names, and once you got to the movie theater, you knew there were other black people and you really didn't have a problem.  The other movie theater was on 95th Street, was the Beverly [Theater].  We dare not go to the Beverly [Theater].  Roseland [Chicago, Illinois] was one kind of community, probably because it was a lower income of white people.  But, the Beverly Theater was a theater of Beverly [Chicago, Illinois], which was affluent white people.  But, I remember my mother wanting to see the movie, 'To Kill a Mockingbird'.  I will never forget it.  And, she wanted us to see it and she took us to the Beverly Theater.  And, at the time, I didn't realize how historical or daring that was.  Because that was a very controversial movie about, you know, racism or racial relations, or non-relations.  But, we sat in that theater, without incident, with my mother, watching that movie.  And, as I got older and realized what that move signified and what that community represented in terms of us not being able to go to live there at the time.  We couldn't live in the Beverly community.  She then began to explain, I wanted you all to have that experience.  So, all of that though I think was out of Princeton Park [Chicago, Illinois] because we were secluded, all black community.  It was, you know, there were white people, mostly integrated couples, but not many.  Frank London Brown lives down the street from us.  Who wrote the book 'Trumbull Park' [1959] about the riots in Trumbull Park [Chicago, Illinois].  I can't think of the guy who was in 'Crime Story', but we had a couple of movie stars come out there.  A couple of track and field Olympians.  I can't even think of his name now.  But, we've had a lot of people to come out of Princeton Park who claim it.  And, I really, I really enjoyed that place.  And, you would catch rabbit by the railroad tracks.  That was also the burial ground for our dogs when (laughter) they died.  (Laughter) We would actually conduct funerals.  Squirrels of course were fun.  Tadpoles because there was a little area that would stay moist.  So, it was, it was rural and urban.  And, we knew nothing about catching rabbits or eating them.  So, we would catch them and put them in cages and stuff, and of course let them go.  And tadpole, they never lived long enough to become frogs, (laughter) you know, we didn't know how to take care of 'em, but we would see frogs later.  So, it was great, great childhood, I mean, I enjoyed it.  The freedom was just unbelievable, unbelievable.  And, I just, you know, it's unfortunate that these kids, a lot of 'em can't have that experience.
Story_ID: 75367
Speaker 1: How did you like school?
Speaker 2: I hated school.  I hated school.  My first experience of going to school as kindergarten.  Now, between moving from Evanston [Illinois] to the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], we did live on the West Side for a while.  So, I started kindergarten on the West Side.  A school called Lawson [Elementary School], which is not there, they tore it down.  I recall my mother and my brother walking me to school, because he was younger.  I recall entering the school and going out the back door and getting home before my mother, almost every day.  Playing hooky from kindergarten.  It made no sense, because I would get a whipping and have to go back to school.  But, it was something about school, I guess it was that separation.  Because, I mean, my mother made it fun to be home.  But, she tired of it and took me to the principal one time and says, "Look I don't know what I'm gonna do."  This principal was very talented, she, she gave me a picture.  The most horrible image of what would happen to me if I continue to play hooky at five years old (laughter), kindergarten.  She asked me, and I remember, she might have been about, I don't know, five feet tall.  She reminded me, like Judy Garland or somebody, she says, "Do you like--do you love your mother?"  "Yes, ma'am."  "Do you love your family?"  "Yes, I do."  "Do you like seeing them every day?"  You know, they build this spooky stuff up.  "Yes."  "Well, if you continue to play hooky from school"--and this is like crazy, kindergarten playing hooky, right.--"You're gonna move away from your family and you're gonna go to a school with bars on the window."  And, she just made it like, Aww, man, and I cried, "I'll never ever play hooky."  Well, of course, I did.  But, you know, I was more--I didn't go right home as often.  And, my mother didn't know every day.  But the interesting thing was when we moved to the South side, to my grandfather's [Tomie Fleming] house, I attended Gillespie [Elementary School] at first, and each family member, 'cause I was young, they would walk me to school.  And, I had a cousin that would always stop, there was a restaurant called the "Colley Snack Bar" and we had a local brother and--two brothers who were singers, they were actually on 'American Bandstand', and the 'Jim Lousbury Show'.  I don't know if you remember that, but they used to come on in Chicago, It was like American Bandstand.  So, they would perform at the Colley Snack Bar some times, on the way to school.  Well, my cousin would go there, they would only perform all enough like during lunch time, so you didn't play hooky.  But, that would distract her, she supposed to walk me to school.  Well, she would stay in there and I would run, sit on my grandmother's porch until school was out.  Because my cousin would think, I just went to school (laughter).  I said all that to say that, my uncle would whip me, my grandmother would whip me, everybody would whip me and I could never explain why I didn't like school.  When I finally, this was a whole year now, kindergarten, I would say April, I guess I just decided to go to school.  When June came to pass, they skipped me from first grade to second grade.  I took some test or something.  Maybe it was boring, I don't know, maybe I was just smart, maybe I figured that out.  It was just not for me to go there.  But, that's the store of school.  Second grade was no problem, I excelled.  And, all the way through, I mean, I began to adjust.  I've never been a real fan of school.  I guess, it's so structured and--but, high school was fine.  But, elementary school, I--even up to eighth grade, I didn't like it that much.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're stop right here (unclear), we have to change tape.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 75035
Speaker 1: So, grade school at Gillespie [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois], you know you had a rocky start with your-- in the groove in, in grade school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, actually I graduated in a--from the second week--that school was very highly populated.  I think we had like sixth, eighth, seventh and eighth grade classrooms.  They were together.  And, I mean, I actually academically made it to the point that I graduated from the second highest; which was probably remarkable and most of my family was probably shocked, because of the start.  But, I think I began to understand the system.  It wasn't as though I didn't have the ability, I just knew that there were certain expectations.  That community is interesting because it is a middle class, virtually a middle class black community, still is.  Because Gillespie [Elementary School] is actually on the Chatham [Chicago, Illinois] side.  We lived in the Lilydale in Princeton Park [Chicago, Illinois] side.  So, many of the young people who attended Gillespie [Elementary School], their parents are professionals, lawyers, well were, doctors and all those kinds of people.  So, there was a lot of competition.  A lot of competition, and I understood that and I thrived on it for some reason.  Competition never was something that bothered me, and I guess, I never looked at this thing of being the child from across the bridge, you know.  Those what we were, on the other side of the bridge as opposed to the other side of the tracks.  That I have to prove, you know, I didn't see that.  I never felt ostracized, per se, because there were enough of us from Princeton Park.  And, at the time, you didn't know all the kids, parents or what they did and they didn't make a big distinction.  All of us dressed well and those of us who didn't, didn't.  We didn't make a big deal out of it.  So, it wasn't this real social, I guess, this distinction made in terms of dressing or profession.  But, by the time we graduated, and went to [John Marshall] Harlan [Community Academy] High School; that was a different story.  During the '60's [1960s], Harlan High School (cough), excuse me, was probably the hub of the black middle class in Chicago [Illinois].  And, for my generation, most of the men would talk about how fine the girls were.  All the guys who when to Tilden [Tilden High School, Chicago, Illinois] and Crane [Richard T. Crane High School, Chicago, Illinois] and Marshall [John Marshall High School, Chicago, Illinois], would come--they would say, "I come all the way to the South Side to see the girls at Harlan."  For the majority part, they were fair skinned, long hair, you know fit a certain stereotype.  They're a few of us that were the brown skinned ones, and so we had to have other talents since we weren't considered fine. (Laughter)  We had to be athletes, or sing well, (laughter) or something to be accepted.  But, it was a social, the social distinctions were very obvious then.  Even, that even carried over into the faculty.  There was something like a brown paper bag test that had the, the girls had to pass to become cheerleaders there.  The cheerleaders' sponsor, I would never forget, was Ms. Steptoe.  And, if a girl was too brown skinned, she was just cut for that reason.  But, by the time I got to be a junior, 1967 [1967], the atmosphere, I mean the whole country was changing.  There was a social consciousness of being black was okay, you know, and we were proud of it.  And, being light skinned now, you might get pushed in the background because you identified too much with the enemy.  And, so we kind of came on our own at that point.  The first brown skinned cheerleader, actually.  I mean, my complexion was chosen during 1967 [1967].  Xavier Hall, I'll never forget, and when we graduated, you know, you had the class notables, she was something with the cheerleaders.  I actually was the most athletic in my group.
Story_ID: 75036
Speaker 1: I was running track at that time.  Even though in high school during the '60's [1960s] in Chicago [Illinois], unlike in the North, there were no extramural sports for girls.  There were intramurals or if you belonged to a park district team or something like that.  Where as in the South, the girls actually had teams in school: elementary school, and high school, and college.  The interesting thing, we had an opportunity that presented itself very fortunate for us in the '60's [1960s].  I had the opportunity to run for a track program that was named after the current mayor at that time, which was the Mayor Richard J. Daley [Youth] Foundation [Women's] Track [Team] and--it was also, that was the girl's side.  The boy's side was the boxing.  They boxed under the CYO, the Catholic Youth Organization.  So, there were two programs, for the girls there was track and field, for the boys there was the boxing program.  But the way that I became a member of the track and field team is also interesting.  I remember at home sitting around during the summer, not really having anything to do.  I would watch this young lady who lived maybe a block away.  She would talk down the street every day at a certain time.  Tall, dark skinned, real short hair, but real proud and she would--every day she would go somewhere.  And, I never knew where she would go.  And, one day I saw her, and I just spoke to her and she said, "come here".  And, I went over to her and she said, "You know where I'm going?"  I said, "No".  She said, "I'm going to track practice."  I said, "Track practice!  People practice track?" (Laughter), you know.  She said, "You wanna go?"  I said, "Yeah."  So, of course, my mother let me go.  She went to the park, which was Abbott Park [Chicago, Illinois] on 95th, and she was a member of this team, the Mayor Daley Youth Foundation Team.  And, they were actually practicing there--during that time.  And, I saw these young ladies and women, and they were--I mean, this was serious business.  They had these coaches and these whistles and people telling you what to do.  And, you were running sprints and some people were running longer, but they were on this track.  And, I thought bow-wow, I must have been about twelve.  I said, "This is something."  So, when she was done, we walked home, she said, "You wanna join?"  I said, "yeah."  She said, "actually, you have to be thirteen, but 'I'm a' tell 'em that you're thirteen."  She just became my, like my sister.  But, she said, "first Saturday, we gotta go to a track meet."  That was like on a Thursday.  I said, "We'll how do I go to a track meet?"  She said, "We're gonna go to a track meet.  I'm gonna sign you up for the track meet."  The track meet was at the same location.  To my not knowing, she entered me in four events.  She entered me in the 50 yard dash.  They don't even run yards and dashes anymore.  The 75 yard dash, the 100 yard dash, and the broad jump, which is now the long jump.  And, she just told me, "Now you go do this.  You watch how they do it, and then it'll be your turn."  And, I won, came home with four medals, won every event; never broad, broad jump before.  And, so she said, "Oh, you can join.  Okay, now you're thirteen."  She took me to practice.  They were practicing then at the University of Chicago [Illinois], which was the [Amos Alonso] Stagg Field, which is now where the library is at the University of Chicago.  And, she said, "this is my, fri--, my cousin (laughter), she's thirteen.  She wants to join."  The coach, at the time, was Joseph [J.] Robichaux, who was a commissioner, politician, with the [Mayor Richard J.] Daley Administration, democratic politician.
Speaker 2: Right, there's a park named after him, now.
Speaker 1: Right, on Eggleston, Ninety-Second and Eggleston [Chicago, Illinois].  He later became the alderman of that ward.  He also became part-owner of Baldwin Ice Cream.  His wife, Jolyn-[HM] Jolyn [Robicheaux] who is now in Texas, they were very prominent people.  But, anyway, one of the assistant coaches was Ira Murchison, who at the time, I didn't know was this great athlete.  He became my coach because he was a sprint coach.  Ira [Murchison]was the first man to break Jesse Owens' world record in the 100 meter, and he was our coach.  But, what made him even more famous, or even a greater feat for him, was Ira, Ira [Murchison] had contracted a severe case of colonitis [sic, colitis] and he had to have surgery and for a while he had to wear a colostomy.  He broke that world record while wearing a colostomy.  Ira's like 5'4, five feet four inches, maybe one hundred forty pounds.  Fastest guy I ever seen, but he trained us all.  So, from that, I started it as a freshman.  I was a freshman in [Harlan] high school.  So, my years with the Mayor [Richard J.] Daley Youth Foundation [Track Team] coincided with my high school career.  So, and we traveled.  We actually were on the level of the "Florence Griffith Joyners" at the time and it was amateur sports though.  It was the AAU [Amateur Athletic Union], and it was wonderful because at least one weekend or two weekends out the month we were traveling, you know.  I can't come to school, you know, we would leave on a Thursday and get back Sunday and maybe Monday and couldn't go to school, so I was big time.  I was traveling, I was on the circuit.  And, I think that, of course, allowed for me to become most athletic of my class because, first of all, I was winning and I was doing something on a level that that nobody else was doing in high school.  And, it made me very distinctive.
Story_ID: 75037
Speaker 1: I was fortunate enough to qualify for the Olympic Trials in 1968 in the Long Jump.  [HM] Willye White was my men--one of my mentors.  I missed it by about four inches at seventeen years old.  That would have been the [1968 Mexico City, Mexico] Olympics that Tommie Smith and [HM] John Carlos stood on the podium.  And, I can even reflect back during that year when we were preparing for the Olympics.  We were on the circuit.  O.J. Simpson was running for USC [University of Southern California].  As a matter of fact, he was a hurdler.  I remember him.  Bob [HM Robert] Beamon was--every jump, all year, was jumping further and further and everybody was predicting.  But, what was really exciting was the undertones of what was coming out in the Black Power Movement.  The HBO Special, "Fist of Fire" [sic, 'Fists of Freedom: The Story of the '68 Summer Games'], I can recall some of those conversations, hearing those conversations.  I was younger though.  I was still in high school [Harlan High School, Chicago, Illinois].  Tommie [Smith] and [HM] John [Carlos] and Denise, who was Tommie's wife, and a lot of those individuals, Lee Evans, they were on the West Coast, and they were extremely progressive.  We were being told by our coach and the Midwest people, "Stay away from them," you know.  Stay away from them.  But, and we were younger.  But, during that circuit as we were preparing, I remember the Indoor Nationals.  I can't remember that year, it was somewhere in California at the Mason-Dixon Games, which was in Kentucky.  Even at the Quantico Relays, which was in Virginia, all of these people were there and they were saying, "What are we gonna do for the [1968] Olympics?"  You know.  Are we gonna go?  I mean, this was planning and strategy, of course, Dr. Edwards, [HM] Harry Edwards was around occasionally.  But, we were forbidden, it was like taboo.  You don't wanna be around them because, you know, their bad and whatever.  They were twenty-three, twenty-four; we're sixteen, seventeen, eighteen.  And, it was phenomenal and as I think about would I have been sent home had I gone to [Mexico City,] Mexico and won and stood on the podium, 'cause I would have done it if they did it (laughter).  And, would I had been ostracized for the rest of my life, like Tommie [Smith].  [HM] John Carlos' wife even committed suicide.  It's a lot of strain.  And, that's just one of those things.  I was a very young person.  But, that was probably a pinnacle in my life, because it set the tone for a philosophy and ideology I know that I've had ever since then.  In terms of, the Movement and fighting for equality.  And, it was through athletics because the time was so political and it's not like that anymore.  It wasn't just about making money.  Well, we didn't make money.  But, we got perks.  The [1968] Olympic Trials, we were in the mountains in Pomona, California, just before the trails, well, at the trails.  And, the brothers, [Adolf Dassler] Adidas and [Rudolf Dassler] Puma, they had just come out.  These were two brothers from Germany, they actually had these shoes.  And, they would always give us stuff, on the circuit, and you know, you couldn't get money, but here try this out.  Try out these shoes.  Try out this suit.  Try this out.  And, I remember they came with all these shoes.  We all had these shoes to try out for the Olympics.  I always enjoyed Puma because of the shape of my foot and the way the shoe was designed.  One of the females from Tennessee State, Wyomia Tyas, ended up marrying one of the brothers, Adidas [Adolf Dassler].  I can't remember his first name, that why I called him Adidas.
Speaker 2: One of the German brothers? (Simultaneously).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  One of the German brothers.  But that was very close quarters where these guys were actually, and it was mostly the men, planning what was gonna happen in Mexico City [Mexico 1968 Olympics].  That was very intense,  very intense.
Story_ID: 75038
Speaker 1: For me also, it was my last year in high school [Harlan High School, Chicago, Illinois].  The team to--the school to go to, the college, if you wanted to continue a track and field career, of course,  was Tennessee State [University].  Ed Temple was the coach.  And, there were two of us that he wanted to recruit; myself and Catherine Jones, who went to Du Sable [High School, Chicago, Illinois].  And, he didn't come directly because you couldn't recruit.  That was, that was something you couldn't do.  So, he sent some of the other women who were there.  And, I remember them, Madeline Ritter was one, the other was a long jumper, Martha Watson.  And, they kinda hinted around, "where you gonna go to school?  Where do you wanna go?  Don't you wanna come to Tennessee State [University]?"  And, I just remember him as being a very mean man that stuttered, you know, when he was giving directions.  "Naw, I don't think I wanna come to Tennessee State [University].  The workout was too hard.  This guy was too mean.  You all look like you, you didn't enjoy it."  But, they were to me, the most beautiful runners.  I mean, the form, the technique, but I just wasn't ready to be punished (laughter) to that extent.  So, for a person that age, being on that circuit for those four years, having those opportunities, hearing those discussions, it just left an indelible impression.  I ended up getting a scholarship, however, to Lincoln University in Missouri.  The coach, [Dwight T.] Reed, who didn't have any money, but he promised, "if you could get there for a semester, I would see to it that you, you would stay."  And, being the oldest of all the children, my mother had three, no one ever leaving home, she would not let me leave.  She said, "There are very good schools in Chicago."  This is Chicago [Illinois].  You can stay here.  I said, "But mom, they don't have a track team."  "Well, you ran track for four years."  But, she didn't understand.  But, anyway, that was about the end of my track career though.  When I graduated from high school, I made a decision, since I couldn't go to Chicago State, I mean, Tennessee State [University], that I wasn't gonna go to college.  I was just going to fix her (laughter).  Like, I didn't understand, you're not fixing her. (Laughter)(Cough)  So, I took a--I graduated at sixteen, I made seventeen later in the year.  And, took a job at a pharmacy, delivering prescriptions for the pharmacist, which was the wildest job in the world.  The pharmacist had a brand new Cadillac Convertible and I would deliver these prescriptions under everywhere in Chicago [Illinois]; and, being pulled over by the police, because they thought I stole the car.  "What am I doing driving this car with these pharmaceuticals" (laughter), legal.  Finally, by November, Mr. [Joespeh J.] Robichaux found out I wasn't in school.  And, he was angry, he called my mother.  And, he said, "Are you--I heard that Pat's not in school."  And she said, "No.  She refused to go."  Well, you know, she told him the story about Lincoln [University, Missouri].  He said, "No, she has to go to school."  And, the next thing I knew, in January, I was at Northern [Illinois University] in DeKalb [Illinois], because he told me that I was one of the brighter girls, and "you can't waste that.  You have to go to school."
Story_ID: 75039
Speaker 1: So, I did two years in DeKalb at Northern Illinois University.  Turbulent years, because that was during the time [1969] when Cornell [University] and [University of California] Berkeley and all these places, taking over the campus, taking over the president's office.  So, we would read the newspapers.  Whatever they did, we emulated, in DeKalb [Illinois], sixty miles from Chicago [Illinois], right.  My dad had to come pick us up many a day.  We would close the campus down.  And, that happened several times and we thought, well, you know, at least we can get on the map.  DeKalb was a university, a state university, 27,000 students, eight hundred were black, and I mean, we were--we had fire in our belly.  We were there to make a change.
Speaker 2: Now, what were your issues?
Speaker 1: Well, the issues were, we didn't have a B1ack Studies Program.  What were Cornell [University]'s issues?  What were [University of California] Berkeley's issues?  We emulated everything.  We didn't have enough black instructors.  We didn't have enough black students, eight hundred students.  The programs that required or the monies needed to open up so that was broader than just DeKalb [Illinois].  And, the CHANCE Program was a part of permitting young people to come into school, or all these different programs, these governmental programs with--for financial aid.  That happened during the time I was there, [HM] Zerrie Campbell, who is now president of Malcolm X [College, Chicago, Illinois].  She was there during that time.  Professor Bob Starks [HM Robert T. Starks], became our first head of our Black House.  He wasn't a Black Studies professor, we had a part of the campus designated for us that built a little, they had built a little garage looking house and that was where we could go and be with one another.  He was over that House.  He actually did teach on campus, but that wasn't why--how we remember Uncle Bob [HM Robert T. Starks].  Many of us would go to jail for protesting.  And so, he would head up the bail bond fund and all that.  And, we'd call him up, "Uncle Bob [HM Robert T. Starks], so and so's in jail, you gotta go get 'em out."  So that was, you know, we weren't ever out of the loop, I know I wasn't.  And, the current movement was always with me, wherever I was because it seemingly at that time, the whole country was on fire.  Black Panther Party Chapter, we had a chapter on the campus.  Of course, Fred Hampton, and Mark Clark, and them were on the campus all the time.  So we, we got a lot of lessons.  It was just part of now that development where, okay, this is what we're gonna have to do.  Dr. John [H.] Bracey was head of our Black Studies Program.  And, I decided then, I knew I was going into education.  I wanted to be a teacher, you know, you were almost conditioned to the point where, you know, [Reverend Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.] and Malcolm [X] gave so you could have, so you have to give back.  And, that was there, you know.  Nation of Islam was very prominent, it--we--there was just nothing else for us to do; that was automatic.  Well, some of us chose other careers, but I was entrenched in that.  So, I only did two years at Northern [Illinois University], though.  I felt stifled socially.  I was getting all the movement rhetoric and all the Movement training, but socially it was not natural.  Most of the blacks on campus were women.  They were like, eight sisters to every brother, so I'm sure the brothers didn't have a problem with it, but (laughter) it was just too highly competitive.  And, a lot of them would go for the sorority girls and I'm saying hey, if you're in the Movement, you don't join the sorority (laughter), so we weren't--my group   wasn't in that.  I would, I became very good friends--I met some of my lifelong friends at, at Northern [Illinois University].  Pamela Warner, who is [HM] Malcolm-Jamal Warner's mother.  We were roommates and we had a lot of--very intense encounters with other people on campus.  We had a group called the "Magnificent Six", so the sisters did have to stick together; that was, that was great.  All of those women have become very successful, I would say.  And they've maintained their philosophy on some level.  Most went into teaching though, within their disciplines.
Story_ID: 75040
Speaker 1: So, after Northern [Illinois University], or during Northern [Illinois University], I met a young man at a party, one summer vacation, and I ended up marrying him, came back to Chicago [Illinois], start having kids (laughter).  Started I'm teaching school.  But (cough) it didn't stop how I was gonna give back.  And, so that--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: You went to Chicago State (unclear)?
Speaker 1: I did.  I'm sorry.  I went to Chicago State [University] and finished.  That was a letdown too, cause I really forgot what it was like being home.  The people who stayed home, in my opinion, didn't develop.  If you didn't go away during that time, you missed something.  Coming back to Chicago State [University], it was amazing to see how easy going and lackadaisical the students were accepting everything.  I mean, I contested the grades.  I contested the methods of teaching.  I contested everything because number one, it seemed so elementary, but I got through it.  I was named one of America's Most Outstanding Athletes while at Chicago State [University], that was an honor.  And--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: What did you do?  Did you run track there?
Speaker 1: Actually, I did skip--my track and field career basically ended.  I did at Northern [Illinois University], I did run adjunct to the men's team.  Coach [Hal] Morris had the men's team.  He wanted to develop a girls' team, but there wasn't a lot of interest.  So, I would attend some of the track meets with the men and they would enter me in a couple of events.  But, that, you know, that wasn't really the whole purpose and I didn't enjoy it.  So, Chicago State [University], I did go there on a scholarship the last two years.  I played basketball and I played volleyball.  And, I think, I forgot, during Northern [Illinois University] I still competed.  I competed in volleyball.  I was the first African American to play extra--Varsity Volleyball at Northern [Illinois University].  And, so Chicago State [University], I came, I starred on that team, I played basketball.  We had our first female black Athletic Director at Chicago State [University] at the time, Dorothy Richey.  And, so, you know, I had an opportunity to at least continue my athletic career and meet up with some of my old friends.  But, the biggest thing was, socially and movement wise, they didn't have a clue.  And, they weren't interested and I thought that was just phenomenal.
Story_ID: 75041
Speaker 1: But upon graduating and everything, I still maintained my goal to teach school.  And, so I did that for twelve years in the system.  I taught at [Roberto] Clemente [High School, Chicago, Illinois] was my first school and that was, that was a great experience.  [Roberto] Clemente [High School] was a brand new school at the time [1974].  As a matter of fact, the semester I came was the semester directly following the big uproar when Valentin of the FALN [Armed Forces of National Liberation] with [Congressman] Luis Gutierrez, all them, they were there and she was kicked out and there was all this controversy.  It was basically all of course, Puerto Rican school, which I learned.  I had an education of learning the difference between the Puerto Ricans and Mexicans, and Cubans, and I didn't even know there was a class level in that group.  You dare not, confuse a Cuban as being Puerto Rican, or a Mexican as being Cuban, or what have you.  So, I learned that in a hurry because the kids really corrected me in a hurry.  My Spanish was pretty good then, cause I had it four years in high school, I think a semester in college.  It was still fresh.  So, it came in handy, especially for Driver's Ed [education].  I taught Physical Education.  I mean that's a direct offshoot from Athletics.  And, most of those young people were first generation Puerto Ricans in America.  No one else in their family really spoke English.  So, they would keep me fresh on Spanish.  I would keep them fresh on English.  We got along real well.  I really appreciate the high regard that they had for teachers.  Christmas time, birthdays, whatever; I mean, gifts, unbelievable, the respect, unbelievable.  "Hey, teach, hey teach, hey teach, hey teach," just nothing that they wouldn't do for you.  The discipline was no problem, except this new generation didn't like going to school that much, and they wouldn't attend a lot.  But, when they were there, they were--I didn't have any discipline problems.
Story_ID: 75042
Speaker 1: Because of the fact that the U.S. Government had determine Chicago [Illinois] is one of the most segregated cities in 1977 in terms of teachers, they instituted a program called "Enhancing Integration."  And, I got caught up in that because they were taking the least seniority teachers, black teachers, and the least seniority white teachers and actually, 'cause Chicago [Illinois] is segregated, most whites live on one side of town; most blacks on the other.  And, they actually crisscrossed us from each side of town. So, I was already at [Roberto] Clemente [High School], living on the far South Side.  But, because I was the lowest person on the totem pole, and I was a so called, minority, I was then transferred to Taft High School; which is like two miles this side of O'Hare [airport] and many of the white teachers that were at Taft [High School] and Sullivan [High School] and all those schools up north, were transferred to the South Side, who had never encountered black children.  That was an experience because I think and (unclear), I had been tracking it unofficially, but they're talking about this decline in the school system in Chicago [Illinois].  You can probably pinpoint when the test scores and the discipline and all of that began to fall because of the fact, many of these white teachers, I mean they severely complained, they were in culture shock.  We weren't so much because we come in contact with white people all our lives.  So, it's not really like, I've never been around white people.  But, many of them had never been around black children, and trying to teach them, unbelievable.  And a lot of them didn't, and they would talk about it.  They were bitter.  And, in some ways I was bitter, mainly because by that time I had three children.  I had to make tremendous sacrifices to put them in nursery school to make this long haul and to teach children that I felt really did have an advantage.  Because [Reverend Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.] and Malcolm [X] didn't sacrifice for me to really teach white kids, and that was my thought.  It was to come back with some talent and teach my community, my children, who was always deprived.  Very interesting experience for me: Mr. Sam Ozaki was the principal at Taft [High School] when I got there.  He's the minority of one in the system.  He had been a part of the group that was interned in the [Japanese American] concentration camps in the United States [World War II].  Of course, I didn't know that, I was just, "Mr. Ozaki, I need to get out of this school; it's too far."  He explained to me very discipline-like and very professional that I don't have a choice.  He doesn't have a choice, I have to be there.  But, (cough) (excuse me) it became an interesting thing because I was determined that I wasn't gonna stay there.  The minority teachers that they did choose, who were low on the totem pole, all had superior ratings.  They would not transfer us to white schools if we had satisfactory ratings.  But what was also discovered was the majority of the white teachers that were transferred to the black schools, had satisfactory and unsatisfactory ratings.  So, black kids are really not getting the best white teachers.  But, they were ensuring that the white kids got the best black teachers.  Mr. Ozaki told me, "You are a superior teacher.  You have been transferred here through a government program and you will be here until the program is over.  You can't transfer out."  I said, "Well, I'm sure there's some way that I can transfer out of here."  But, for me it was enlightening in the sense that Taft High School was one of the most affluent high schools in Chicago [Illinois].  It borders on Niles, Illinois, a suburb, an affluent suburb, Norridge [Illinois], you know, a little sub- community of Chicago [Illinois].  Those people really don't even consider themselves Chicagoans, except for when they can take advantage.  Children were very wealthy, or middle, upper middle class.  But, were they deprived of attention, and the things that we've always given our kids, you know.  We weren't hung up in working every day, so we had time maybe, because we're humanitarian as well.  So, they cling to you.  I did coach basketball there.  It was phenomenal for them to see me.  And, they often expressed it because their images of black people, and they told me, were the 'Jeffersons,' 'Good-Times,' and I guess once I started hearing this, I couldn't get angry.  I thought, how couldn't they not know that that's not who all of us are;  this was before the 'Cosby Show,' you know; this was before any positive things; 'The Mack' was out, had been out, all these Blaxploitations.  So, they didn't really understanding black people.
Speaker 2: Okay.  It's time to change.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 75348
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, I hear that you played semi-pro basketball.
Speaker 1: Well, actually during--this was another part of, I guess, my--it was really part of the teaching thing, because the people that I met while I was a teacher, physical education teachers; Dorothy Gaters, who was the Marshall [High School]'s Girl Basketball coach, the legendary-
Speaker 2: The legendary now.
Speaker 1: Dorothy Gaters is such a basketball person that even--while she was coaching, she also wanted to participate.  So, all of us were much younger at the time.  She founded a team called the 'Debs.'  They were on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois].  I remember hearing about the Debs, but there were also other teams, the Aces and just other women's, we were girls, most--we were all adults.  All of us worked.  So, there were at least four team out of Chicago [Illinois].  But, there was a nationwide network of women and its semi-pro and it says that you got compensation occasionally.  But, it wasn't a, a league that was home then funded like the WNBA [Women's National Basketball Association] or anything like that.  But, I would say we were the precursors to the first WBA [Women's Basketball Association] and we mostly traveled in the mid-west and competed against one another.  I played on the Aces and then later on I was recruited by the Debs.  And, that lasted probably about four or five years.  Quite exciting.  By that time I was in my late twenties.  Maybe early thirties.  Yeah, maybe early thirties.  And, met a lot of good people.  But, of course, Dot [Dorothy Gaters] went on to become the coach that she is, a wonderful person.  And, many of the women now, some of us have been able to retire.  She just doesn't want to, I guess.  But, that was, that was fun.  That was my last real competitive sports that I participated in.  So, I can say that I officially retired from competition, playing basketball, at about thirty-five (laughter) years old.  Which is old (laughter).  And, concentrated totally on teaching and changing careers.
Story_ID: 75349
Speaker 1: Well, there's an interesting story about you playing basketball while being pregnant with your youngest, can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  My youngest child, of course, is my son [Donald E. Hill, Jr.] now.  And, and I can't remember which story that is, I mean, I've heard some of them, but the bottom line was I was pretty strong during that time and able to--I ran into a teacher, an instructor of mine--I'm trying to recall the story.  But, one of my instructors I ended up play against, that I had at Northern [Illinois University], now this part--this story I do remember.  And, we were competing against one another, Doctor, Dr. Ann, we used to call her, but I can't remember her last name.  And, she--I was guarding her, she was guarding me and she, she knew me, she kept saying, "I know you, I know you."  And, I don't know if this is the same story but, I remember competing, my vertical--I was just extremely strong during that time.  I don't know what that was about.  But, when it was all over, I just say this--going to say that it was just exciting to compete against one of your physical education instructors.  But, she was like five years older than I was.  And, I think we were in Wisconsin or Indiana.  I cannot remember, and you'll probably have to help me with, with the other story because I can't remember all the stories.  But, right now that sticks out.  I think I was about six months pregnant.  Had to be about six months pregnant (laughter) playing ball.  And, it made for easy delivery but all of them were easy so it was no big deal.
Speaker 1: Well, that's a remarkable story in itself.
Speaker 2: I guess so.  But, it had to be before thirty then, because I have him at twenty-six.  So, I was at twenty-six years old, that I can remember.  You date--you know your dates by your children's birth.  So, yeah, I was twenty-six.  Yeah, she couldn't believe it either.  She's going like, "You're in such great shape."  I wish I could say that now (laughter).  But it was fun.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you taught school for twelve years.
Speaker 2: Right.  From 1974 to 1986.
Story_ID: 75350
Speaker 1: Okay, and when you make a big career change, you wanna (want) talk about how you decided to (simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, actually somewhere in the '80's [1980's] Chicago Public Schools [Illinois]--the profession became very unstable, really in the late '70's [1970's] and '80's [1980's] in that we were encountering a lot of strikes.  Well, labor disputes, that resulted in strikes.  And, at the--by that time I was divorced.  And, it just became so unreliable.  So, I decided, I say "Now, I need to find a profession that doesn't strike, that has benefits, who's very practice discussion, and something that I would enjoy doing, still in the public sector.  What was interesting though, prior to becoming a teacher, I did take the teacher's exam and the police department exam at the same time in 1974 [1974].  1974 I just began subbing in the school systems, but in 1975 the public school system and the police department called me.  I chose to go into teaching because my children were young and I was just developing my family and the hours was just too unsteady with the police department at that time.  It was not the so called profession that it is now.  But, when I decided to leave teaching, I said let me try going into law enforcement since that was one of my original, you know, choices.  And, so 1985, I took the Police Exam, and '86 [1986] they called me.  And, interestingly enough, the school year ended June of '86 [1986] on a Friday and Monday of that month, I began--I entered into the Police Academy.  And, so I've been on the department since '86 [1986].  That I guess, you know, up to this point, it may seem as though my career has been somewhat uncontroversial, but even as a teacher, during that, what they called enhancing integration, it became controversial, because while at (unclear), I made a choice that I was not going to get up at 7:30 in the morning like my mother and my grandmother had to do, to go clean white people's houses and neglect their children.  I knew, I had a degree.  I had gone to college.  People had made sacrifices and so as a result, I got to Taft High School late every day.  They wanted to fire me.  The Board of Education was more or less embarrassed.  Here you are, one of their superior teacher's and you're setting this bad example and they attempted to fire me.  And, it was very controversial in a sense that, they went so far as, when I had this hearing as to whether or not they were gonna keep me or kick me out.  One of the official's--I explained, we only had one vehicle, I was not gonna make the sacrifice of 4:30 in the morning, I pass up twenty-five high schools to go to Taft, I went thought the whole thing and they said, "You should buy a new car."  "You should buy two cars."  That was just how insensitive that department was.  So, I say that to say that there were some controversy in my teaching career that kinda prepared me for the insensitivity that I was going to encounter later on in Chicago Police Department.
Story_ID: 75351
Speaker 1: So, what happened with the Chicago [Illinois] Police Department?  I got on in '86 [1986] very few officers at that time came on with degrees or from professions.  Many blacks do anyway.  We always, you know, we're older and came on from other professions.  But, I didn't realize that the racism at that time in the Chicago Police Department was as entrenched and as overt.  It occurred in the--at the Board, but they being academicians, they were a little more subtle and covert about it.  But, the department made no bones as a sexist, racist, occupation.  And, I was very fortunate when I came on to meet people who were, at that time, working directly with the first black mayor of Chicago [Illinois], and that was [Mayor] Harold Washington.  I was recruited by those individuals who were actually looking for talented people to work as close to the mayor as possible.  And, so that gave me a level of encouragement, but I did not realize becoming a part of that group, which was the African American Patrolmen's League [now African American Police League], at the time, that they were considered maybe the mild mouths of the Chicago Police Department or the Black Panthers of the Chicago Police Department.  And, once I was aligned with that group in 1990, 1988 I became a member, 1990 I was elected the first female president [African American Police League].  The Chicago Sun-Times featured me in an article.  And, all hell broke loose after that.  I'm thinking I'm giving this interview on something civically responsible and, you know, fulfilling all those other things that I said that I want to do, in terms of giving back.  I wasn't naive, but I just didn't realize that everything was gonna kick in.  And, then by it being such a male dominated profession, there's a lot of envy of the men as far as women.  So, when I was kinda like anointed by these strong brothers from the African American Patrolman's League, many other individuals who were jealous and envious of their stator and their affiliation with the mayor, began to direct all of that towards me as well, 'cause now I was the president.  So, I made the men's bathroom.  That was the first thing I made, you know, I made the men's bathroom wall, in Cabrini [Green, Chicago, Illinois].  When I got that assignment and I knew then that I had been, you know, given this great honor.  And,--
Speaker 2: You made the bathroom wall?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they wrote my name on the bathroom wall and the article was pasted on the men's bathroom wall to di--make sure that everybody understood who they were referring to.  And, so that's considered an honor in law enforcement.  Neg--it's sarcastic, but it's like, you know, people know who you are and they either respect or fear you, or both.  So, from there, there had become, and I did not know the time, they had become a--an attempt or an effort to ensure that I was gonna be, I guess, broken down.  Number one was, I think no woman should ever--some felt, I think men and women felt that no woman should ever head this organization.  And, the other thing was, we weren't gonna have this organization being revived, because it was somewhat (telephone ringing) stagnant, but it was not gonna be revived-
Story_ID: 75352
Speaker 1: I didn't, I guess their interpretation was again, that no woman was gonna head up this organization, which had a reputation from the '70's [1970's] as I said, as being this black power group within the department.  And, it has successfully sued the City of Chicago of [Illinois]--with the Federal Lawsuit winning it, charging the City of Chicago with racism in hiring, promotional and--it was three things, hiring, promotional and, it was three things, hiring, promotional and something practices, whatever.  I can't remember.  But that, that's part of the problem.  So, aside from that, also many of the--much of the hierarchy of the [African American Police] League was not the admini--the security force for this mayor, Harold Washington.  And, I had that opportunity as well, I was able to serve as one of the members of the security detail.  The highlight of my police career.  And, of course, after [Mayor] Harold [Washington] died, we all were serv--we all served as security for the second black mayor, which was [HM] Eugene Sawyer.  And, both of those, were just tremendous opportunities.  But, once the power was gone, in terms of Harold Washington's influence in the City [Chicago, Illinois] or his direct presence, his influence was still kinda there but, his direct presence that's when all kinds of attacks administratively came down on me.  I was being watched.  Allegations that weren't true were lodged against me.  One of the most common ways of discrediting officers is either through their personal lives, through their association with drugs or something like that.  And, I can remember on more than one occasion, going out to my squad car after roll call, and we have to do a vehicle check.  You check the back seat, you check everything, to find drugs in the back of the vehicle.  And once, maybe every two year, might be something that, you know, an arrestee dropped, but I can remember in one year, in one district, finding drugs in the back of the vehicle at least three times.  And, I knew then, that was intentional and I had to--I definitely reported it each time.  But, at that point, I would make sure, I ask the commander to make sure that whenever I had to go to my vehicle that two sergeants went with me.  And, shortly, that stopped and it never happened again and that was to discredit me.  However, they were successful in bring a lot of attention to an issue in 1992, I worked midnights for the very first time in my life, at that time I was about forty-five years old, remember I didn't come--become a police officer 'til thirty-five, I mean I was forty years old.  And, so I didn't know that I had developed this thing called Circadian rhythm disorder.  Everybody has this Circadian rhythm, where your body clock function.  I cannot work midnights.  What would happened after about three or four days, I would lose my voice, which you need to be a police officer because you have to talk on a radio.  And, I couldn't sleep.  So, I asked for a leave, 'cause I was gonna make a decision as to whether or not I was gonna continue to be a police officer or try to find another job within the department or whatever.  And, they somehow another construed that to me having some type of psychological problem and that's another way to discredit you.  I refused to go along with the testing based on the advice of a friend and phycologist at the time.
Story_ID: 75353
Speaker 1: Now, I just want to go back to that method of disqualifying black police officers 'cause you had been discussed even before your case came up that a lot of black officers were disqualified because they were tested as psychologically unfit.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: This seem to be a common way to (simultaneously)
Speaker 2: Keep the numbers--right.  I--and I guess I should emphasize that even though it was used against me, it's--it is one of the common practices used to comply with--there's no official quota, but there is an injunction that says, the department has to show that they are making attempts to hire "minorities".  So, what we see is very cynical.  They will hire them, they will enter the [police] academy, there's a year that you have to go by--has to go by for you to be on probation.  At the end of that year, you have to take a state exam and if you pass it, you stay on.  And, what we were finding out was two things:  One, on the front end, many weren't making it because through the part of being hired, you had to take psychological exam or psychological screening and many African American's were being found unfit.  That was one thing.  You never told what your so called pathology is or why you failed.  Even though there's a document with your name on it that says, you can't be a Chicago Police Officer because you crazy.  Nobody ever tells you what it is so you never correct it so you still walk around being crazy on some other job.  That's a common practice.  Another practice is that they don't pass background checks.  They find something.  If you had a domestic problem with your wife or, you know, you have associations with people they feel as though you shouldn't have associates.  But, there's always a small things.  But, the psychological thing seem to have been the thing that they found that they could use, and work.  Because, there's no way to really contest it.  And, so prior to this happening to me, and the [African American Police] League functions as a--we at one time functioned as the same--in the same way as the Fraternal Order of Police.  But, now there's only one so called union.  So, we're more or less functioning as an advocate and also a grievance piece for officers who can't get relief from the Fraternal Order of Police or other vehicles.
Story_ID: 75354
Speaker 1: And, so we were getting a lot calls from officers about this psychological.  We were treating those issue, we were referring them, we were consulting them, we were directing them, but I guess, it was working so well, they say, "hey if we can get this on Pat that would discredit her, discredit the [African American Police] League, no officers would want to join and we would at least have a thorn out of our side."  But, in some ways it backfired.  Fortunately, as I said, I was being consulted by somebody who really knew the system. And, it was extremely controversial.  They did manage to suspend me for thirty days, which turned into a one hundred twenty-five days because you have to wait for a hearing, but they weren't able to fire me.  And, throughout that controversy, the public became more aware of what goes on in the department, the processes by which they use to, to basically get rid of many of us and it also brought--it reversed, it backfired because it brought a lot of attention to our organization and to me.  And, I was able to come back.  The community rallied.  I Think this is another highlight of my life because of the fact that the thirty days turned into one hundred twenty-five days with no pay, no medical benefits, my three children, my apartment, the community rallied on my behalf in a way that you would have thought I was the mayor or somebody.  I mean, the support to this day, I watch a video tape at least once a year on that event.  There were a benefit held for me.  And, enough money was raise, and enough support came out where I was able to take care of my family and the department backed off somewhat.  But, even then when I came back to work, I think they may have thought that this was temporary.  But, fortunately, I had developed some sills though that process because I met a lot of talented people.  A lot of people were resources and at any given point and time if I found myself in a similar situation, I would reach out to them (telephone ringing) and I've been able to do that.
Story_ID: 75355
Speaker 1: So, they came at me another time.  Being serious about my ancestry and my Africanism, Africanism (laughter), I began to wear a symbol in my ear.  But, I really did it after [Mayor] Harold Washington died as a, as a tribute or something to commemorate that experience.  And, so prior I wore, wore this symbol, which is an Egyptian Hieroglyphic called an Ankh.  I wore it in my ear-
Speaker 2: This right there now, isn't it?
Speaker 1: It's on my finger-
Speaker 2: (unclear)
Speaker 1: And, it's still in my ear.  I wore this symbol while I was on the detailed, but it became more valued, the more symbolic after that time.  And, I never received any flak from the department.  But, in 1992 maybe, '93' [1993], I can't remember, naw maybe in '93' [1993], '94' [1994], I really can't remember.
Speaker 2: So, '93' [1993], '94' [1994]?
Speaker 1: Ninety-three [1993], '94' [1994].  For whatever reason, the [Chicago Police] department changed a general order about women wearing earrings.  They had changed it three or four times.  And, a particular sergeant felt as though I was in violation of the Order.  And, as I explained to him, it was a spiritual symbol and it is not official and earring.  Earrings are worn in the earlobe.  I intentionally ware it on the outer ear and by all definition, is not an earring.  He pressed the issue.  The department administration rallied behind one of their manager's, which was a sergeant and pursued me being in violation of a general order.  And, this was another controversy that went throughout the City [Chicago, Illinois] that backfired on them and that was basically they attempted to fire me on disobeying a direct order.  But, the way they did it, again is violations of their own orders.  I would come to roll call every day and I would be ordered to take it out.  And, I wouldn't take it out and I would be ordered home, in full uniform, not sick, not inebriated, ready to work, I would be ordered home.  Finally, after twenty days, one of my attorneys, by this time I had accrued attorneys for protection and the [African American Police] League had many advisors, called me and stated that this has to stop.  It appears that your rights are being violated and we're going to pursue this.  We filed a federal lawsuit on the bases of discrimination, violations of my First Amendment Rights.  And, we were very successful.  And, to this day, I can wear it.  There's an order throughout the department that says I can wear this Ankh and I cannot be made to take it out.  But, also follows that order is, the court order, is that during that time the department unlawfully transferred me from my district.  They literally called me on the phone, my watch commander called me on the phone by orders of the superintendent as asked me if I was going to wear the Ankh to work.  If I was going to wear the Ankh, do not report there, report somewhere else.  And, one of the orders that the judge came down with was, that I be allowed to wear the Ankh.  But, also that I not ever be transferred without my permission.  Which is pretty powerful in a sense.
Story_ID: 75356
Speaker 1: But, the way that the union has set things up now, no one is actually transferred without their permission.  But, it makes a statement.  And, that was really the last time the department, I would say, came after me with both feet.  But, one more time, since this current administration, [HM] Terry Hillard, became the superintendent, did they come after me.  And, that's because, we raised--the [African American Police] League raised the bar on the department's training.  During, I think, 90--1999 or 98 [1998], 2000, maybe '99 [1999], a lot of our officers were being killed.  And, it appeared that there was a pattern.  They were all--their profiles were similar.  They were all ex-Marines.  They were all working in plain clothes and let the truth be told, they had all violated a procedure.  Not to say, they deserved to die.  On a radio program where the public was discussing it, it wasn't like they were happy these officers were killed, they were concerned the officers were killed.  Whenever these things occur within our community, the black media contact us.  Often times, the white media.  The comment that was made by me, and at that time, I was no longer the president [African American Police League].  But, also the president, who was Barbara Pillows, was that the officers had violated procedure.  For whatever reason, the [Chicago Police Department] superintendent, [HM] Terry Hillard, took serious issue to the comment.  His comment was, we were basically Saturday morning [sic] quarterbacking and we were not respecting the dead in commenting on this issue, within a week after it occurred.  And, we were commenting on it for protective measures, for future measures of correction not anything demeaning, but it was twisted.  I come to work two days later and for the first time in my career, the media, the [Chicago] Sun-Times specially, had basically pitted the superintendent [HM Terry Hillard] and myself.  It was an article with each of our photos, side by side, never happened, never.  Didn't happen with [Matt] Rodriguez, only happened with a black superintendent and unfortunately he wasn't intelligent enough to understand what was happening.  At that moment, the department took all my past history and everything I was exonerated of and brought it current.  And, labeled me, within the department what is called a personnel concern.  That meant, okay, you are a troubled officer, you need help, we got the--they trying an indirect way again to discrediting me.  While, I at that point made a decision that I was gonna take a low-key position.  I didn't wanna fight 'em on that level again on the same fight.  I knew that that was a violation and we were able to kinda like, I would say, defer it.  But, it was in the media and that was several years ago, and maybe since I'm no longer the president [African American Police League], they don't feel I'm of any--continued to be a threat.  But, as we know because of the philosophy of this organization, and because of the personality that has been attached to this organization, we know that they are still probably somewhere hoping and praying that, you know, they will finally "get us".  And, is that administration still there.  But, since that time, we haven't had any direct confrontations with, with the department.  I think also, it's because we have (unclear) tremendous community support.  And, the community over the years has become more and more aware of how the police functions and their relationship to the police department.  And, then the police have slipped up with all these brutality killings, with all these killings, and these brutality actions where the community has become more aggressive.  And, we spend a lot of time now consulting with these community organizations, advising them, you know, attending conferences with them and I think for the first time, probably in the last twenty years, I would say there's a contingency of citizens who are, who are comparable in terms of what the police department should do in their knowledge.  They're comparable to probably another police.  They're like the citizen police.  And, that's exciting and as that continues, I think the police--and I've seen changes, it's been reflected in our general orders.  They're--I see changes occurring, internally.  The administration is responding.  But, the police officers don't understand why the administration is taking these positions, because the police officers are so out of touch with the very people that they are supposed to be serving and protecting.  But, the [African American Police] League is still very instrumental on that and I'm very proud of that and the--many officers are involved and their more, they're more, I guess they're more involved on a low-key level.  They don't have the, the boldness that we had.  So, we have to function in a way that they can--that's most palatable to them.  And, that's what we're doing to be effective.
Speaker 2: Okay.  We may as well change right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 75052
Speaker 1: But tell me, let's back track a little bit and talk about all of these, the psychological suspension, earrings and trouble making history they tried to pull out on you.   How do you this was not, I mean, what makes you think it was politically motivated, or racially motivated and not-
Speaker 2: Well, I mean there were other examples of people doing things or, or documented examples of other officers engaged in the things that they allegedly were accusing me of who were not being punished.  First of all, let's just say I was wearing an earring even though it was a religious symbol.  There were officers, especially on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois], of the [Chicago Police] department, male officers who were wearing stud earrings that didn't represent anything, they were just jewelry and they were a part of that persona image of being a cool plain clothes officer.  So, the contradictions, and they were gross contradictions on all of these word that they would single me out and these guys were left untouched and if you look at their rec--, histories, many of them have gone on to be promoted.  The other thing is to label me a poor officer, bad officer, a disgrace to the Police Department.  As I remember, the former head of Police and Fire Committee saying on public television, Alderman [William] Beavers, I was a disgrace to the police department.   He didn't say racism or corrupt police officers or brutal officers are a disgrace, but Pat Hill is a disgrace.  And it is ironic because I'm, I'm a part of an organization that's always sought to seek equality for black officers, parody on the department, to point out abuse on black citizens, but I'm the disgrace, not these officers, so allegedly, he's upholding them and it's documented.  I mean we now have the [LaTanya] Haggerty [shooting] Case and the [Robert] Russ Case, and the Reginald Cole Case and the Jose Guillen Case, we have all these cases that if that had to have been focused on, in my opinion, those types of officers' behavior had been focused while they were so busy cutting down the league, maybe some of these people would not have been killed because there would have been more pressure put on the department to deal with those kinds of officers, and that mentality would not have been accepted.  Like a Rex Harrison, not Rex Harrison [sic Rex Hayes], Rex, what is this officer's name, they, I think the city--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: I know--(unclear)
Speaker 2: The city [Chicago, Illinois], I think the city has paid out more money on, in settlements on this one officer, I think it's something like, it was documented in the [Chicago] Tribune, something like three or $13 million, one of those numbers on just this one officer's behavior over a period of six years for brutality.  They're settling, and then when they're questioned about it, "well just because we settled, does not admit guilt."  Well, I mean if you keep settling over and over and over for the same officer, there is some level of guilt and only an irresponsible department or one that condones this racist behavior would say that.
Speaker 1: Rex Hayes.
Speaker 2: Rex Hayes, that's his name.  Rex Hayes.  You also have another officer, last name is Valleyfield, who is really comparable, his behavior, you don't hear anything about him.  But there've been numerous settlements in regards to his behavior.  The light senti--, the light punishment that the officers got who killed LaTanya Haggerty, one officer is fired, fined.  The other officers are suspended, but not all of them.  But none of these officers are prosecuted.  In the Reginald Cole Case, a suspicious manner in which he's there, taken from a penitentiary brought to Cook County Jail, then brought to the Area One Chicago Police Department Detective Division for questioning, he ends up getting killed, claim, claiming that he attempted to or did grab a detective's gun and shoot him.  When in fact, they're not supposed to be armed when they're interviewing these people.
Speaker 1: And he had only a couple of months to serve, I think, at that time.
Speaker 2: Right.  He was almost going to be paroled or had served his time.  But--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: He was--- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: All these things are questionable.  And the ridiculous thing about this is that there is no accountability.  Many of these ins--, occurrences have happened on [HM] Terry Hillard's watch.  And a lot of people say well, you know he's a black man, give him a chance.  But do all these black people have to die and I'm saying there's a certain amount of responsibility and there is no accountable, no accountability.  In a lot of ways, the community in that regard is somewhat not accountable because if he were a white superintendent, I think his ouster would have been a little, would have been demanded.  We can't leave out the fact though that the mayor appoints the superintendents.  And the mayor doesn't seem to be allowing himself to be accountable on any of this.  When it gets tight, he just doesn't know and he's paid to know. But, again the people have to, you know, show that this is the representative democracy and that we can vote you out, but that's not happening.  But the police department is an entity within itself, you know, although it's a public entity and it should be scrutinized and it is scrutinized by the public, it still is an entity within itself.  (Phone ringing)
Story_ID: 75053
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, I just I wanted to ask you about some of the things that the [African American Police] League does with the community.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And people may not know anything about.  Historically, there's been a bad relationship between the community and the police.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Do you, can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What you-
Speaker 2: Well, historically, especially the black community and the police, and, of course that really is from Ground Zero, and that's from the beginning.  Policing in America started with the slave patrols and that's documented, and who were the slaves, black people.  The most disenfranchised whites were chosen to be the patrollers because they were the ones that would try to make sure the blacks were kept at the subservient level, because they were just one rung on the lever above them.  So, they knew, with a vengeance, they would, you know, make sure they were brought back to the plantation, or beaten severely or what have you.  Unfortunately, it's never been the most educated group of white people who've been on the Police Department. (Unclear)  I mean a lot of people are, if it wasn't for the Police Department, they would be digging ditches or unemployed.  I mean that's the level of mind, that's the mentality and skill level that many of them have.  But, the [African American Police] League's role have evolved with the times.  We're in this office now, we've been here a year.  We're in, in the community for the first, well, not the first time, but we're in a living environment and this office was actually donated to us by the property owners as an experiment.  We're here again, as I said, sharing with the firefighters, the black firefighters, their organization.  And it was to do, to be a visible component in a neighborhood.  So, it's more or less like what some police departments are actually doing officially with satellite police stations.  But we're not really exercising arrests and we're the community type police officers.  We advise them on procedure and policy, we do that.  We're in a building on the first floor, that's three stories high.  We have an open door policy; we've had events for the kids; we've had a couple of open houses.  We participate in community cultural events; Kwanza, Juneteenth and all of that.  We just celebrated Juneteenth Celebration and aligned ourselves with the Coalition to protect the Homeless [sic, Coalition for Homeless] on their issues; to protect public housing, I'm sorry, with their issues.  And on a daily basis, though, even just by telephone, oh gosh, we lodged, we have recorded all kinds of complaints of brutality.  We are now referred by [Rainbow/]PUSH [Coalition].  The individuals who contact [Rainbow/]PUSH [Coalition] now on police brutality issues are directly referred to us.  Through their own admission, [Rainbow/]PUSH [Coalition] has said they don't have the expertise and they've asked us to do it.  And, of course, gladly we're doing it.  A lot of the cases now, the interesting thing is the citizens in Chicago [Illinois], I think, are getting such a good grasp on this brutality piece, most of our complaints are coming from the suburbs.  We're getting a lot of complaints from blacks who live in Bolingbrook, Hazel Crest, Country Club Hills, Olympia Fields [Illinois], all out there.  And they are wreaking havoc on these black people who moved to the suburbs, supposedly to get away from crime and they're running into police brutality because they don't understand that they're still viewed the same way.
Story_ID: 75054
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a historical view that, I know a couple of black writers have written about that black people actually in this country represent criminal, represent the definition of criminal to the power structure.
Speaker 2: Right.  One prominent book author, is Dr. Charshee McIntire, whose book is 'Criminalizing a Race[: Free Blacks During Slavery'] and it's a book I refer every time I speak, I recommend that book because it gives you the foundation and the profile of what fits a criminal in America.  And the prototype or the image is definitely, number one black male, and a whole culture has been built around, their whole mind set has been built around to the point that almost every behavior that black men exhibit in America is going, at some point and time to be being criminal by law.  An example is the so-called anti-loitering law, which is a law that was initiated by a black member of the city council, Alderman [William] Beavers, and it's just stupidity to do such a thing when it is an extension of a slave law that says two or more slaves seen together was against the law because they would be perceived as planning their escape off the plantation.  Well, the same thing probably exist here, two or more brothers who are to be, who are determined to be gang members.  Now, they're not telling you they're gang members and how are the police determining they're gang members, but if they're seen socializing on a corner, on a street together, they can be arrested because they're in violation of the anti-loitering law.  So, it's, a lot of this has to do with ignorance.  The [African American Police] League spent a lot of time attempting, educate people about the law and about how to lobby to have laws changed, and about the political process of electing officials that represent you; and we're very strong on voter registration and voter education.  The interesting things we've taken a model of Malcolm [X]'s AA, OAAU [Organization of Afro-American Unity], in terms of the voter education registration program.  We take it to the streets, educate the people and inform the community, inform the people don't vote for nobody who ain't representing you, who you put first, who put you last.  And that's been very effective, and people go like police officers are doing that?  But the African, African American Police League formed out of the Afro American Patrolmen's League is a community organization that just happens to be comprised of police officers.   And I've always been committed to the community, always been connected to the community and as a matter of fact, we are here because the community put a challenge to black police after the riots of [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and they asked a poignant question: "Are you with us or are you for us;" that was when the conscious level was high, that was when the community was practicing on some level of self-determination and hopefully, we'll get back to that point.
Story_ID: 75055
Speaker 1: Okay.  What kind of policing do you think the black community wants, given the history of distrust of the police department and all the other problems?
Speaker 2: Let the truth be told, I'm not sure the black community peo-- knows what kind of policing it wants.  For one thing, it knows what kind it doesn't want.  It doesn't want this oppressive occupying force in its community.  And I don't think the real type of com--, policing that a service, and I'll tell you this, the league has gone out talking about, number one changing the whole idea of changing the wording of 'police' because that's so negative in itself and entertain idea of being called "domestic peace officers" because basically that's what we are.  We are peace officers within the domestic part, the United States.  We don't border the international, you know, lines or whatever, we're domestic officers.   And so maybe in changing the name and developing a definition around that, then we can kind of evolve into this service oriented entity, whereas people really need to know when and when not they need to call the police.  Our people, unfortunately, have become totally dependent on the police.  It was a time in our community the police where the last people we would call to be in our business.  Now, because of the lack of education, our lack of understanding of resources, they become the first people to call.  I mean the calls we get are just unbelievable.  They're unnecessary.  The black community for the Police Department, ninety percent of the calls of the Police Department gets in our community are service calls.  Service calls, they're advice calls, they're consulting calls.  It's very frustrating to many officers because they want to kick ass and take names and many of them don't have the skills to make referrals, like take off the police hat and become a priest or take off the police hat and become a teacher, take off the police hat and become an older brother or an older sister.  They come in with an attitude we're going to make some arrests.   But this is not really the kind of policing or service that our community needs.  What is very heavy in our community is you have a lot of situations that are situations that are based upon mental illness.  They become social issues because they're not treated, they're not treated social issues and then they become criminal issues and with the criminal issues, they become incarcerated.  But if the mental illness could be addressed, the pressures, the family breakup, the unemployment, the role confusions, in terms of, I mean it's so much in our community where our people are just so confused, but it's a lot, there's a lot of untreated mental illness in our community.  All these people living together in these closed quarters, closed environment without the proper resources, without outlets, without, you know, the proper interaction and they become social issues; and they can't get along.  Call the police, you know, child running away, not really running away or the man is beating the wife or beating a girl or saying something he shouldn't say.  And then a lot of times, women now, are taking advantage because it becomes a tool they can use to get back at a man because the law works on her side.  So, they know the law to that degree, but those are the things that have to be treated before, long before it becomes a criminal issue and instead it's a criminal issue first and so rather than treat the cause, you just snatch the person out the home, out the community and throw them in the penitentiary, and that's why they become so lucrative; these penitentiaries.  But, the kind of policing we need has to treat that, or has to refer the initial, because we see people at that initial point, we see people at their worst and we see the reason why we're being called, it's not really a criminal issue and you know, if you address it properly, people won't have to go to jail, they'll be treated and socialized properly.
Story_ID: 75056
Speaker 1: Okay.  What do you plan to do next?  I mean you're still young and-
Speaker 2: Well, thank you. (Laughter)
Speaker 1: So-
Speaker 2: Well, 1999 [1999], I decided to run for council person, alderman in my ward, the third ward [Chicago, Illinois], because I feel as though I've matured to the point where I can address and have the ability to facilitate through city government, addressing some of the needs of the people in our community.  The service needs, again, we're talking about service-
Speaker 1: Um, mm.
Speaker 2: That being a political official allows you to have. We, there was nine candidates, I was not successful, of course.  I was second to the incumbent and for a first run with no support from the mayor, no financial or verbal support from the mayor, I think we did very well.  This year, next year, in 2003, [2003] I'm going to try one more time.  I'm going to, and I've learned a lot and I think I have a lot more allies and I don't think the current alderman's position on a lot of things is assisting her ability to stay there, but you never know.  But that's what I'm going to do in the near future.  Nonetheless, in four years, I can retire from the Chicago Police Department and I intend to do that.  I don't intend to stay around and wait to be thrown off.  From that point, I would like to develop a business and we are kind of developing a business now with some other people in the community, a bookstore type thing.  And so that's it, I don't know what else I'm going to do; but those are the things within the next four years; run for alderman again, and if I'm not successful, retire in four years.
Story_ID: 75057
Speaker 1: And go from there (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: [Chicago, Illinois] City Council seems like a very tough, I mean to be a city, to be an alderman in Chicago City Council seems, I mean with the attitude that you have in terms of reform, the change, it seems like it would be a tough spot to be in even in you were elected, you know.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sure it is tough, but I was told that when I became a police officer, you know, obviously, my ideology is one of black nationalism.  So, many of my friends try to discourage me from becoming a police officer  because their view of it is that they're just occupying force and that's a contradiction and my thing was I'm not going in there to become the traditional police officer and I've proven that I haven't become that.
Speaker 2: Um, mm.
Speaker 1: But your responsibility as my friend and as a person with the black national ideology is to watch my back. (Laughter)  And the community and everybody has kept their word.  I have not become one of the boys, girls or women in blue, in the sense of the code of silence and all of that, and it has worked.  I've taken my hits; the community has rallied and defended me and we made some progress and we brought some things to the attention of the people; and the people are now assuming some responsibility.  I look at the same way within the [Chicago, Illinois] City Council.  There's a tremendous responsibility in the council, and that our so called representatives aren't not taking, they're not assuming, they're not assuming their responsibility.  I think a lot of it is because they're ignorant.  I mean they just don't know and like I said, I had matured to that point.  There's a certain discipline that you just have to have.  There's a certain commitment that you have to have.  I'm not trying to be a movie star like some of our people in the council.  I'm not about this personality of Pat.  I think everybody knows who I am and even during this controversial period, there was always an attempt to try to put this personality over what I was really doing, and we were able to ward it off, because that's not what it's about.  So, I think I have the tools now, I'm old enough, I have skills, I know how the council works, I know many of those people who are already in the council because we've had to interact with them on various ordinances and resolutions and I think I'm rooted enough and I think it's just time.  The, (sigh) I guess the difficulty would be organizing to the point where we can secure the votes and protect the polls on Election Day because this is Chicago [Illinois], and that's how I think we really lost before.  We weren't, no, I know, we had the momentum, we had the human capital, we didn't need a lot of money, but we cannot protect the polls.  So, if I'm elected, if I get in there, I, I don't think I would let anybody down.  I don't think I'll disappoint myself or those who support me.  As a matter of fact, I look forward to it, I think it's going to be a joy and hopefully, we'll have a new mayor as well.  But if we don't, then that'll be part of what I'm in it to do, to either make him accountable, primarily, though to help retire him, and make my colleagues understand their functions as well.
Story_ID: 75058
Speaker 1: You kind of like fights, don't you?  I mean-
Speaker 2: Do I like them?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (Cough) Do I thrive on them?  Only when it's necessary. (Laughter)  Because actually, I'm kind of low key now.  I, I look at myself as this: I heard a definition a woman gave to herself, she says: "I'm like a rattlesnake, you don't know I'm there until you step on me."  And I feel like that does describe me, I mean I can go into my world and try to cause me to suffer, I'm cool.  I'm not going to come out and disturb yours, but once you do, you know, be prepared; and I think that's where the Police Department has made this mistake over the past and that others have also agreed that pretty much sums up who I am, my personality.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you think your legacy will be as a black police officer, well, as Pat Hill, you know?
Speaker 2: It's interesting, because I think I'm beginning to see some hint of that legacy now.  About three weeks ago, a young officer I didn't know who works in my station, I see him coming and going as I see a lot of them, because our department has become very young now.  So I don't know a lot of these officers by name.  And he came up to me; he, and they're so disrespectful, these kids, I call them, so arrogant.  But, I guess it was a complement in his own way.  He said: "Hey, I know who you are, can you help me?"  You know, I'm saying, "Well, I don't know who you are, what's your name, you know."  "You know, but can you help me, because I know who you are, and from what I heard about you, you know the general ordinance and you're not afraid and can you help me?"   Well, I said, "Okay, son, what is it that you need for me to do?"  And that, in its sense, kind of makes me think of like what my legacy is going to become.  Because people don't remember but what the last thing was you did.  These, by these children not reading (laughter), by them hearing, well, I guess I am a legend he knows who I am in that regard, but somehow or another, I'm going to have to document this on some level, what I did and we do have videotape and things like that. And I've tried to put a history together of the old guys who inspired me, but I think my legacy is going to be that woman, and I did have counterpart at some time, I can't leave her out, Barbara Pillows and I were, I think were a good team in a sense that two women just gave this department hell.  And, that's what this brother said, I don't know this other lady, but I know who you are and his problem wasn't even a problem.  I'm expecting like something I went through and I'm going to have to show him how to document and sequence the events.  It was just writing a to, from... So,  I think that's what my legend, my legacy is going to end up being, because they're only going to hear the rumor now, it's going to be inflated at times, and deflated.  I've stood next to individuals who didn't know who I was, who'd just come out of the Academy standing at the counter.  "Well, I heard about this Pat Hill lady."  These are officers.  There just having a conversation. "I guess we're going to have to meet her, we're in the Second District."  So, I introduced myself that means in the Academy they're already talking about me. (Laughter)  It's not very nice, but it inspired them because they must have said something that was provocative enough to, we got benefits, (unclear), stay away, they said: "we're going to meet her."  So, they, it's already formulating that she was that lady, unfortunately, they haven't talked about the organization; but she was that lady that not only gave the department hell, she knew what she was talking about.  That's important, because it's easy for us to talk, but to actually back it up, it's different.  And that, that's time, I mean I still research, I study, I read and that means something else is not happening.  A lot of social life, that's not going on, you know, a lot of frivolity, because you don't have time for that.  But if that is the legacy, I can live with that, no pun intended; if that is a legacy. (Laughter) So, I don't know exactly what it is, but I think that's what it's going to be, on that level.
Story_ID: 75059
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is slightly different.  But, it doesn't sound like it, but, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Cough) I had to process what that's not the same thing.  Am I satisfied with what I think the legacy is going to be and is that how I would like to be remembered?  I'm satisfied with that.  My children have already demonstrated they're adults now.  They've demonstrated that I'm okay.  My son has finally come around, who has been my greatest adversary (laughter) next to the [Chicago, Illinois] Police Department, (laughter) that son, my mom is just nuts, you know. But he's almost twenty-six years old and he's matured and understood, beginning to understand what all that work was about.  Also, the fact, that as I take him around with me, "man, do you know who your momma is, man, do you know"--well, for a grown man to hear this now, you know, and I've slowed down considerably, so I guess I can act a part as a, of a mother who has matured; because I used to, we used to be competitive in basketball and athletics and all of that.  Once that's happened, I'm, I'm even satisfied.  Yesterday I had a closing on a piece of property and I took him with me, and it was exciting for him; and I think that's how I want to be remembered.  I want to remembered as somebody who may have made some mistakes, but always had a plan and in the long run, it worked out; and she did it for you, in terms of children; but she also did it for her people, and he said that all the time, I keep referring to him because he's been the last one to understand and he says it now.  But his concern as he's related to me, "Mommy, do you think they would appreciate it?"  And my response to him is it is your responsibility to make sure that they do, (Laughter) so I passed it on to him, and I think he's going to be okay.
Story_ID: 75060
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you, what is your, I know your father [Hercules Richardson] never saw you get to this point and-
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And there's a tremendous amount of goodwill that's expressed to you and I think that's superb-
Speaker 2: Yes. Thank you.
Speaker 1: But, um, what does your mother [Lucille Fleming Richardson] think about your struggles?
Speaker 2: My mother was so protective of her children.  My mother, I was the oldest, as I said earlier.  My mother didn't start having children until she was thirty.  But within that time, even though she was an older parent, she's a very contemporary person and she and I became very good friends.  At beginning, I was very concerned that she would worry and at the beginning, she did.  "Pat, do you have to do those things?"  "Pat, you are so much like your father;" (laughter) those types of things.  I said no, I have some of you there too.  But, ultimately, and she got a chance to really experience the (ooh) the worst part of it, the suspensions and being out of work and my career being questionable.  I would always be, continue to be upbeat because, number one, I was never unemployed.  When I was suspended, I would substitute in the schools, so I was always working.  But I think what validated it for her to say you're doing the right thing, was that benefit that was given for me at the worst point.  She said: "I didn't know you knew all these people and I didn't know all these people knew you and all the things that they said."  And I guess, as a mother, "it was like my baby was taken care of and it was okay." But even as the other times would come, she would, she would get disturbed, because I wouldn't tell her.  And her friends would call:  "Did you see Pat on TV today?  Did you hear what Pat said today?  Did you get the paper today?"  And she would call me sometimes and say: "Why didn't you tell me?"  And I'd just say don't worry about it, let your friends keep you up on it, because sometimes I don't know what's going to happen in advance.  And, so I know she left here being proud of me, because she told me that.  Ad she also gave me instructions, so I fulfilled them I hope.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
