Story_ID: 8665
Speaker 1: I'd like you to start out and state your name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My name is Richard Hunt, R-I-C-H-A-R-D H-U-N-T.
Speaker 1: And your profession?
Speaker 2: I'm a sculptor.
Speaker 1: Your date of birth?
Speaker 2: September 12th, 1935.
Speaker 1: And today's date and where we are.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Today is January 15th, 9 - pardon me - 2001, Martin Luther King Day, and we're in Chicago [Illinois] at 1017 West Lill Avenue which is the studio of Richard Hunt.
Story_ID: 8666
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: My favorite food--I mean, nothing comes to mind especially. (Pause).  My favorite food--I'll just say okra.
Speaker 1: My father always liked okra.  I used to think it was horrible until I tried fried okra.  Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I have a favorite, but I guess if I had to say something.  (Pause).  Well, I don't have a favorite because I hardly ever take a vacation.
Speaker 1: And your favorite--
Speaker 2: My studio.
Speaker 1: Your studio is your favorite [vacation destination]?  Okay, well, that's good.  Okay, we'll deal with that.  Okay.  And your favorite--do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not really, but again let's see what comes to mind.  (Pause).  "Many hands make light work."  That's not really, but that just came to mind, something my mother used to say.
Story_ID: 8667
Speaker 1: Okay, speaking--you know, you were born here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yes, that's correct.
Speaker 1: And I'd like to talk about your early years but actually start with your parents.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'd like to have your--let's start with your mother's name.  I'd like to know about her background and her family.
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Etoria Inez Henderson, her maiden name, and she was actually born in Murfreesboro, Murfrees, F-R-E-E-S, Murfreesboro, Tennessee.  Her mother went there where she was from, you know, to have her, but then she grew up in the area around Monmouth, Illinois. And first on a farm, mostly on a farm, then in the town of Monmouth, Illinois.  Then she came to Chicago during the '30s [1930s], and it was either in Chicago or Detroit [Michigan] that she met my father, but anyway they got married and lived in Chicago on the South Side.  When I was born, they were living in Woodlawn on Eberhart Avenue.
Speaker 1: Did she ever talk with any about growing up or anything whether it was in Murfrees--?
Speaker 2: Well, see she didn't really live there.  I mean, she came back--her mother came back to Monmouth.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did she ever share any stories with you about growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, not a lot except they grew up on a farm in this town and, you know, it was sort of I guess an ordinary rural midwestern life, and you know, she had a sister and brother.  She was the middle.  She had an older brother, younger sister, and her mother died when she was young, about eight years old or something, and then she was raised by an aunt and then a stepmother and, you know, went to school in Monmouth and came to Chicago, like I say, after, say, high school, started to work.
Speaker 1: Can you describe what type of person she was?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, actually one way or another she got very interested in music, and so she was always, as I was growing up, involved with that.  She sang for the most part, you know, like in local things in the church, local choral groups, and took voice lessons.  There were a variety of, you know, choral ensembles in the community at the time that she sang with, you know, black opera companies.
Speaker 1: And was she - would you say she was a quiet person?  Was she an aggressive person?  Was she - you know, what was she?
Speaker 2: Well, she was quietly aggressive.  Yeah, yeah, you know, patient, persistent, had a certain kind of, you know, ideas, goals for herself and her children.
Speaker 1: And what were they?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, education and a certain kind of cultural education, you know, along with the three Rs.
Speaker 1: Reading, writing, arithmetic.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 8668
Speaker 1: Okay, and tell me about your father and his family.  Where was he from?
Speaker 2: He was from the rural South, Hart County, Georgia, you know, a family of sharecroppers, that sort of thing, and he ended up in Chicago [Illinois], you know, Depression, all looking for work.  I guess you'll say part of the migration also, and so he and my mother [Etoria Inez Henderson] met here, but anyway he--let's see where were they?  There were, I guess, about six children in his family, and I think one of his sisters was older than he, but he was probably second.
Speaker 1: Did he--do you know what brought him here?  Didn't he go to Paine College [Augusta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he - well, yeah, he was like there maybe one semester or a year and then ended up coming to Chicago, like he couldn't afford to go anymore and ended up coming here, working.  He then, you know, worked on a variety of jobs.  He had the idea of trying to become an undertaker at one point so he went to a mortuary school, and he didn't have the stomach for that so he went to barber school, ended up being a barber so, you know, as I was growing up, he was a barber.
Story_ID: 8669
Speaker 1: Now you said when you were born, your parents were living in Woodlawn [neighborhood in Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were living in Woodlawn, yeah.
Speaker 1: What was the address you said?
Speaker 2: Well, it was 62nd and Eberhart.  I don't remember the exact address, but it was actually 63rd and Eberhart because it was south of 63rd Street.
Speaker 1: And what was that community like then, Woodlawn at that point in time?
Speaker 2: Well, then as a newborn.
Speaker 1: You don't know.
Speaker 2: It would be hard to characterize it, but later on.
Speaker 1: You've got a point there.  I thought.  I was jumping ahead of myself. (Laughs).
Speaker 2: Yeah, from the womb even, right?  In my second trimester we did this and that, but, you know, early memories and, you know, talk was that it was, you know, a nice enough place, I mean you know, for us to grow up in and whatnot.
Speaker 1: What was the ethnic makeup then?
Speaker 2: It was African-American, black, Negro, colored community, yeah.
Story_ID: 8670
Speaker 1: And now do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I have one sister.
Speaker 1: One sister, okay, and is she older?
Speaker 2: No, she's younger, three and a half years younger, yeah.
Speaker 1: And her name?
Speaker 2: Marian Hunt.  Marian Eustacia Hunt.
Story_ID: 8671
Speaker 1: Now I'd like you to just share with us, you know, some stories or anecdotes about, you know, growing up.  I don't care--you know, I mean the younger period but just sort of growing up in the neighborhood and family life.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I guess one of the things about, you know, growing up, you know, like I mentioned, you know, when I was born we were living on 63rd and Eberhart [in Chicago, Illinois].  We moved a lot, you know, and maybe another place or two in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois].  Then we ended up moving to Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], and most of my childhood, you know, through college days were spent, you know, living in Englewood, and then, well, one thing I think was interesting.  At one point in time my mother's father came to Chicago.  I was about six or so.  He was ill, and you know,the thought was that he would stay with us, but anyway my mother [Etoria Inez Henderson] and father decided that they would actually move our family--mother, father, sister, and I--to Galesburg, Illinois which was the town next to Monmouth [Illinois], and they'd be closer to my grandfather and you know, some other cousins that were there and so, you know, we sort of packed up and moved there, and I think even before we got there my grandfather died, but so anyway the die was cast, so to speak, and so we were there for a few years, and then we moved back to Chicago, back to Englewood.  We were living in Englewood when we moved to Galesburg, but it was an interesting kind of change of pace because, you know, it was a small midwestern town as contrasted with the city, you know, and so spending those years and growing up, you know, part of growing up there was interesting, you know.  It had an interesting contrast, that kind of experience.
Speaker 1: How do you think that experience influenced you in some ways, you know, because you were basically a city kid going to a country?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, you know, even growing up, though, you know, we would spend time, the summer we would go to Georgia to visit relatives, and we also had spent a lot - you know, go back and forth, and relatives from Galesburg, Monmouth, that area, would come up here so yeah, I mean I would say in my background a lot--and then as a matter of fact, one of my father's brothers and one of my father's sisters moved to Chicago from Georgia during--you know, it would be between the time I would say two and six or seven when we moved to Galesburg so anyway, you know, there's the rural southern experience, midwestern, you know, downstate, and city experience part of growing up.
Story_ID: 8672
Speaker 1: Anything do you remember or could share--did you spend time around the barbershop with your father?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what would you describe those experiences like?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean you know, it's an interesting--well, you know, it was a lively place, you know, particularly on the weekends with all kinds--you know, everybody from the neighborhood coming in, you know, talking about whatever was going on, and you know, a lot of politics, racial matters, whatever else, and actually so you know, as a kid I worked in the shop, you know, sweeping up, shining shoes so.
Story_ID: 8673
Speaker 1: And now where did you go to elementary school?  I know you said you moved around a lot.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, the first school I went to was Copernicus, Nicholas Copernicus School in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], and then I went to Beale School in Englewood and then Bass School in Englewood.  Then I went to Englewood High School.  That's the only high school I went to.
Speaker 1: Was there a junior high at that time?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, first through eighth grade and then four years of high school.
Speaker 1: Now what kind of child would you describe yourself as?
Speaker 2: Well, sort of, you know, quiet, a little bit troublesome from time to time, you know, to teachers and parents but basically, you know, interested enough in school and did well enough, you know, for levels of the class, and then, you know, fairly early on I started to like to draw and stuff like that so I was always doing stuff in different school programs, whether making posters or decorations or, you know, one thing or another, and then at the point in time when there were like art classes, you know, sort of gravitate toward those.
Speaker 1: When you say fairly young you started drawing, what age was that?
Speaker 2: You know, five, six, seven.  I always sort of did more than maybe a lot of kids but, you know, sort of more consciously doing it as a kind of activity outside of, you know, some classroom activity, say, from the time - yeah, I was eight or nine on.
Speaker 1: Is this something that either of your parents encouraged?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean you know, I'll say, too, that actually even before I started doing a lot of drawing, I mean I mentioned earlier my mother's interest in music.  You know, I took music lessons, piano lessons, violin lessons, and stuff like that so there was always some of that going on, and then yeah, I mean my mother was the one who was most encouraging of these kind of cultural activities because it was a particular interest of hers.  She was also interested in, you know, literature, poetry, and stuff like that.  She used to do dramatic readings as they called them, you know, along with the singing.
Speaker 1: So was there a lot of that in your household?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  Um hmm.
Story_ID: 8674
Speaker 1: So I want to go back to your father a little bit and ask what type of person was he also?  I mean I know he came here [Chicago, Ilinois].
Speaker 2: Um hmm.
Speaker 1: He looked at being an undertaker.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That was probably to make a living.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  I mean I don't think he just loved undertaking.  No, what I mean is like--I mean, say, I liked it like in describing my, you know, progress into an art career.  You know, I mean I like to draw, and I like to do sculpture, and I had a burning desire to do it.  I don't know that, you know, he probably would look at mortuary science in the same way, yeah, but I mean he was hard-working, and in the days before there was a barber's union they used to work basically all the time, nine to nine, six days a week, but so anyway he was, you know, very much involved with that.  He was very much involved with the church.  He was always active in the church, trustee, deacon.  Actually in the Methodist church there are trustees and stewards.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 8675
Speaker 1: And you were raised what?  What religion were you?
Speaker 2: Well, first Methodist and then Baptist.  My mother was Baptist so at different points in time I'd belong to different churches.
Speaker 1: And who would you say you are most like in many ways?  What do you have from each parent?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, certainly I picked up on the cultural interests that my mother had and--but you know, about the same time, you know, I was involved like I say with my father, whether it was working in the barbershop or other kinds of projects we'd be involved in so, you know, it was a kind of approach to work that comes out of my relationship to him, and I would say, too, that I was more influenced by my mother earlier on and then later on more influenced by my father or saw him more as an example.
Speaker 1: Can you give me an example of what you're talking about?  You gave me a lot of examples with your mother but.
Speaker 2: Well, I think it's more that, you know, my mother was more involved in just childrearing.  Like I say, my father was working all the time, but as I, you know, matured, entered the world of work, and all like that, it's more that his example was there to emulate or to be responsive to understanding of - I mean, he wasn't as hands-on involved with my upbringing or education as my mother was.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any lessons that your - or we're all influenced by how we are raised.  Do you remember any lessons that your parents taught you that you instilled and hold true today?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean first of all, they were both, you know, interested in education and in being involved in the community and stuff like that.  I mean not like a single sort of words to live by or something like that but just that general sort of--I mean, these attitudes about learning involvement and any number kind of activity, like say whether it's in terms of the local community of having a sense of being part of a larger community that you ought to be responsive to.
Story_ID: 8676
Speaker 1: I want to go back on to your drawing so you said the die was cast about seven or eight.  I mean you--
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't know I was going to be an artist, but I mean it's just something I liked to do whereas somebody else who might really like to, you know, be involved in a sport or do whatever they might want to do.  You know, it's just something that I would do, you know, when there wasn't something else to do, you know, and then.
Speaker 1: Now what were you drawing from?  Were you looking at things?
Speaker 2: Oh, anything from just drawing things around to copying things out of books or magazines, making cartoons.  Nothing profound, just things that kids would find to do.
Speaker 1: So when did you start doing art classes?  You did school.
Speaker 2: Well, there were like art classes in grammar school, I mean an art period, a period of art, you know?  I can't remember how many times a week, but there was that, and then when we moved back to Chicago [Illinois] from Galesburg [Illinois], I started to take classes at the what was called a Junior School of the School of the Art Institute [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] on Saturdays and in the summers, and then through the public schools there was another art class.  I think it was called the [James Nelson] Raymond [Lecture] Fund [for Children of Members and Public Schools] or something like that.  They had like classes where you would go, and it would be sort of like something like art history, and there would be drawing projects you would do and take the drawings and paintings back to be graded and whatnot, but anyway so the combination of this Junior School and these Raymond Fund classes and then that sort of started to--well, first of all, I met a lot of other kids who were doing some of the same sort of thing and started to kind of direct my interest in a formal way toward art activities.
Speaker 1: When you were at the Junior School, what age were you at that point?
Speaker 2: I was like nine, ten, eleven.
Speaker 1: And do you think this is something that your mother found out about and?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, um hmm.
Speaker 1: And were there a lot of black kids involved with that?
Speaker 2: Not a lot.  Some.  I mean, for instance, friends that I know today like Alfred Tyler is a painter, Calvin Jones.  We were there together.
Story_ID: 8677
Speaker 1: And what was your favorite thing that you were doing or, you know, did you gravitate to or was it drawing mainly or was it in the painting?
Speaker 2: Well, drawing and painting to begin with, and then later on when I was about fourteen I'd been taking classes most of that time, and when I was about fourteen, I took a sculpture class, and I actually liked making sculpture more than drawing and painting.  Then I continued to do that.
Speaker 1: And what was the difference between what you learned at the Junior School [of the School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and what you learned at Raymond?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, this [James Nelson] Raymond [Lecture] Fund [for Children of Members and Public Schools, Chicago, Illinois], they were like what they call lecture classes.  The term just comes back to mind--which was a little bit of art history, a little bit of how to do it, lecture demonstration, and I mean that was more generalized, and you know, there were like a large group of students sitting in this lecture hall and then doing these art projects at home and bringing them back, whereas the Junior School was like a studio.  I mean they had the classes in the same studios that the people going to the Art Institute to college went to, but they'd just be like, say, on Saturdays in the summers when they weren't used for regular classes, and some of the same teachers as well as others taught those classes and so it was a more--well, a more direct, concentrated kind of art experience, and you know, I think--a privilege for young people that have that kind of early introduction to drawing, painting, sculpture.
Speaker 1: And did you--was there any one either at the Junior School or at this Raymond lecture series that you feel had some impact on you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean there were a few but most importantly actually the sculpture teacher that I had, a woman named Nellie Barr who taught the sculpture classes and who I first studied with then at fourteen and continued to study with, you know, through high school, and then we ended up being friends, and we're still friends so that was quite an experience, yeah.
Speaker 1: So she's still alive?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about ninety-six [years old].  She's in a retirement home outside of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in Gwynedd, Pennsylvania, Quaker retirement home, but she was a very accomplished sculptress as were a lot of teachers at the time.  She'd come here to the United States as a result of war in Europe.  She was from Germany and had lived in Paris [France] before leaving Europe to come to the States, roundabout way ended up here.
Story_ID: 8678
Speaker 1: So you were telling me about your [art] teacher.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But I wanted to ask you about that experience because sometimes we gravitate--we just sort of have a natural thing.  Do you think that when you - it was sort of love at first sight in terms of sculpturing or was it that she was so passionate about it that that impassioned you?
Speaker 2: Well, it was some of both.  I mean, yeah, and I don't know if it was first sight, but I took this class which was maybe--yeah, I think the class would have been like twelve weeks, and so, you know, by the time I was starting to model in clay, taking clay, making figures or heads, portrait busts.  And so yeah, I certainly liked doing it, and I liked working in what you call three dimensions, having something there as opposed to drawing, but I still liked--I continued to draw and paint and ultimately more drawing than painting, but anyway--it was a combination I think of really finding in that something I really liked to do and then having this teacher [Nellie Barr] take an interest in what I was doing.  She thought I did pretty well--so one thing kind of led to another.
Speaker 1: What things do you think you really learned from her from those early days about sculpting or the whole process?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, first of all, the difference between sort of trying to look at something and draw it, make a representation of it on a flat surface and the difference between seeing something three-dimensional, experiencing it "in the round" as we say and thinking about the transition from front, side, back.  It was things like that and then just sort of what it took to do that, and then there's a whole other range of sort of just technical things about sort of making sculpture, making molds and just--it's more like work than--at least it seemed to me at the time.  Well, let me put it this way.  I mean, it's involved with processes that are more (pause) what you might call working with your hands, labor-intensive.
Speaker 1: Tedious?--
Speaker 2: Not necessarily.  You know, I mean some things are and some things aren't--but anyway it's to me it's more totally engaging of both the senses.  Actually it's a tactile thing, working with material.  All of that interests me.
Story_ID: 8679
Speaker 1: What materials were you working with at the time?  Was it?
Speaker 2: Well, largely clay and plaster.  It wasn't until later when I started to go to college and take sculpture classes where I worked with wood and metal.  You know, I mean that came later, but certainly I like working with clay.  I could have continued that, I suppose, and come on, experience other things, but then it was like while I was in college I started to work with metal.
Speaker 1: Now so you're fourteen.  You take this class [at the Junior School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Illinois].  She's [art teacher Nellie Barr] very encouraging with you and encourages you because she sees talent in you obviously.
Speaker 2: (nods) Yeah.
Speaker 1: What--at this point then are you taking--continuing to go to this Junior School?  What happens from fourteen on?  Are you taking?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I took more of those classes, and I also did things at home and in high school for that matter.  I had--I was like what they call, you know, like in the second two years of high school you can sort of have a major.  I was an art major.
Speaker 1: How was the program at Englewood [High School, Chicago, Illinois]?  What was?
Speaker 2: Well, there were some interesting teachers there and again a group of students that were kind of involved in art.  Again this friend of mine, [painter] Alfred Tyler, was--we were also classmates at Englewood.  He was also going to this Junior School.  There were a couple of others who also went down to the Art Institute, and then there were several teachers there--Mr. Johnson, Miss Kern, Miss Walters --they were all very sort of--they were good teachers and got involved with students that had a particular interest, a real interest.
Speaker 1: Was it that time that you declared a major as an art major?  Did you think that's what you wanted to do for the rest of your life or?
Speaker 2: Well, actually I was interested in history and science, biological science, and so there were those three areas of interest.  I didn't spend as much time with the others, but you know that is to say I would probably spend more time drawing or doing sculpture than I would reading history or something, but at the same time, as a matter of fact while I was a high school student, I got a job taking care of animals in a zoology lab at the University of Chicago [Illinois], a part-time job, so I was interested in that, and like I say, I was interested like in the history classes that I would take.  I mean I took--if I had an elective, instead of taking--well, I would more likely take something that had to do with history or biological science than something else.
Speaker 1: Do you know what's very interesting about that?  That's like a right brain- eft brain person really.  You cover almost all of the sort of disciplines.  These are people--
Speaker 2: Except math. (Laughs).  Math was bad.  I didn't take anymore of that than I had to.
Story_ID: 8680
Speaker 1: So is that what you spent most of your time was between those things?  You were quiet.  You were sort of quiet yourself, weren't you, or not?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I was--compared to some I was quiet, but I wasn't the most quiet, but I wasn't as sort of active and loud or something.
Speaker 1: Did you have dreams and aspirations?  You know how when you're young, we sort of think well, I want to be this or I want to do that or I think this is interesting.  What was Richard Hunt as a young person?  What was he?
Speaker 2: Well, actually another thing I was interested in but I didn't pursue it was architecture.  Actually another one of my friends, we used to draw buildings a lot after I got beyond drawing cartoons but--so anyway that was always an interest but (pause). So like I think by the time I was at a point when--well, like I say, I thought about history, science, art, and another thing is I continued until--through high school was kind of interested in music, and I used to--like there was Abraham Lincoln Center, Community Center, that had a youth orchestra that I used to play the violin in, but like while I liked doing it, it wasn't something that I did all that well.  You know, I mean I had to put a lot more in than I got out of it in terms of, say, improving as a musician, but on the other hand it left me with a real love and appreciation of music, but anyway so I was kind of left to think about--(pause) well, another thing is I thought that as far as art went that as it came time to think about college, that I had gotten some recognition and all, and I thought "well, if I got a scholarship to go to art school, then I might opt for art," but if I didn't, I would have gone to college and gone into history or science so then I got this scholarship so I went on to the Art Institute [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Was that for--you had been going there to the Junior School [of the Art Institute of Chicago].  Did it seem like old familiar territory or was it a whole different experience?
Speaker 2: It was somewhat different because college is different from high school and being in a sort of program that's part of a program that's going to lead to a degree is different from taking one class and then another class so there was that, and then it was actually a rather different school than it is now.  In the early '50s [1950s] when I was a student there, if you wanted to get a degree, you ended up taking academic classes somewhere else so I took come of those at the University of Illinois [Chicago, Illinois] and University of Chicago and Chicago Teacher's College so I was taking art classes and academic classes different places, different times, but like it wasn't like going off to a college somewhere else and not--having to get familiar with everything all at once.
Story_ID: 8681
Speaker 1: During your college years, was it a four-year program?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: When all was said and done?  Okay.  Were there things that you learned differently or other people that were actually influenced - who influenced you during that time period?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I ended up with a number of other teachers and then getting involved with a group of students who were also - so what you might call interested in careers as artists, and it was a time when actually there were a number of students who were really interested in becoming artists.  I kind of got caught up in that, and then the sort of fact that there was an art community outside of the School of the Art Institute [of Chicago, Chicago, IL], in terms of galleries and other artists working and all, so some of the artists and people involved in that milieu were influential as well as just being in school.  As a matter of fact, that ultimately is something I look back on as kind of an advantage of, say, going to a school like the Art Institute as compared to going to, say, University of Illinois at Urbana [Illinois] or University of Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin] and taking art classes.  You're kind of there at the school, and what happens in the school is important, but it's not - you don't have the same reference to kind of the art scene outside of the institution so anyway there was that, and I got involved in exhibiting my work and all with all of the students and sort of developing some of the aspects of what I call professionalism that would be part of what you end up doing to develop a career.
Speaker 1: Where would you have exhibited during this?
Speaker 2: That's what I was.
Speaker 1: Well, as a matter of fact, art fairs.  There were Hyde Park Art Fair, Old Town Art Fair.  There were some galleries.  There was a gallery called the Palmer House Gallery in the Palmer House Hotel [Chicago, Illinois], a gallery on Oak Street which was called--I think it was called the Domino, but anyway.
Speaker 2: How did you get in those galleries?  Did you just go in and show your work or?
Speaker 1: Basically that, yeah, and then there was a group of art students called the Art Students League that put on shows that would be--like at a certain point in time once or twice a year art students could--you know, this is not the Art Students League in Europe, but the Art Students League within the School of the Art Institute.  You'd present some work that would be juried in or out of this Art Students League, and then the League itself would organize group exhibitions in different venues around the city, and so anyway I got in that, and then I was in some of those shows, and then say maybe as a result of that, I was invited to have a one-person show or to have work consigned to the gallery, that sort of thing, and then at the Art Institute there was annual exhibition called Artists of Chicago and Vicinity to which you could submit work, and so I submitted some work, and it was included in the show one year.  Then the next year I submitted some work and won a prize and the same in the following year.
Speaker 2: So you really were--you really took off almost immediately because you're talking about a four-year program.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, yeah, this was between being a freshman and a senior at the School of the Art Institute.
Story_ID: 8682
Speaker 1: See, there's a lot of interest in you, Mr. Hunt, because you rose like this sort of in an environment that not a lot of African Americans are engaged in.  That's why you tell it in sort of like well, this happened, that happened, but.
Speaker 2: But that's the way it happened.
Speaker 1: It did.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: But when you came in, let me ask you were there any other blacks in your class [at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago] or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were--there weren't a lot like I think like I mentioned the artists Alfred Tyler and Calvin Jones.  Okay, they were I think like, say, a year ahead of me in high school, and therefore they had already gone, but then there were probably maybe five African Americans in the class I began with.  I can't remember how many would have been entering class but several hundred.
Speaker 1: Did you ever have any concern about being able to make a career--because you were having--you said you had one-person shows while you were in school, too, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you ever have any concern about--or did anyone ever say or try to mock you in terms of this is not something that a young black man should be doing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it was funny.  First of all, my parents--not that it's not something--but the idea of an artist, my making a living as an artist plus it was something that a lot of--again late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s] was a period when there weren't a lot of artists making a living anyway, black or white, and certainly it was before the period when actually like American artists, New York School, and all became sort of important so it was something that sort of a responsible, loving parent would look at his kid and say "hey," you know, and that's an interesting thing, too, the difference in sort of interest in what you might call "culture with a capital C" or cultural pursuits like art and music.  I mean obviously there are more places for music in your life, African American or otherwise in terms of its entertainment potential or potential of somebody as an entertainer, but anyway as a matter of fact, the kind of concession to their fear.  They had a certain practical sense.  I had--I got a degree in art education, but actually by the time I had graduated--well, I ended up teaching some, but then I gradually just gave that up in favor of being a sculptor, and I mean this was in the years after graduation, a few years after graduation, but anyway another thing about it is that in the '50s [1950s] before the Civil Rights Movement, segregation, all that, it was still kind of interesting because artists in general were kind of looked down on so it was being part of, say, two misunderstood, somewhat maligned minorities. And so actually it was an interesting enough point in time to be sort of developing this career because it'd be different, say, in the '60s [1960s] or beyond after the Civil Rights Movement, or black awareness, and all that, so and then I was interested in what you might call Modernism, Abstraction, stuff like that, and so it was something that was sort of more accepted on its own merits by the people that accepted it, and everybody else thought it was strange anyway, whether I was doing it or somebody who was white or whatever--so it was more on the--I guess the strength of the work that I made my way than anything else.
Story_ID: 8683
Speaker 1: Now why were you attracted to Modernism?  What about that appealed to you, this period?
Speaker 2: Well, maybe just sort of--I think it had as much to do with the sort of spirit of the times and the milieu that I was in.  As a matter of fact, one kind of defining experience was--and like I say, I started out modeling, working the figure, but I saw some work that abstract artists like David Smith, [Pablo] Picasso, [Julio] Gonzalez, and some of the European Modernists had done in a exhibition that was at the Art Institute [of Chicago, Illinois] called 'Sculpture of the 20th Century.'  You know it was maybe in my--either the end of the first or the second year, and I saw this work that was done in metal, and it just impressed me quite a bit, particularly the work of Gonzalez who was a Spaniard who was a friend of Picasso's even in Barcelona [Spain], and they came to Paris [France] and worked with one another at one point in time when Picasso started to work with metal.  Gonzalez knew more about it than Picasso. So anyway I saw that, and I thought "gee, I really want to do that," so I took some metalcraft classes at the [School of the] Art Institute [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and then I got a welding torch, and one thing led to another, and so I started to do it, and one thing led to another with that.  Some of that work is what I exhibited, and then as a matter of fact, I was invited to exhibit like I mentioned in the Artists of Chicago and Vicinity show.  I exhibited some of this work in that exhibit, and then the curator of American art invited me to participate in the what they called the American Show.  Artists were invited.  This was an invitational show, artists from all over the country, so I had a piece in that and welded metal sculpture, and it just happened that one of the curators from the Museum of Modern Art [New York, New York] was a juror and then decided they wanted to buy that piece for the Museum of Modern Art so it--
Speaker 1: At what age? That's what I'm wondering. You were still in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was like nineteen, twenty.
Story_ID: 8684
Speaker 1: Now that 'Artists and Vicinity' show was open to established artists [in Chicago, Illinois an the surrounding area].
Speaker 2: Well, as a matter of fact, the 'Artists of Chicago and Vicinity' show had just been open to artists who were, I think, say, eighteen years and older.  There was--actually this had to do with the fact that there were a number of students then in the late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s]--yeah, this had to do with students at that period who were returning on the [Montgomery] GI bill so that while there had been an established sort of rule that--I don't know--artists either couldn't be students or had to be somewhat older.  I think it was more that they couldn't be students and enter because I guess they didn't want to have work that wasn't at a certain level, but anyway some of these GIs--pardon me--petitioned to have their work accepted because they were in late twenties, thirties, whatever, had a certain kind of experience, and some of them had actually maybe been to art school and been in the war [World War II] and come back so anyway 1953, '54 [1954] when I was exhibiting in this 'Artists of Chicago and Vicinity,' there were actually a number of students who were exhibiting then, some older GIs and some younger ones like myself who'd just gone to school out of high school who were in the show and won prizes and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Was that a juried show or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, it was juried.  That was a show then open to all artists, I think, over eighteen within a fifty-mile radius of Chicago.
Speaker 1: That's an important distinction.  If it's a juried show, you're judged, and you know.
Speaker 2: Right, so if you were over eighteen and living within a fifty or one hundred-mile radius of Chicago, you could enter, and then there were these judges who then juried the exhibition, and you were either in or out or you won a prize or something like that.  They were responsible both for the work that was exhibited and the work that won prizes.
Story_ID: 8685
Speaker 1: The history of Modern art in the United States, when did it first begin?  You first talked about the European Modernists so I'm wondering how old was that movement or whatever in 1960 when you were?
Speaker 2: Well, say 1950, that is--you see, I started to be aware of what you would call Modernist art when I was a high school student [at Englewood High School] because I was involved with these classes.  While I wasn't doing that kind of art, but it was there to look at, either in exhibits at the Art Institute [of Chicago, Illinois] or presentations made by teachers in these lecture classes and whatnot, but anyway American artists had been involved in Modernism from early on, late 19th, early 20th century, and what you would call abstract art, say, beginning with Cubist experiments and stuff like that, moving on to more, other kinds of abstraction, other approaches to abstraction date from the early 20th century.  It was more centered in Europe, Paris [France].  American artists, a number of American artists went to Europe to actually experience sort of what was going on there.  You know, some came back and worked in that way.  Like in Chicago, an interesting example was John Storrs.  He's known as kind of Art Deco like there's this Goddess of Grain on top of the Board of Trade Building, kind of abstract sort of figure.  You know, that's an example of his work, but anyway there were a number of artists working in abstraction in Chicago.
Story_ID: 8686
Speaker 1: (cut off) Do you think that there are advantages with starting with the human form (cut off) and doing abstraction or you don't think it's really relevant?
Speaker 2: I think it happened to be the way artists, if you went to some sort of art school, were trained maybe through the '50s [1950s] with sort of the acceptance of, say, abstraction or other styles of art and actually, say, from the '60s [1960s] on with the kind of expansion of sort of the enlargement, say, of fine arts disciplines, it would be--at this point it wouldn't be fair to say one had to "start somewhere."  That is to say, and it depends, too.  Another thing is people decide to be artists at different points in their lives.  It's not something that you'd have to start as a kid or in high school and go--so that, say, somebody who could be an engineer and decide to do some sort of sculpture that had a technological base that they were prepared to do because of what they'd done before--I mean in today's sculpture world--whereas, say, the innovation that working directly in metal represented when [Pablo] Picasso, [Julio] Gonzalez, David Smith started to do it.  These were all people who had gone to some sort of art academy and learned to draw and model and then sort of decided to break away from that, but since that's become an established way of working, one could start at some other point and go from there.
Speaker 1: But I guess I was asking about you yourself.  Do you think that any of the [formal] training [in drawing and painting] sort of comes out, the fact that you?
Speaker 2: I think we're part of--all our experience sort of informs what we do, and I mean it's not like I made a point of like rejecting any of what I learned, necessarily.  I don't apply it all the time to everything I do, but what I'm saying is that--as you were asking, I don't feel that one has to know how to model a portrait head or a figure in order to be a significant sculptor these days.
Speaker 1: No, I wasn't asking about right or wrong.  I'm asking about your own experience.
Speaker 2: Right, but my own experience is the experience that I had, and if I was sort of going to become an artist today, I don't know that I would say I'd want to do it the same way.  For instance, there are a lot of young sculptors who, by the time, they go to art school know a lot about computers and about the way one might use computer programs to generate forms.  That might be an exciting way to start today [2001], you know.
Story_ID: 8687
Speaker 1: What was your early work like?  I'm sure you--do you some of your own pieces?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you go back?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's one right there. (points off-camera)
Speaker 1: Oh, right here?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was--as a matter of fact, that was the first piece that was shown in the 'Chicago [Illinois] and Vicinities' [art] show which is made out of solder and wire.
Speaker 1: And so what--? (Pause).  And this is metal work in here, too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, like I say, it's lead solder and wire, zinc-coated wire.
Speaker 1: And I want to go back to what intrigued you about working with--was it an experience that you could do things that you couldn't do with clay?  Was it you could get more intricate?  What attracted you to wanting to work with metal and the metalworking?
Speaker 2: Well, partly it had to do with recognizing that you could do things that had more--(pause)--well, say, freedom from, say, the kind of weight and sort of monolithic nature of, say, clay or stone or wood where one tended to work like either building up things with clay or cutting something out of a block which had a certain kind of restriction in terms of where the form might go.  You can add onto things, but the use of this metal gave rise to just a lot more possibilities.  I thought it was a lot freer in terms of the way one could develop composition, sculptural composition, and then there was the use, as [Julio] Gonzalez [Spanish sculptor] talked about it, the use of space as well as form in developing a sculptural composition.  So when I got the sense of what that was--it was another kind of experience like working with the form that I told you that I'd been drawing and painting so I started modeling this things, and there was--I was talking about three-dimensional--well, but that was like three dimensions in a sort of solid displacement of space by this form, monolithic form.  So the idea of then opening up that space, sort of using space in a composition with metal was another level of interest that I was able to achieve through this direct metal, soldered, welded way of working, and I felt that it was more--I liked the kind of industrial connotations.  In fact, that was kind of--had a contemporary kind of quality that seemed to me appropriate to the time as well as these possibilities for sculptural composition using space.
Story_ID: 8688
Speaker 1: And I'm saying as a young artist--I'm talking about your time at the Art Institute [Chicago, Illinois] you were trying to--what you were saying--you used-- (pause) it was that interaction with using space and these materials that you used to sort of express yourself.  Is that right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, one of the things, like I say, [Julio] Gonzalez [Spanish sculptor] talked about what he called the "New Sculpture" being a marriage of material and space and that, (pause) like I say, recognizing that a sculptured thing or object could not only sort of exist in space but be open to space entering it or projecting into space was an enhancement of the third dimension, almost approaching the fourth dimension because actually it took time to take in this object that existed in space in that way in a different way than a solid three-dimensional object.
Speaker 1: So would you say Gonzalez had the most influence on you and your work more than [Pablo] Picasso?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Picasso was a very innovative and challenging sculptor, but Gonzalez was a pure sculptor, and the way he formulated these ideas about it, they were succinct and very (pause) compelling, I guess, would be the word, at least for me.
Speaker 1: Did you ever get a chance--did you ever meet him?
Speaker 2: No, he actually died in the '40s [1949], yeah--and he didn't actually make a lot of sculpture.  He's sort of a sculptor's sculptor.  He's not as say as well-known as Picasso or Henry Moore or somebody like that and didn't make as much sculpture, but he was responsible for a lot of people that came after him.  He influenced David Smith very much who was an American sculptor who had a lot to do with popularizing this way of working in the United States, but he had been to Paris [France] and saw a few exhibits of Gonzalez, very taken with him.
Story_ID: 8689
Speaker 1: Did you--so here you are.  What did you want to say--besides the things you just said.  Were there certain things you wanted to say through your art at that point in that time?
Speaker 2: Well, part of it was, yeah, basically as what you might call a beginning artist exploring new technique, part of it is you're making sculpture in order to make sculpture.  You're learning to make sculpture through the sculpture that you're making, and then there were a certain number of things that were kind of coming of age like things like I did several pieces that were drawn from Greek myths like the piece the Museum of Modern Art [New York, New York] purchased that this curator, Dorothy Miller, saw.  It's called 'Arachne,' and it had to do with Arachne having the spinning contest with the goddess Minerva and overcoming, like actually outweaving Minerva and the kind of gods punish people that--they did better than them, and so she was turn into a spider so the sculpture was about Minerva being turned into a spider and metamorphosis.  I did things like Icarus and a couple of other things like that so it gave an opportunity to explore like traditional work with a new medium, and then some of the things were just these explorations of form and space.
Speaker 1: Now when your piece was picked up, bought by this--you said Dorothy Miller at the Museum of Modern Art, how was it affecting you back at school?  Did you get a lot of publicity out of it?  Were you the sort of only student whose work got bought at that time?
Speaker 2: At that time, yes, uh huh.  Yeah, it made for a lot of conversation in the lunchroom so then it also is something that helped just as far as career goes.  A dealer who'd been interested in my work in New York decided to give me a show and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: This is all before you graduated?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you had a show in New York in your senior year?
Speaker 2: Well, no, actually I had some work exhibited there, but then I had a show.  Actually I got a fellowship [James Nelson Raymond Foreign Travel Fellowship from the Art Institute of Chicago] then when I graduated [in 1957] to go to--well, I mean you can do whatever you want, but I went to Europe and did some more work there.  Then I got drafted or at least called to the draft.
Story_ID: 8690
Speaker 1: Didn't you get drafted while you were in school [at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Illinois] or?
Speaker 2: While I was on my fellowship [James Nelson Raymond Foreign Travel Fellowship], I got a draft notice.  Then I came back, and then actually I was working on stuff for an exhibition.  I got my point of entry.  I can't remember what they call it now, but anyway at the point where you have to go down to the Selective Service Bureau and get--well, to the point--I got my draft date extended so I could finish work for an exhibition, and so while I was in basic training, I was having my show in New York [New York], but anyway then I was in the army for two years and then came back to Chicago [Illinois] to resume my career, and then I started teaching for a couple years [at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago and The University of Illinois at Chicago].
Story_ID: 8691
Speaker 1: I want to go back to this first--this [1958] show in New York [New York], though. That was pretty exciting, wasn't it, at the time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was it a small gallery?  Who was--?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a gallery called the Allen Gallery--I mean it was a small gallery, but most of the galleries were small in those days, but it was actually a gallery--(pause) But anyway this gallery was called the Allen Gallery.  It was a gallery that was run by an individual, a man named Charles Allen.  As a matter of fact, his name was Charles Bernstein, but he changed it to Allen, and he had been affiliated with the Downtown Gallery that a woman named Edith Halpert had, and so anyway he decided to open his own gallery.  This was a few years before I started to show there, but he actually at the time was showing Jacob Lawrence and a number of other artists but just a name everybody recognized who had been showing at the Downtown Gallery, and he was able to get Jacob Lawrence to show with him.
Speaker 1: Did you get--what were you being touted as at that point?  What were people saying about your work in the press at that time?  What were they saying?
Speaker 2: They weren't saying a lot.  It's not like big articles about it, but I had--the show did pretty well, like a new talent sort of thing.
Story_ID: 8692
Speaker 1: Your time in the service [U.S. Army], was that--you spent two years there [1958-1960].  Was there anything significant about that period of time except you probably thought you were in prison?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I thought two years was going to be forever.  If you're twenty [twenty-three], two years seems like a long time, one of the interesting things about it was that it was over as soon as it was, but after basic training in [St. Robert] Missouri at Fort Leonard Wood I ended up going to the medics and being stationed at an army medical base, Fort Sam Houston in Texas, San Antonio, so I ended up getting an opportunity to stay there for the rest of my service, and so I was able to get a studio off the base and work.  Matter of fact, I had some shows in San Antonio while I was there, and sent some more work to this gallery [Allen Gallery] in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: So at this point you were only--you're working aggressively still as an artist.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) You never stop.  Okay.
Story_ID: 8693
Speaker 1: So you come back to Chicago [Illinois] after that?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You said you did some teaching.
Speaker 2: Right.  As a matter of fact, I got out of the army.  If you're going to go to school, you could get out three months early so I applied to go to the Art Institute [Chicago, Illinois] for--to work on a master's degree so I did that during the summer, and anyway, I got invited to teach a class there that fall so I started teaching.  Then the next year I was teaching there and at the University of Illinois [at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] which at the time was at Navy Pier.
Speaker 1: And you were teaching art?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were you teaching sculpture?
Speaker 2: Well, sculpture and drawing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, one place I taught a metalcraft class and another place sculpture and another one drawing.
Story_ID: 8694
Speaker 1: You said the piece that got bought by the Museum of Modern Art [New York, New York] by Dorothy Miller that was focused on that Greek figure.
Speaker 2: Arachne.
Speaker 1: Arachne.  Was there--did people ever express surprise that you were black in the choosing of your subject matter?  Did they ever say that you should be doing black subjects?
Speaker 2: That wasn't until later.  Well, it's interesting.  At different points in, say, art history and African American art history there have been people who have been telling black artists what they should do, whether they were blacks, African Americans, colored people.  Like earlier in the [20th] century when you start having--there have always been black artists but at a certain point in time, Harlem Renaissance, whatever, there have been people who would try to define what kind of art African Americans ought to be doing and whether it was for them or for other people or--and what relationship it ought to have either to Africa or the African American experience, but in this period, say, after World War II, at least as far as I know--that is to say, growing up, going to the Art Institute [Chicago, Illinois] as I have gone on to describe earlier, I was not in an environment where anybody was talking about what black artists ought to be doing so in my own experience it was then, say, mostly, say, after the Civil Rights Movement, period of black awareness, black consciousness, that militant blacks started talking about what black art ought to be and how it ought to address the black community.  Then of course, there was a sense then that black artists had a special either obligation to relationship to the black community plus mainstream institution wanted more to identify the blacks that either they were exhibiting or had collected so one became more of a black artist as time went on.
Story_ID: 8695
Speaker 1: You taught here at U of I [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and then it says in 1964 you got a professorship at Yale University [New Haven, Connecticut].
Speaker 2: Visiting artist actually.
Speaker 1: So how was that experience?  Did that have or any of these--you've had several of these [visting artist appointments]--have any of--did that have any specific meaning to you in your career in any way?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, it was a certain kind of distinction plus for instance at Yale, Jack Tworkov, the Abstract Expressionist painter, was Chairman of the Art Department.  He was the one who invited me to come there, and well, like I say, I'd been exhibiting in New York [New York] and came to know artists there so it was something that happened.  Certainly it's interesting to be, say, then among other artists.  At that point in time George Sugarman was a professor at, was teaching at Yale sculpture, a couple other people, but anyway so it was an opportunity to interact with whoever was there to interact with, both students, faculty, whatnot, and it's not all that different from being a visiting artist at Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana] which I was, except that Yale is an Ivy League School and Purdue is a Big Ten School, more known for engineering and football than art, you know.
Story_ID: 8696
Speaker 1: So, Allen Gallery played more of a role than B. C. Holland in [supporting your career]?
Speaker 2: Well, the Allen Gallery was the first sort of--well, what you might call "important gallery."  I mentioned the galleries I was showing in when I was a student.  Then the Allen Gallery--well, first of all, it was a New York [New York] gallery, and it had other artists who obviously were more experienced, better known than I was at the time I began to show there so it was a point of entry into sort of a larger scene from the Chicago [Illinois] scene.  Later on in the middle '60s [1960s] when I started to show with the Holland Gallery [New York, New York,1963], which was at the time in the beginning the Holland-Goldowsky Gallery, that was important for me because the gallery started to, well, represent my work well here and then started to show my work in California where B. C. Holland would take work, and then this fellow Noah Goldowsky had come to Chicago from New York and had been involved with some of the New York galleries and Eaton Gallery for one, and as a matter of fact, I think it was through him that I met Jack Tworkov who later invited me to come to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] so anyway if you look at my resume, there's all these different things so it was all sort of steps or blocks in sort of this career building, expanding thing.
Speaker 1: That's why I'm asking you.  What would you consider significant building blocks along the way?
Speaker 2: I would say they all are.  It's not like there's one--it's not like somebody, say, in entertainment, say, somebody's an understudy, and the star has laryngitis, and they come on and get rave reviews.  An art career is a little different.  You have a show, and you might get a good review, and you might sell it out.  You have another show, and you might not, but one thing sort of leads to another and--
Speaker 1: So are there things that you would consider--pinpoint along the way even though it's all--are there things that are memorable along the way in terms of your career.  Yale you consider that was a good experience.
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure.
Speaker 1: Now the B. C. Holland Gallery led you to--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Allen Gallery, selling things to museums, but as an artist, a visual artist, I think it's more that those things ought to be come to be routine.  You see, if you really have a career, you're always having a show somewhere.  You're always going to be a visiting professor or give a lecture.  See, and I think it's a mistake to sort of say "well, this is this and this is that."  If you're going to have a career for forty some years, every year you're going to be doing something, you know, and getting another commission or something.  If you don't, you wouldn't have a career for forty years.  You'd end up doing something else.
Story_ID: 8697
Speaker 1: Well, I think one of things as far as, say, family and friends goes, say, the fact that you get a degree in art, art education, or something and teach, that's easy enough to follow, okay, but then whatever else happens with exhibiting and galleries, one thing or another, it's not like something that they've had any prior experience with.  Well, nor had I, but at least I'm there, part of the dynamic of the experience, and you live and learn within it, and the extent to which your family follow you along that path or experience it with you, it depends on a lot of things.  In my case--(pause)--you know, my parents.  They had been, as I was growing up, encouraging, and they were looking for any excuse to be proud of me so they were, as certain things would happen.  They'd say "oh, yeah, that's nice," their way of commenting, and then there were opportunities to introduce them to sort of what I was doing which I would avail myself in them.
Story_ID: 8698
Speaker 1: Now who was influencing you around this time, though?  Who were--family plays a role sometimes, and then there are other people that play significant roles, and you had already spoken to [Spanish sculptor Julio] Gonzalez having influence just by the nature of his work and his descriptions of how he approached sculpture, but who else has influenced you in your career?
Speaker 2: Well, like I mentioned the early teacher [Nellie Barr], but beyond that, I would say the association with other artists.  Early on when I first started working with metal, like I saw this work in the exhibition I talked about of Gonzalez, but then there was a sculptor named Joe Goto who was here in Chicago [Illinois] whose work I saw and admired who was working in somewhat the same direction.  There are a variety of situations, but it's more that--like I say, [sculptor] David Smith's work--but it's more that I just sort of one thing sort of led to another.  I looked at a lot of art and would read a lot.  Then actually in the late '60s [1960s] I started to work on this larger-scale work that I've come to do, public work, and then there was like an opportunity through some like architect Walter Natch commissioned me to do a major piece for a building he was doing, and then I had the good fortune to come across some people--well, one guy in particular who had a welding fabricating shop where I started to work on these larger-scale things, and his name was Romy Jete.  He had a place called Crown Welding on the Near West Side [of Chicago] so I got a chance to kind of experience sort of welding fabricating on a large scale through having pretty good access to that facility, but basically I sort of did my own thing.  That was to say there was this over here and that over there to sort of use, and one of the things I like about sculpture for myself is that you use your head and your hands to do it so part of that is to think about things to do and ways to do it and then ways of fashioning and manipulating material and the logistics of it and all that so it creates a kind of well-rounded experience.
Speaker 1: That reminds me of the science and history [you studied] and that some of those a little bit more heavy things in the arts.
Speaker 2: Well, as a matter of fact one of the things over the years is that you come to use all those things that have interested you one way or another.  Either the subjects of projects you do might require some historical research.  Technically you might have to experiment with a certain thing.
Story_ID: 8699
Speaker 1: When you start doing in the late '60s [1960s] large scale [sculpture], what was the motivation behind that?  Was it just an opportunity or was it that you wanted to experiment with a larger form or were you?
Speaker 2: Well, two things.  As a career move--okay, it's one thing to make work and exhibit it and hope to sell it through galleries and whatnot, and then being commissioned to do things is another way of making a living being artists.  That is to say an architect or somebody comes to you and say "we want to commission you to do something for this building" or "for that event to commemorate something," so the beginning of these sort of commissions allowed for an expansion of my career in that direction, in the direction of what you might call public art. And so I've gone on to do a lot of those over the years, and so it's been interesting the kind of challenges and opportunities of commissions of one kind or another, and another thing about that is while initially there was more about sort of the relationship between sort of sculptured forms, objects, and, say, architectural or public space, the commission work I've done over the years has sort of divided itself or at least there's certain branches, you might say, something I've come to call "heritage projects" having to do with maybe African American themes or experience, [Dr] Martin Luther King [Jr] memorials or things that commemorate various events in the African American experience, and then other ones that are just sort of art and architecture projects.
Speaker 1: With your heritage pieces--which ones do you like the best or do you have a favorite amongst those?
Speaker 2: Well, in a way that's sort of--I'm just sort of coming into stride with those.  I've done a few things.  I did a Martin Luther King [Jr] commemorative ['I Have Been to the Mountain'] in Memphis [Tennessee] which I think at the time, middle to late '70s [1970s], was an important thing for me to do.  I did a piece at the Carter Woodson Library here [Chicago, Illinois], 'Jacob's Ladder,' which is one of my favorite pieces.
Speaker 1: Why is that?
Speaker 2: Well, as a matter of fact, because of the way it exists in the space.  It's actually on a large-scale kind of a first sort of demonstration I was able to make of this sort of material-space interaction, the two-part sculpture in this skylit atrium.  It was an opportunity to do on a larger scale what I'd done with more personal sculptures in the past.
Speaker 1: When you got that job, was there a theme to go along with it or was it?
Speaker 2: No, it was my response.  I called it 'Jacob's Ladder.'  Well, first of all, the idea was that there was--that the library board and the librarian thought that doing a sculpture in this atrium would be a thing to do, and so I suggested doing something that would hang in the space which they accepted, so the thought of using the theme, a ladder form and the theme Jacob's Ladder coming from a biblical story and the spiritual, seemed like something to do.  It emerged as a way of relating theme to the experience of space.
Story_ID: 8700
Speaker 1: Now I'd like you to talk a little bit about your process because you have a lot of commission work you've done or are doing.  Just--you were talking about the project that you were doing for Des Moines [Iowa]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Des Moines, yeah.
Speaker 1: And I'm wondering what is the process when you're given a project what is the process you go through as for the thinking out the project and doing it.  You work with the wax forms first, but I'm just wondering if you could describe for us your process.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it varies a little bit depending on the site and on who's commissioning it, whether it's an individual or a committee or a group of people of some kind, and the site, whether the site has--well, whether, how strict you might say the requirements of the site are, and by that I mean--well, say for instance, I was just talking about 'Jacob's Ladder.'  Well, the building was designed with this 30-foot square, 30-foot high atrium so if the sculpture is going to exist within that and hang from the ceiling, there are things that have to be worked out in relationship to the structure of the supporting members of the skylight and the sculpture, and the weight, and all of the things are considered as part of the sort of background to the design process.  On the other hand, if the sculpture is going to just be sitting in the middle of a plaza where there's just a matter of having a foundation so it doesn't sink or tip when it freezes and thaws, then you don't have to think about that as much as maybe just the scale of it in relation to the surrounding space so there are those things.  Then on the other hand, it may be that you're doing a project for a developer who's just developing a piece of property, and the sculpture is seen as an amenity, part of an amenity package.  That's one thing, and you work it out with the architect and the developer and think about materials and their relationship to one another and certain aspects of the form, what it might be about.  On the other hand, if it's a group that wants to memorialize or commemorate something, then you spend a lot more time talking about the background in terms of how the subject or the theme will be developed.  So there all those things, and then so some of it then might have to do, some of the preparation, beginning of the process, might have to do with some level of research, either historical or technical or something, and other times there's maybe not so much of that and more with just experimenting with different kind of forms that would be appropriate, but anyway all that ends up getting developed into some model or sketches that project the idea for other people to review and comment on, and then you develop some dialogue about what it is you're going to do and proceed then from the conceptual model phase to planning the large-scale thing.  Then it's a matter of getting the appropriate materials and planning the large-scale process.
Story_ID: 8701
Speaker 1: Now how many projects are you working on at any given time?  What is the usual life cycle of a project?  I know they have different.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  On the short end, say, six months, long end, any number of years.  I've had some things that have been in the work for as long as ten years--not many, thank goodness--but, say, two, three years.  Yeah, say maybe if I took the whole range of projects over a number of years, a year to two years tends to be what.
Speaker 1: How many projects do you work at any time?
Speaker 2: Well, it depends on how many people come along with commissions, but right now I'm working on about eight different projects.
Speaker 1: So in your forty-year career as an artist, I'm going to go back and ask you more specifics.  In your forty-year career there is the business of art, and I was wondering if you could address that, the things that you've learned or maybe - because people have droughts at different points in their career, but you haven't had--as you said, "I wouldn't have had that many droughts or I wouldn't--" well, it sounds like you wouldn't have been around.
Speaker 2: Well, okay (laughs).
Speaker 1: A ten-year drought wouldn't have worked.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, luckily the droughts haven't been too severe or too long, but yeah, there are ups and downs on a variety of different levels.  It can be--have to do with the economy, what's happening in the art world, and that could be all the way from the way economy affects the art world to changes in taste and attitudes and then just personal things in one's life, whether sickness, health, emotional things, yeah, so anyway, but the thing is there's the law of inertia, things sort of start and tend to continue in that direction.
Story_ID: 8702
Speaker 1: Now you--let's go--I'm going to go back.  You had your first retrospective show in 1967?  That's what it says, the Milwaukee Arts Show [Milwaukee, Wisconsin].
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: I usually think of retrospective as you've been in existence a long time so how did that come about?
Speaker 2: Well, the director of the museum wanted to have a show so in 1967 there was work from 19 say '53 [1953] to 1967 in that exhibition.  It depends.  It wasn't a huge retrospective. (Laughs).
Speaker 1: But it was a retrospective.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: But I also wanted to ask about--because you started with Allen [Gallery, New York, New York], but it looks like you started getting very involved with Dorsky Galleries [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was later on.  I left the Allen Gallery and--
Speaker 1: But this is '69 [1969], it looks like, before--.
Speaker 2: Well, the Dorsky Gallery, yeah, right.  Yeah, that was a gallery who--he was very interested in my work, and yeah, it seemed like a good sort of move to make to exhibit with him and which it was.  I was with that gallery for some years.
Speaker 1: Then you had another retrospective in 1971, but it was at the Museum of Modern Art [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Right, (nods).
Speaker 1: Was there anything significant about that show?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, it's four years later, and I had more work (laughs).
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) You had two retrospectives that year.
Speaker 2: Well, it was the same one from the Museum of Modern Art to the Art Institute [Chicago, Illinois], yeah.  But sure, yeah, it was--part of it had to with the fact that I had this work that people wanted to show.  Part of the reaction was in the reaction to sort of the art politics of the time.  A number of African Americans had been petitioning the Museum of Modern Art to do more with African Americans, and the chief curator at the time--[William Lieberman] Bill--what's his name?  Anyway, I'll think of his name.  Actually he'd been someone who had actually collected my work personally some time ago.  Another gallery I showed with, as a matter of fact, that was kind of significant in Chicago was the Fairweather Hardin Gallery.  This curator had purchased a piece of mine from there, but anyway--it's embarrassing that I can't remember his name.  I'll look it up before we go, but anyway the museum decided they would mount some African American shows.  As a matter of fact, they had two retrospectives, mine and one of [painter] Romare Bearden at the same time, and since the Museum of Modern Art was doing it, the Art Institute decided that they would show it here after it completed its run at the Museum of Modern Art so anyway so that's what happened.  William Lieberman--so anyway he came out.  We talked about having a show and put it together.
Story_ID: 8703
Speaker 1: Do you think that your career would have taken--you say "everything's building blocks along the way," but do you think that the Civil Rights Movement had anything to do with even getting more commission or outside sculpture projects or do you think it wouldn't have really mattered as it related to you?
Speaker 2: Well, no, I think the Civil Rights Movement was important for every African American and beyond that.  Like I think, looking back, you wouldn't know it right at the time, but the Civil Rights Movement, as I see it, initiated a continuing rights revolution which continues today and gave kind of encouragement to, I think, not only within this country, to other sort of groups that have felt themselves under--misunderstood, underrepresented or whatever the courage to come forward, and I think it's a significant catalyst to other attempts at either struggle for independence of one kind of another, whether different countries or groups within other places--so anyway there's this long, continuing legacy of the Civil Rights Movement, and in a way one of the things it did culturally is to sort of redefine cultural participation in ways that are still being worked out.  Like at the beginning of my career, like I say, pre-Civil Rights Movement from the middle '50s [1950s] on, like I say, being an artist was to be kind of misunderstood and being stereotyped, and being African American was misunderstood and stereotyped.  So anyway on the other hand, there were like Cold War issues like freedom of expression in the United States as compared with communist countries, like you'd be in group exhibitions where you were an "American artist."  Well, like today you'd be an "African American artist" plus obviously the Cold War is over, and that's not--so the different changes in focus which offer--all of them offer opportunities of a sort, and you have to be able to see that or come to see it even if you don't see it in the beginning.
Speaker 1: Were you criticized, though, at some point by more black nationalists types as not being black enough?  Was that ever--did that ever come into a factor?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I heard about it from time to time.
Speaker 1: No, I was just saying.
Speaker 2: No, no, I mean, yeah.
Speaker 1: You heard about it, but you didn't personally experience any--.
Speaker 2: Well, not directly.  No black nationalists came knocking on the studio door and said "we got to come in, and we're going to break up all this work that's not relevant."  No, that didn't happen, but I heard --you know.
Story_ID: 8704
Speaker 1: One thing I want to address about your work, there is a sense about it, and it doesn't have to be with sculpture, but there is a sense, and maybe this goes back to this interaction with space and everything, but there's a sense of flight, and I would say most of the things that you do, a sense of upwardness and flight.  I wanted to see if you could address that.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, the idea of space, of using space in the composition and, of course, using some forms that are like wings and all that, and of course, flight as a connotation of freedom so there's all of that that's part of the use of those forms and those compositional devices and attitudes so there's this general tendency that I have to orient my work in terms of like, say, this open, expansive, ascending quality.
Speaker 1: But it goes back to space?  Is it all related to space or is it--why is there that tendency?
Speaker 2: Well, like I'm not obsessed with the idea of, say, either "personal freedom" or "freedom for my people" or something like that but just the idea of freedom, okay, so another thing is I didn't get that far into it, but I remember as a kid, too, being very interested in astronomy and then, of course, the whole space program.  But space is an interesting concept in and of itself, and (pause) well, one could say one has to have actually space to be free in.  You couldn't be free without having space around physically or--so like having to work on energizing the space around it is one thing, either in a self-contained way in a single sculpture or in the way a work relates to an architectural or some other kind of space has been something that I've dealt with in my work.
Speaker 1: Would you say that's the signature part of your work?
Speaker 2: Perhaps, yeah.
Story_ID: 8705
Speaker 1: Now are there--'Jacob's Ladder' [1978 Hunt sculpture] you had pointed to as being one of your favorite heritage pieces.  Are there other favorite--you said "my work divides into two, more architectural and then the heritage," but are there other pieces that you have that are your favorites?
Speaker 2: Well, as a matter of fact, kind of a sequel to that ['Jacob's Ladder'] which is more--which was actually occasioned by that, there's a museum, Hunter Museum [of American Art] in Chattanooga [Tennessee], where I did a piece that I call 'Spatial Interactions' [1991] where there's a large sort of atrium kind of space as you enter this museum, and so I've got a piece that hangs from the ceiling and another piece that cantilevers out from like a balcony into another space, and so that was an opportunity to revisit that sort of idea [from 'Jacob's Ladder'] in a different way, and there it's more, again, relating the piece to the architecture and seeing it as a major work of art within the context--(cut off).
Story_ID: 8706
Speaker 1: So you were talking about the one piece that's in--.
Speaker 2: In Chattanooga [Tennessee]?  Yeah.  Yeah, well, I think I--what I was wanting to do is to contrast that with the so-called "heritage piece," 'Jacob's Ladder,' [1978, Chicago, Illinois] and like I say, the acquisition committee for the museum [Hunter Museum of American Art, Chattanooga, Tennessee] had seen that piece, the 'Jacob's Ladder,' and thought they liked the piece, I suppose because it was Jacob's Ladder but because also the way it worked within that space [atrium of the Carter Woodson Library], within the architectural space, and the space in the museum in Chattanooga offered a similar opportunity to sort of interact and explore the space with a somewhat sort of linear spatial composition, and like I say I call that piece 'Spatial Interactions,' [1991] a rather neutral title that was intended to draw attention to the fact that that's what the subject of that piece was, the interaction of the sculpture with the architectural space.
Speaker 1: Are there other pieces that you particularly like or--because you may have fondness for one versus the other in the whole process?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I think in a way, rather than pointing to--.
Speaker 1: This or this or that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think of my work as this kind of ongoing kind of exploration of various themes, sometimes separate and sometimes in connection with one another, and so that I think it's more for, say, an onlooker or a critic or somebody to see one piece or another as particularly worthy of this kind of comment or that kind of comment.  Generally, I'm most excited about what I'm doing currently.
Story_ID: 8707
Speaker 1: You want to talk about that [current work]?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, like I mentioned, I'm working on several projects right now [January 2001].  Among the heritage-type projects is this one in Des Moines, Iowa, where, first of all, I was invited by a group--they call themselves the Black Officers Memorial Committee--to design a sculpture that would be part of a commemorative area that commemorated the fact that the first African American officers were trained for service in World War I at Fort Des Moines.  Later on as the process was developing this committee was expanded to include women in the Women's Army Auxiliary Corps.  It just happened by, actually I think, more coincidence than anything else that Fort Des Moines became the site of the first training facility for women in World War II.  So anyway now the group is the Black Officers and Women of the Army Auxiliary Corps Committee, and the project's expanded from just doing a sort of sculpture in a public space to like a kind of park or campus, you might say, with some early buildings being restored, a chapel or what had been army officers' barracks for like a museum, and then the sculpture and a plaza and a few other things so I'm working with an architect, a couple different architects, to develop the site and site for the sculpture.  Then I'm working on another place, another project in Augusta, Georgia, Springfield Village Park.  An important component of that is Springfield Baptist Church which is purported to be the oldest African American Church, dates from the 1780s in its beginning.  The building that stands there now is from the 1880s, but anyway there was this village there where free blacks and slaves had a viable community, and then this church was part of that so anyway I'm doing four sculptures and a little playground as part of that in developing a park and working with an architect that I've gotten together with to develop that whole site.  Then I'm doing a piece for Midway Airport [Chicago, Illinois], a piece that'll be at the entrance to the new terminal, and a couple of private commissions.
Story_ID: 8708
Speaker 1: What about the Benton Harbor [Michigan] project?
Speaker 2: Well, as a matter of fact, that's something that I've been involved with for about five years [1996-2001] as part of an effort in Benton Harbor called "Community Renewal Through the Arts Program," and I have there what I call a "satellite studio" where--and I also call it "Richard Hunt's Studio Center."  It's--I was able to take over a building that had been--well, in the '20s [1920s] it was built as an automobile dealership.  Then later on it was outfitted as a job training center that sort of then didn't get put into operation, and so it existed there sort of renovated but disused, but the way it had been outfitted, they were going to have training in welding and stuff so the sort of stations for welding.  Then there were classrooms and offices and some of that are used as galleries and some other shop kind of spaces, and so I do some work on sort of projects there--models and laying out projects and interacting with the community.  We have like some gallery space where there's some of my work, and we've had other exhibitions, and then there are two artists in residence there, one guy, Jesus Lopez who does holograms and photography, and another guy, Isaac Duncan who does sculpture primarily, and then we do a variety of things with other groups in the community, and since I've been there, some of the artists have developed studios there and some galleries and other kind of arts-related activities that kind of--well, it hasn't grown by leaps and bounds, but this community renewal thing is starting to have a little effect, I think, and then actually it's been I think maybe a catalyst for some my activities in that area.  I've done a number of projects in southwest Michigan during this time that I've been there and getting ready to do--well, developing a project in the sort of sister city, St. Joseph, Michigan.  There's an art center there called the Krasl Art Center.  I'll be doing commission in connection with them at the behest of a family as a memorial to the husband, father of this particular family, prominent family in the area.
Story_ID: 8709
Speaker 1: Do you ever see yourself slowing down?
Speaker 2: (Laughs). Well, not unless I have to.  Why slow down?
Speaker 1: You're absolutely right.  That's right.  That's absolutely right.  I have my father who's still going at the age of eighty.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, that gives me hope.
Speaker 1: So I have several other questions really relating to your career as an artist when you look back on your career.  Do you--could you have imagined your life any other way?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess yeah, you can imagine another way.  One of the things is the way that one's life is lived is--you see it as it was at least I see mine as a result of some things that I planned to do, some things I didn't plan to do, and it sort of--but the sort of basic shape, trajectory is something that, yeah, is easy to accept, given that I started out wanting to be a sculptor, and that's what I am.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what do you think accounts for your success because a lot of times people have thoughts about doing things, but they never do them for whatever reason?  Sometimes they have the talent, but they lack the ambition or something.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I've had a certain amount of talent and a certain amount of luck.  I'm trying to remember whether it was [composer] Aaron Copland who said this about [composer] Leonard Bernstein or Leonard Bernstein said about Aaron Copland, but the gist of it was--whichever one of these guys it was, they're both talented--he said "he had the luck to have talent and the talent to have luck."
Speaker 1: Your teacher--I forget her name now.
Speaker 2: Nellie Barr?
Speaker 1: Nellie Barr.  Did you ever have discussions with her afterwards about what she saw in you at that time when you were fourteen your career, because obviously she's been a factor throughout?
Speaker 2: Well, no, no--I never asked her "what did you see in me when I was fourteen?"  That's not the kind of question I would ask, but we've talked about sculpture and my development, her development.  I've certainly told her that I appreciated her interest in me early on which I'm glad I had a chance to do, plus I'm glad we were able to have a relationship that went on over the years so, yeah.
Story_ID: 8710
Speaker 1: With other young people coming along, other artists, whether they be African American or not, but what do you encourage in them or what is your advice to them, just people who are aspiring artists?
Speaker 2: Well, basically to have certain independence of sort of thought as a--think independently about what kind of career they would want to make for themselves, and as a matter of fact, and then also not to ask me for any advice.  Not to be facetious because like for one thing, the art world, just the art world, is so different in 2001 than it was in 1951 that--I would say just looking at it from the perspective of somebody entering college or whatever.  I don't understand what they would be seeing.  I can't look at it through their eyes.  I can look at where I am in relation to either my peers or the connections I have within the art world or whatever, but I wouldn't know where to start so they have to figure out where it is they're starting from and where they think they can go, but one of the things that is interesting about it is that there's just so many more people.  Like even if you factor in inflation, just like becoming an artist is a lot more expensive, and there's so many more people that you have to sort of get in front of in order be seen and known, and there are fewer places to start from just like I described this Artists in Chicago Vicinity Show, Art Fair, stuff like that.  For one thing they don't exist. Anyway, the things I described that were there to involve myself in as a student or emerging artist don't exist in the same way, Artists of Chicago and Vicinity Show or anything like it in other cities.  For instance, the role of, say, an institution like the Art Institute [Chicago, Illinois] in sort of being, say, host and kind of cultural arbiter within a community shared either by a variety of institutions or just--or they don't want to be bothered.  They're more interested in having a larger presence within an enlarged art community so another thing is that since there's so many more people involved in art at all different levels.  For instance, there are more art schools and more people teaching art and more students, and then so their opportunities within kind of the level of sort of becoming an artist that are, say, well supported.  That is to say, one can get a scholarship, one can get support for various kinds of levels of study, research, all like that, but that doesn't help necessarily to define a career as an artist, but within the sort of foundation, government support, sort of--and then there's enough people involved in that so that you can get very involved and stay involved for a long time so you can end up being thirty years old.  You haven't got this grant and that grant and that fellowship and that fellowship but never really had a one-man show or sold anything, and then you can try again.  Take another round, and you're thirty-five.  It's the art version of the perpetual student in like a university, advanced programs, pre-doctoral, post-doctoral, so anyway it's hard to say to somebody who's had all those opportunities go have a show over here and do that.  It may or may not make any sense.
Speaker 1: You had mentioned computers earlier on.  Do you think that's going to change the art industry at all much or has--?
Speaker 2: It's changing everything.
Story_ID: 8711
Speaker 1: The other question I have, you own this building [1017 W. Lill Ave, Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: A lot of artists wouldn't have had the foresight to necessarily own something.
Speaker 2: That's true, yeah.
Speaker 1: And I'm wondering--I know you're a very modest man, but--and you also have in the next room a significant collection so I was wondering if you could sort of--oh, I don't know how do you address that, but there--you have had a business mind about you, I think.
Speaker 2: That's what I got from my father.
Speaker 1: (laughs) Because you said your father had--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so can you just say--.
Speaker 2: Well, my father had a business like when he started out, he rented the space his barbershop was in.  Then he bought the building his barbershop was in, and then he bought another building so that's basically what I've done.  When I started out, I rented an apartment.  It had a basement studio, and I bought a building.  I bought another building, and I bought another building (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.  But what did that say about you that you felt that you needed--you were always--
Speaker 2: It's also about space, as a matter of fact.  There's a big space to make sculpture in that's about space.
Speaker 1: (offscreen voice) And for artists it's about being able to control your environment because you're always put.
Speaker 2: (interviewer) Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now just a couple more questions, oh go on--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) But there is the sense, too, yeah, in which having a career as an artist, making art and selling it is like having a lot of other businesses.  Like if you talk to a businessman who's got a factory somewhere and there's an empty space next to him, he might want to buy it so somebody else doesn't crowd him out or build something else that he doesn't want to see there plus just having an adequate space to do what you want to do in and not be subject to a horrendous rent increase when your lease is up.  All those things is a way of achieving a kind of stable working environment.
Story_ID: 8712
Speaker 1: Now are there any things that you--since you're going to be working a lot more, a lot longer, are there things that you are dying to do or projects that you have not done that you'd love to give your eye teeth to do?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I do a lot of what I want to do within the projects that come along.  It's not like there's some great thing.  I suppose whether I do it or somebody else, somebody does, there ought to be some works that deal with slavery as part of this sort of [African American] heritage thing, but like I say, somebody else can do it, but there's kind of--just as part of--for the exploration of our history and the part slavery played in it plus the part slavery played in emerging capitalism and the whole--there are a lot of ways in which this is coming to the fore and will need to be addressed in one way or another with--some of those will be sculptural expressions as well as books and more movies and whatnot.
Speaker 1: Now with African American artists do you have--you had talked very forcefully about young artists coming along, but African American artists--have you seen change in this fifty-year period about how they're accepted or their acceptability or their future in the mainstream?  Do you have any?
Speaker 2: One thing that can be said is that there coming to be what you might call a "black mainstream" for them to swim in, and there's a "main mainstream," and it depends.  There'll always be a few artists that are involved with that, but they aren't necessarily the artists that--first of all, they're few and far between, but then there's something that makes them acceptable to the main mainstream that would probably make them less acceptable to the black mainstream.  Take [artist Jean-Michel] Basquiat [1960-1988], for example.  You've got dope addict or homosexual or whatever.  Kill yourself with drugs.  His paintings are selling for millions of dollars to Swiss collectors.  Not many other African Americans would touch that or any--name some--but it's not the kind of artist you'd want your son to grow up to be like.
Speaker 1: So as a people we [African Americans] are still pretty conservative is what you're saying in some respects.
Speaker 2: Well, it's not necessarily conservative.  It's all relative (laughs)
Speaker 1: Well, you're accepted in the main mainstream, too, though.
Speaker 2: To a certain extent, yeah.
Story_ID: 8713
Speaker 1: I have just I think one more question, and that is what would you want--what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not--I don't feel that I can really say or control that.  I just like to have a lot of sculpture around, and then it'll kind of sort itself out over time.  A lot of what I do is public enough so people going to have access to it if they're interested in what I've done.  I talk about being interested in architecture, and as I was growing up in Chicago [Illinois], I got interested in work like [Louis Henry] Sullivan and [Frank Lloyd] Wright and people like that, and the thing is like, say, when I was growing up, there were a lot of Sullivan buildings around, a lot of them on the South Side [of Chicago].  It didn't start out to be that way, but it ended up being a black community, but most of his buildings are gone, and if he hadn't built a lot of them, there wouldn't be any left, and then the time when there's enough either nostalgia or whatever for things that have sort of survived over a period of time that you want to preserve so it's interesting to have a lot of stuff around so some of it will end up being left at a point in time when people will be interested in preserving it.
Speaker 1: One more question and that is--this sort of ties into the legacy, but what do you want to be remembered for?  When people say "Richard Hunt," what do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Well, for being a sculptor.
Speaker 1: How about Richard Hunt, the person?
Speaker 2: Richard Hunt, the person, is a sculptor.
