Story_ID: 127761
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Augustus F. Hawkins, H-A-W-K-I-N-S. Better known as Gus, G-U-S, rather than Augustus.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what does the F stand for?
Speaker 2: Freeman, my mother's [Hattie Helena Freeman] maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 31, 1907.
Speaker 1: And where were you born?
Speaker 2: --In the city of Shreveport, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what is your occupation?  We always ask this question.
Speaker 2: Currently?
Speaker 1: Well, no, I guess what your occupation--
Speaker 2: I'm a retired congressman.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: What is what?
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date, September 12, 1903, 1903--correct, 2003 [September 12, 2003].
Speaker 1: Correct.  Okay, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in the office of the Christie Group in the City of Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 127762
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish lightweight questions that we ask and they only deserve a short answer, actually.  The first question is sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is lamb chops.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Not particularly, but if I had to choose, it would probably be a dark blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time is primarily in the spring of the year.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: We have always set aside August as a vacation month, largely because my anniversary falls in August.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite destination for vacation?
Speaker 2: We would prefer, I would think, as a family, the Monterey Peninsula in the State of California.
Speaker 1: Okay, sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, I go back to the time that I started campaigning for public office in Los Angeles [California] in the '30s, 1930s--"Gus for US and US for Gus."
Story_ID: 127763
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright, that'll do.  Okay, can you tell me something about your family history?  I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of, of your family and your father's side--both sides.  Can you give me your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Hattie H. "Helena" Freeman, F-R-E-E-M-A-N, which is my middle name.  My dad's name was Nyanza, N-Y-A-N-Z-A, Hawkins, H-A-W-K-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now your father's name was Nyanza Hawkins.  Now, where does that name come from?
Speaker 2: Nyanza is an old African name, meaning of course, in Africa, lake.  My grandfather was an explorer and he explored the continent of Africa and I think that is how he came to the idea of naming his son Nyanza, N-Y-A-N-Z-A.  It's a very unusual name.
Speaker 1: Well, it's very unusual to find a man, I guess, in the latter part of the 19th century, a black man, exploring Africa, too.  So, can you tell us a little bit about your grandfather on your father's side?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was from Ogletree, England, and he was an explorer by nature and actually vocation.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was an Englishman, as such, your, your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --That is correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--so he explored East Africa and--
Speaker 2: All of Africa and eventually came to the United States.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Wasn't his destination, but so, ended up that being where his final mission carried him.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any, any stories about your grandfather that are (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I, I really don't, don't recall my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, there are no stories handed down through, through the family about him, in terms of--
Speaker 2: Not, not--only that he was a collector of relics and early traditional pieces of pottery, but, as far as anything specific, I'm, I'm not too versed in it and we're talking about more than one hundred years ago.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes sir.
Speaker 2: --So, so ideas begin to fade a little bit and it's hard to recall things.
Story_ID: 127764
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have, do you have any knowledge of your grandmother--your father's [Nyanza Hawkins] mother?
Speaker 2: No I don't.  That part of the family is almost unknown to me.  I was the youngest of five children and I suspect that anything that would be specific is somewhat beyond my memory at this time.  My interest of primarily in, in current events and future trends and I suspect that when we getting--get into talking about one hundred years ago, it takes me away from my main interest at this time, which has, in my opinion, has to be focused on what are the prominent issues today and what are the prospects for continued prosperity and peace in the world and harmony among people.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  But this is a historical document and we, we're just trying to, you know, I guess, cover your origins, as we do everybody, you know.  So we ask these questions, and, and they, they don't, you, you don't have to get, get into great detail.  But I just, you know, need to ask, you know.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, well, I would think people would remember me most by what I have been able to do.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: In recent times rather than my background because I don't consider my background to be that significant or that outstanding that people can in a sense appreciate as much as they would what we're faced with today and what we have to do.
Speaker 1: Well, I can appreciate that, but I think when we study the lives of great people and people who have accomplished things it's instructive to know where they came from and how they had to--with what they had to do to accomplish the things that they accomplished.
Speaker 2: Well I--I appreciate that, and I understand the significance of it and unfortunately I, I just don't, don't see in my background things that are unusual, or in a sense they contradict a little bit what--who I am and what I am today.
Story_ID: 127765
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well I don't think anything--I don't think we're trying to do that.  We're not trying to contradict what you're doing today, but we just--we always spend a little time asking about how you--who your parents are, how you grew up.  It doesn't have to be a dissertation, you know, but it's--we always ask these questions.  Did, did your--was your father [Nyanza Hawkins] born in England, too?
Speaker 2: No, my, my, my father was a native of New Orleans [Louisiana] in Louisiana.  My mother [Hattie Helena Freeman] was born in Texas and was part Indian.  So, there's a mixture there that I suppose runs throughout the family because the complexion of every one of my brothers--I had five full brothers and a sister and we all are different complexions, shading all the way from possibly light brown to somewhat on the white complexion side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I, being the whitest of all.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, at least in appearance anyway.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, how many brothers and sisters do you have, or did you--
Speaker 2: Well there were five children, one sister and four brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there, is there a, a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: I'm not familiar with that, really, to be frank with you.  My mother was brought to Shreveport [Louisiana] at an early age as I recall, and my dad was a pharmacist and I suppose they met at a drug store and fell in love with each other.  That was the beginning of that family.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, let's see.  Did your--say your father was, was raised in Louisiana and so, did his father like, migrate from England to Louisiana and live or how did that happen?
Speaker 2: Well my father moved to--to the northern part of the state [Louisiana] in his travels.  At one time he operated excursions on the Mississippi River and the Red River, which runs through the northern part of the state, was a tributary of the Mississippi [River] and for some reason my father settled in Shreveport, began to accumulate property and upon his death had left quite a large amount of property in the city of Shreveport.  He was very conservative, conservative Republican, may I say, speaking politically now, which is somewhat of a contradiction because I was a Democrat or only inclination of political persuasion of my mother, who was quite liberal in her views.  My dad was [Roman] Catholic and my mother was Methodist.  I was brought up as a combination of the two.  I attended some Catholic schools, but for the most part as a child in the city of Shreveport had a tutor who tutored me because my dad wanted so far as possible to avoid a segregated public school.  And it was not really until I--the family moved West, that I became acquainted with public schools.  I've been a strong advocate of public schools ever since then, but, that's why I say my background, it's somewhat contradictory of my current situation, my current feeling about things, my current reaction.  My dad was sympathetic to my mother's view that I was raised as a Methodist, rather than in--as a Catholic.
Story_ID: 127766
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, the--your family moved to Los Angeles [California] when you were young, right?
Speaker 2: We moved first to Denver, Colorado.  I was, as I remember, about ten years of age and as a result of a unfortunate coal strike in Colorado [Colorado Coalfield War, 1913-1914], my dad [Nyanza Hawkins] decided that it would be better to move west to the West Coast.  And we moved then to Los Angeles.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how old were you when you, when your family moved (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Approximately eleven years of age.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Tell us something about your mother [Hattie Helena Freeman].  What was she like, and you said she was, she was a Methodist.  And did she have a chance to go to school and--
Speaker 2: Well, she went to school in Texas and as I recall, at an early age, moved--when she moved to Louisiana she was--she completed high school, but never attended college.  She was a very devout mother and as I recall, a very wonderful mother-type.  She loved cooking, for example and she was quite fond of traveling every August to the family.  My mother and most of the children were sent on a trip to northern cities, Chicago [Illinois], Kansas City [Missouri], and I recall once to New York City [New York].  It was in the time of Jim Crow, traveling, and as I recall, we would occupy a, of course, a segregated coach and my mother would make preparations for the kids to sleep on different benches and we enjoyed the traveling.  I recall that I had a reputation of leaving a shoe in almost every city we traveled to for which I got a good spanking at the end of the travel but I was not a well-disciplined or behaved child, unfortunately, but somewhat spoiled but my mother was always the--the key to the family. She was the unifier that always kept the family together, and being the youngest of all children until the time that--that a girl came to the family, I was the spoiled one.  After the--the arrival of a sister, my dad then became the father who devoted his affection mostly to--to the daughter of the family for which I always had a little fight because she got the breast of the chicken and I got the leg.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you--now you grew up until age eleven in Shreveport [Louisiana] and then the rest of your youth was spent in Los Angeles area.
Speaker 2: That is right.
Story_ID: 127767
Speaker 1: Can you give us some sense of some of the sights and smells and sounds and smells of growing up in, in, in [Shreveport] Louisiana and Los Angeles [California]?
Speaker 2: Only vaguely.  I recall that I was always getting into trouble because living in a segregated climate and having Jim Crow conditions prevailing.  For example, I recall getting on a street car and of course, it was always a sign indicating where the blacks would sit and where the whites would sit, and I persisted in sitting behind in the Jim Crow section. Many times the conductor would come back and mistake my complexion and move the sign so that I would sometimes end up in the white section, which was always a problem because it created a situation where, as I recall, many times when I wanted to go some place I avoided the street cars because I didn't want to run into such a situation.  We lived on one hill in the city of Shreveport that was segregated and a nearby hill was completely white, and sometimes I'd get into the situation of being on the white hill, rather than the black hill and the white kids would chase me back and sometimes the black kids would then begin to try to defend.  I always got into strange situations of that nature and I guess that was the reason why eventually my dad [Nyanza Hawkins] decided to avoid such troubling conditions.  It was better to move away, even though his fortune was accumulated in Shreveport.  And so he decided to move to Denver, Colorado because a person, a lady who had been in school with him, in college with him, had married and moved to Denver.  So we moved to Denver, but as I say, we only stayed approximately a year before moving west to Los Angeles.
Story_ID: 127768
Speaker 1: Okay, now you said your--your father [Nyanza Hawkins] went to school, where, where did he go to college?
Speaker 2: --To Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] in, in New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Southern University.
Speaker 2: Southern University.
Speaker 1: Baton Rouge [Louisiana], right?  Baton Rouge, yeah.
Speaker 2: It was in Louisiana--
Speaker 1: Oh, it was in, okay.
Speaker 2: --While he was living in New Orleans.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, tell us about Los Angeles [California].  What was your impression of Los Angeles when you got to Los Angeles?
Speaker 2: Well, I was delighted and had a certain amount of freedom, enjoyed the climate.  I was an avid tennis player, and that fit me quite rightly.  And as a result of that I realized that I spent a large amount of my time on tennis courts in the city of Los Angeles rather than places where I should have been, developed other friends who enjoyed outdoor sports.  I was also interested in baseball--played second base on baseball teams--and enjoyed also the beaches.  We were very fond of the beaches nearby in the city of Los Angeles, Venice [California], Santa Monica [California], Ocean Park [California] and a few others.  But the outdoor life was always a hobby of mine, and I soon developed somewhat of an interest in, in schools as a secondary interest, and always aspired to be a civil engineer.  That was my ambition in life, wanted to get into engineering and to build bridges and buildings and things of that nature.  It came almost instinctively as my second nature, and for that reason I developed a great taste for mathematics, some physical sciences, loved physics and really set out to--to make that my life.
Speaker 1: Now, where did you first go to grade school, just to, in, in--
Speaker 2: In Los Angeles.  (Simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I went to [William] McKinley [Junior] High [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: That was for high school and grade school.
Speaker 2: That was grade school, elementary, grade school.
Speaker 1: Okay, it was called McKinley--
Speaker 2: But I was there only about two years before I went into high school, and that was [Thomas] Jefferson High School in Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was, what was Los Angeles like, or what was black Los Angeles like in 1918, when, when you--
Speaker 2: Los Angeles was highly segregated as compared of course, to where we came from.  It was like a paradise, but it was filled with signs--no colored trades solicited.  The theaters were segregated, and most of the businesses catered to white trade.  It was not at all the ideal place from that point of view that it is today.  And for that reason, until--of course we had housing segregation as well.  Most of the property had what was called restricted covenants, covenants that buyers of property would not sell to anyone except those of the white race and almost every piece of property was covered with such a restrictive covenant.  The job situation was fairly open, but there weren't too many jobs available to blacks at that time.  That was before the age of civil rights and fair employment practices and so on.  Teaching was a coveted profession, and to be a teacher was to be really respected and to be somebody, but of course, the schools were largely segregated, if not by law, by custom.
Story_ID: 127769
Speaker 1: Kind of describe black Los Angeles [California] for us in those days and what part of Los Angeles did your family live in?
Speaker 2: Well, largely most of the blacks, I would say two-thirds of them, lived in what was known as the South Central area.  That would be, at that time, from 9th Street in South Los Angeles [California], to about Slauson Avenue, and between Alameda [Street] and Avalon Boulevard.  Avalon Boulevard on the west was the dividing line, for blacks lived east of Avalon, the whites, west of Avalon and the prominent newspaper which somewhat tied the group together was the Eagle, the California Eagle, which was published by the Bass Family--Joe Bass being the head of the family. Charlotta Bass was his wife.  They were big Republicans and the biggest publisher in the West.  About the beginning of the '30s [1930s], as young people, a group of us got together and encouraged a young black by the name of Leon Washington [Jr.] to organize out of a throw away what led to the publication of the Los Angeles Sentinel, which was the Democratic newspaper, the more liberal one.  And it was Leon Washington who was, who became one of the prominent civil right fighters and the idol of most of us in the young group.  The prominent church was the [People's] Independent Church of Christ [Los Angeles, California], which later became the church that the minister of which, the minister of which later became one of the young men who was in our group.  And, so we had the Methodist church under a minister by the name of [A.P.] Shaw. A.P. Shaw was probably the most prominent minister that we had at that time and as I recall, the most prominent professional was a Doctor H.C. Hudson [Henry Claude Hudson] who had migrated to Los Angeles from Shreveport [Louisiana], a friend of my dad [Nyanza Hawkins], and was perhaps the main organizer of the local branch of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  The NAACP was a dominant organization outside of the lodges.  The lodges were very prominent.  The Elks Lodge which was located on Cen--Central Avenue and later became the meeting place, a civic meeting place of most of the people in Los Angeles.  Also at 12th [Street] and Central [Avenue], which was a prominent intersection for two streetcars running south along--south of Central Avenue.  It was a prominent intersection for black life but it was altogether a segregated area, but it was one which became well settled and a site of many beautiful homes because the--those who accumulated wealth could not move into the white neighborhood because of--because of the restrictive covenants that applied to most of the property.  And I recall that one of our early battles in the city of Los Angeles was when Dr. Hudson, having accumulated a good fortune, attempted to move into a white neighborhood on the west side of the city, was boycotted and besieged by protesters, some of whom shot into his home, and it was quite a battle, which we had to do everything we could to defend his right to move into that neighborhood.  The neighborhood was beginning to change. As blacks moved in, the whites primarily of Italian origin, moved out, and what was once a highly segregated neighborhood with restrictive covenants on all of the property became black, and later in the history of the city, Hispanics began moving in and today in the year 2003, I would say is largely referred to as an Hispanic community rather than black because blacks moved south and west while Hispanics moved into homes that they vacated.  So, it was a great change that occurred primarily in the '30s [1930s], '40s [1940s] and since then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 127770
Speaker 1: Now, I didn't want to get--I want to go back to your schooling and catch up with that history. Well, but that's a good description of what Los Angeles [California]--
Speaker 2: Well, I don't recall very much about elementary school because as I say, I had been accustomed to being tutored and private schools but I apparently did all right in elementary school to the extent that I earned the right to go to high--high school.  So I rather, I would say, might say, I skipped elementary school altogether--public elementary school.  But, the high school to which I went at that time--[Thomas] Jefferson [High School, Los Angeles, California]--was primarily white, and there were only, out of possibly two or three thousand students, there were probably only about forty or fifty black students and among which was Dr. Ralph Bunche was in the high school that I went to.  Most lived in the neighborhood, which as I recall, was 42nd Street off of Central Avenue.  And the--but, most of the prominent students attended Jefferson High School.
Speaker 1: --From all over the city?
Speaker 2: --From all over the city.  Although the west side, there was a settlement of blacks on the west side who were in--more affluent as a group, than those who lived on the east side.
Speaker 1: Now, you said you were a tennis player in high school, and before, you know, you, you enjoyed tennis, did you play on a tennis team in high school?
Speaker 2: In high school I did, yes.
Speaker 1: What else did you enjoy in high school to do, I mean?
Speaker 2: My favorite subject in high school, as I recall was mathematics and later physics.  I made the mistake one year of registering in vocational education subjects because I loved drafting and woodwork but had to make that up later because I wanted to go to college and at that time, the University of California at Los Angeles [UCLA], was a--known as a part of the University of California System.  We were the Bruins.  They were the Bears.  And I wanted to go to the University of California [Berkeley, Berkeley, California] to go into engineering because UCLA at that time did not have an engineering course as such.  And so my old ambition was to get through college and to go to Berkeley.  In the '30s [1930s] there unfortunately developed under the [President Herbert] Hoover administration [1929-1933], a great depression--the Great Depression of the '30s [1930s], which meant that, for example, my dad's [Nyanza Hawkins] bank accounts were dried up and he lost mo--most of his fortune.  So, one result of it as I recall was those kids in the family who wanted to graduate from college had to do it the rough way.  I was able to obtain a job even during the Great Depression [1929-1939] in a drug store as a soda--what we call a soda jerker.  And I mixed and mixed drinks and--soft drinks, of course, washed dishes and so forth and got through UCLA as a result of that.
Speaker 1: Now, just to check the time, you, you graduated from high school in--was it '25 [1925], 1925?
Speaker 2: '26 [1926].
Speaker 1: '26 [1926]--
Story_ID: 127771
Speaker 1: -Okay, and then, then you went on to UCLA [University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2: UCLA
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: --And I graduated from UCLA in 1932.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you had to work your way through--
Speaker 2: I had to work my way through college as being a soda jerker or sales clerk in a drug store and delivering things in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is your, your father [Nyanza Hawkins] still operating as a pharmacist in, in LA [Los Angeles, California] when he was--
Speaker 2: No, he operated a retail establishment that sold soft drinks and tobaccos.
Speaker 1: Okay, sort of a confectionary or something--
Speaker 2: But he was largely retired.  We're getting to the point where he had become quite in age.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell me in, in high school and in college, who were the teachers that influenced you the most?
Speaker 2: Well, in the--on the west, on the east side where I went to school-[Thomas] Jefferson [High School, Los Angeles, California], all of the teachers primarily were white because it was still a white school even though the student body was changing.  The principal was white and the--most of the schools throughout the [Los Angeles] County were white schools except the few that were in the segregated areas that were blacks.  And so some of the blacks began to enter into the education system, but the--the, the [Los Angeles Unified School District] Board of Education was completely black--pardon me, I'm sorry, completely white.  And one of the great battles we had was to try to get a black as a member of the Board of Education.  Eventually we got one, but that was in the, in the '40s [1940s], as late as the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so were, were, were there any teachers at all that were helpful or tried to develop you, or took, took a special interest in you?
Speaker 2: There were a few in high school that I recall.  Primarily, as I recall, the mathematics teacher and also, we had at that time, a very sophisticated civic education and I recall a great interest in that.  I can't recall the names of the teachers, unfortunately.
Story_ID: 127772
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you, when you were on the verge of graduating from high school [Thomas Jefferson High School, Los Angeles, California], you, you wanted to go into the sciences, you said, right?  Not--okay.
Speaker 2: The sciences were my main interest.
Speaker 1: And what did you major in in, in UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2: In UCLA, I majored in economics.  The--as I say, they did not have engineering as a part of the--engineering department.  I was still hopeful that one day I'd get to the University of California at Berkeley [Berkeley, California].  I never made it because--getting into another part of my life--in the '30s [1930s], we, as young people were very much interested in trying to control the leadership, or to get some leadership, largely through people like Leon Washington [Jr.], who was the editor of the [Los Angeles] Sentinel.  And so, we became interested in the only black who had ever been elected at that time to a statewide office, an individual by the name of Fred Roberts [Frederick Madison Roberts], who was a Republican member of the [California] State Assembly in Sacramento [California].  And we felt that the fact that we didn't get good jobs and didn't get restrictive covenants outlawed and so forth, we blamed on the lack of leadership, the fact that the person who represented us in Sacramento happened to be of the Republican persuasion.  At that time most blacks were Republican because of historical reasons.  [Abraham] Lincoln had freed the slaves and therefore, they became Republicans in order to fight the Democrats.  And from that led-- that led, many of us as young people, to want to change the leadership.  Most of the organizations and leaders in Los Angeles [California] were Republicans.  The ministers were Republicans.   The civil rights groups were still not yet well known.  That movement, the civil rights movement in Los Angeles largely came out of the [The Benevolent and Protective Order of] Elks [of the United States of America] organization--the civil liberties union of the Elks.  And every week a forum was held at the Elks auditorium featuring the civil liberties union.  That became almost classified as a left wing group at that time.
Speaker 1: Usually the Elks are associated with parties and music in most black communities--and I, they, perhaps they do more, but that's what the public sees mostly.  But the Elks of Los Angeles were, were involved in reforms.
Speaker 2: At that time, the civil liberties union of the Elks was a place to be on Friday night at their forum.  And as young people, many of us began to participate in their forum because we had an opportunity therefore, to talk about the leadership. The newspapers were Republican.  The organizations largely were Republican led.  Most of the professionals were Republicans.  Even the leaders of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored Peoples] in Los Angeles were Republican.  At that time one of the high positions among blacks was superintendent of the county employees in the Los Angeles [County] Hall of Records [Los Angeles, California] and administrative buildings were Republican.  So to get a job you had to be really a Republican or a supporter of the Republican Party.  And so we had to break through that, that glass ceiling.
Story_ID: 127773
Speaker 1: Now, did you start becoming involved in, in political organizing in the--
Speaker 2: I was--
Speaker 1: --In college [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] or after college?
Speaker 2: --I never had an interest in politics in school, even in high school.  Other than civics, I avoided that because my interest was to go into engineering.  And becoming an elected official was about the last thing I had in mind.
Speaker 1: Well, did you encounter, I know, was it the, was it the age of--we're on the cusp of the depression [Great Depression, 1929-1939]--when you were in school and I know there was a lot of organizing activity in, in labor in those days.  Did you encounter any of those kinds of organizers--
Speaker 2: The only--
Speaker 1: --Or activists in, in, in college? (Simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --The only interest in labor that I expressed--and that was in late life--was in the railroad unions because a lot of the more affluent families were connected with the railroads.  The railroad wages, cooks, the redcaps, the porters were all railroad people.  And one of my first friendships with a union person was A. [Asa] Philip Randolph, who became my idol.
Speaker 1: Now that was later on though, not, not in college, right?
Speaker 2: Well that was after college.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  So how's that, so, (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: --So there was no--you didn't--
Speaker 2: I graduated from the college before I even, let's say became interst-- involved with anything political or political organizations.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 127774
Speaker 1: Now, you said that you were involved with a group of other young people that wanted to change things--
Speaker 2: They were largely young people at the University of California, Los Angeles [Los Angeles, California], which as I say at that time, it was before it became a fully accredited part of--of the university system [University of California System].  They were in a sense, subordinate and--
Speaker 1: --To the University of California.
Speaker 2: --To the University at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California].  It was known as the Southern Branch but during the time that I went there--that is, the first year that I went there--they became UCLA.  When I graduated, mine was one of the first classes to graduate from the new university, U- known as UCLA.  Prior to that, they were the University of California, Southern Branch.  As I say, a group of us who, in a sense dissident from the local leadership because we felt that our future in getting good jobs and going into the professions and so forth, depended on changing the--the leadership, which meant changing the only elected official at that time who was black--the only elected official statewide.
Speaker 1: That was [Frederick Madison] Roberts, right?
Speaker 2: That was Fred Roberts.  Not a, in anyway a bad guy, but just unfortunately, affiliated in the views of many of us, too much with the status quo, that is with a group that wanted a pledge of allegiance to the Republican Party.  So we became Democrats, largely as a matter of self-interest from the view point that we had and so, we decided to get together, young people. We'd get together and support a candidate against him, and we did that during one campaign, and that would have been in 1932, and we almost won.  We almost defeated him but we found out afterwards that they had put in a candidate, which appealed to us, who they controlled.  So we were in a sense tricked into supporting a candidate that wanted to lose.  That led us two years later, in the next election, to meet and decide we'd select one of our group.  We wouldn't again trust the leadership.  And by a process of elimination, almost, I went around said who's going to make the best candidate and it was because I had never been involved in, I suppose, in anything too much anyway, that I had--didn't have anything against me, that I was selected fortune--fortunately, or unfortunately as a candidate.  And so we started from scratch as a result of that, but it so happened that was the year that [President] Franklin Delano Roosevelt and his New Deal [1933-1938] began to change the opinions of many of the people in the district, if not the leadership, at least, the rank and file.  And so as a result of that, you had the, the New Deal appealing to blacks, most of who were out of jobs altogether, who--the banks had closed up on many of the affluent blacks.  We had the beginning of blacks entering into the labor movement, breaking down discriminatory practices in the trade unions and so on.  And you had a national leader, such as A. [Asa] Philip Randolph, who had a great influence on those in Los Angeles [California] who made a living off of the railroads.  So in a sense, things came together, and it was because of this coming together of different movements and forces, that I was elected by, just barely elected by fifteen hundred votes.
Story_ID: 127775
Speaker 1: Now, what was your campaign slogan again?
Speaker 2: In the campaign we--we entered the campaign without any financial backing of any kind, from anyone, and most of the leadership, practically all the leadership against us.  So we began to try to be as creative as possible.  And I recall that one of the slogans that we developed was one, "Gus for US and US for Gus."  Now, we capitalized "US", so that it stood for US too.  And everything we did we used that theme.  And it had an appeal because it meant that we were for the people.  And our campaigns were built around the idea of bringing the [62nd] district back to the people.  We had to overcome the opposition of a district that had been loyal Republican basically because they had only one elected official in the state [California], which was Fred Roberts [Frederick Madison Roberts].  And there was a loyalty to keeping him there because he was black.  And it was felt that having a black in the [California] State Assembly meant that we would be protected in our civil rights, and regardless of how he voted, the district primarily supported him.  The leaders supported him.  And the whole idea was keep black representation in Sacramento [California].  And that was a very strong concept to overcome.  But it so happened that the district was about 50-50 white, between white and black voters.  All the blacks lived by segregation, east of Avalon Boulevard, but from Avalon Boulevard west, which was about a third or a little more than a third of the district, was completely white, without exception.  So, in the race the problem was to get as many of the blacks as we possibly could, hopefully, to get a majority, which we never got.  But it so happened in the election, we were able to get enough blacks so as to keep fairly even until we got over to Avalon Boulevard, which was the dividing line because once you got among the whites, at that time, the white Democrats were ninety percent Democratic.  So, it was just the opposite.  So we were able to keep close enough so that when we got among the whites we were able to pick up that large majority Democratic vote among the whites.  So that was somewhat to the advantage of the campaign.  Fred Roberts later said that he was defeated not because of the blacks but because the whites in the district assumed that I was white rather than black and that they voted for me for that reason.  And he ran against me even after I won that first time on the basis that he was going to clarify the campaign in such a way that the blacks would know that I was not black and the whites would be well aware of the fact that they wo--would have to vote for another black person.
Story_ID: 127776
Speaker 1: So it happened that after that election it was a [President Franklin Delano] Roosevelt ticket, that was automatic, almost automatic.  However, in my own political career, I had as many Republicans persons on my side as Democrats.  And at that time in California you could run on both tickets and thereafter, I kept campaigning on both tickets and won on both tickets but I had a tough time getting enough Republicans to sign my petition.  I needed to have forty Republicans to sign that petition.  So I had to keep friendly with forty Republicans in order to run on both tickets.  And in that way we were able to overcome Fred Roberts [Frederick Madison Roberts] and his machine, machine in votes because it was a loose net thing.  It was a matter of history that even my own dad [Nyanza Hawkins] was a Republican by tradition.  And it was only when I became a candidate that my mother [Hattie Helena Freeman] shamed him into voting--changing his registration merely because his son was running for public office, and he had to change his registration to vote for his son, and that was the only thing.  Thereafter, he became a great Roosevelt supporter, but up un--until that time, no argument we could use in order to get him to vote Democratic.
Speaker 2: That's a story that's pretty much told all over the country, black people trying to make that transition at that point.
Speaker 1: It was a great transition.  And it was because of the Great Depression [1929-1933].  I would say that [Herbert] Hoover made Democrats out of more people than the Democratic Party did.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, you were elected in 1934 for the term--
Speaker 1: I was elected in--
Speaker 2: --In '35 [1935]--
Speaker 1: --The campaign of 1934 to serve in the [California] State Assembly, which convened in 1935.
Speaker 2: --So, you were twenty-seven years old?
Speaker 1: At that time, yes.
Speaker 2: A young man.
Speaker 1: I was a youngest member of the [California] State Assembly at that time.  I eventually became the oldest and the longest serving, and the campaign, strange to say, that we used against Fred Roberts was, that he had been in office too long.  He had been in office sixteen years and we said that was too long, too long and we used that as a campaign issue.  I served for twenty-eight years and in the State Assembly, and went to [United States] Congress in 1962, after having served twenty-eight years in the State Assembly.
Story_ID: 127777
Speaker 1: Okay, now what was--now you're twenty-seven years old. You're elected to the California State Assembly.  Are you the only black--
Speaker 2: At that time.
Speaker 1: --Okay, representative in the State Assembly.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what, what was that like?  Now, you--
Speaker 2: It was a very lonely position because I had the whole idea of protecting against any change in civil rights that might be offensive to the African American constituency.  Fred Roberts [Frederick Madison Roberts], for example, had introduced a bill to provide for a Tuskegee-type of school in the valley--the great valley of California [Central Valley], which would be segregated, and we used that against him.  But, the idea was that you had to be careful that no legislation was introduced in Sacramento [California], in the state capital that jeopardized civil rights.  We had done away with the restrictive covenants by that time.  We had done away with signs that prohibited black trade in the restaurants, even in the main streets of Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: Now what time are we talking about here?  We're--
Speaker 2: We're talking--we're talking about--
Speaker 1: --When did you do that?  I mean, when was that done?
Speaker 2: --We're talking about the late '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: This whole thing changed.  We had a prominent black attorney by the name of Loren Miller, who led the campaign to outlaw restrictive covenants.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So that was in--
Speaker 2: --And that succeeded.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was one of the issues then that you faced when you were elected, trying to get rid of the restrictive covenants and the-
Speaker 2: Right, absolutely.
Speaker 1: And the, okay.  And then---
Speaker 2: But we didn't have, we didn't have any appointed state officials.  They--the highway patrol, for example, all black police officers, all--pardon me, all white police officers, no black.  We didn't have a black commissioner and social welfare, athletics, all of these commissions were not--were, were segregated.  At the time that I was elected, we also supported a state senator, Culbert Olson, who became governor, and we all, we ran on the same ticket.  And we got pledges from Culbert Olson, if he were to become governor, that he would name blacks to these various commissions, which fell to my privilege of naming them largely because I was the only black in Sacramento and very close to the governor at that time.  We had never had a black judge, but we got a commitment out of Culbert Olson that he would name a black judge and fortunately we had that privilege.  And the first black judge named came from the Olson, Olson administration, happened to be a brother-in-law of mine, Edwin Jefferson.  Edwin Jefferson served and--and eventually became an--an appellate court judge.  And there are so many black judges in California now, I, I've forgotten the--the number.  But, that was the very beginning of that.  I had the privilege of naming the first black to the highway patrol, a very outstanding police officer from Los Angeles.  And we took pride in that.  The fire department was all white.  We were able to change that--that situation to the time that, actually, when there was a fire alarm, blacks would go near the fire department to see blacks on the fire trucks.
Speaker 1: People would--actually, were that excited?  They were actually (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We were all excited.  Euphoria.  We--when, when a black traffic cop at a prominent intersection was named, we--blacks would go down to that intersection all day long just to see this black directing traffic.  That's how crude the situation was.  Fortunately, that has changed dramatically.  So there has been some progress, not nearly enough but if you had lived in those days, you would at least have seen a tremendous transformation.
Story_ID: 127778
Speaker 1: You mentioned earlier, as a, as a young man, avoiding riding the bus because of the confusion sometimes in the political pinches, your color would, would cause.   You know, sitting in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Color was at time useful, at time a great disadvantage.
Speaker 1: I'm just could image that there--you probably have some stories about the, the California General Assembly in terms of color that might be amusing at least because I'm, I'm not sure--did all the, the representatives know that you were black when you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, they eventually did.  They didn't at first.  I recall the first night that I spent in Sacramento [California] after my election.  I was among a group of--of the members, and I recall one of the white senators in the group said, "I understand that they've elected a black nigger down in Los Angeles [California]."  And others in the group who knew me were very much embarrassed.  That senator later became one of my closest friends.  The blacks running against me, and I went through many campaigns, one of the slogans that they used, one candidate used a slogan, "It's time to put a black man in Sacramento."  And that's all he--that was his campaign. I made a commitment though when I went there that I would never use the race issue in the campaign.  We always avoided that.
Speaker 1: Okay, but, you've always felt a commitment to the black community and more so than some others, I might say, you know, from--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --The record.
Speaker 2: Once getting elected, I then, thereafter, enjoyed that loyalty of, what I say, the black tendency to support black officials.  It's worked for and against us.  It's worked against us in my opinion, when blacks supported [Clarence] Thomas to the Supreme Court [of the United States].  He would never have been named a member of the Supreme Court of this country except that he was an African American.  He seems to have forgotten that, but that was a fact.
Speaker 1: So you think that there would have been an outcry in the black community and more of an outcry for him not to be nominated had he not been--
Speaker 2: On the basis of his qualifications as a lawyer, on his background in supporting the Civil Rights Movement [1954-1968], he should not have been named, from the viewpoint of the African American community, and he has, I think, demonstrated that failure, that lack of ability as a lawyer.  He has been another vote for the conservatives on the court.  And being black, they could say that it's safe for him to be that way.  But he has been on the wrong side of every issue that has affected us from the civil rights viewpoint.
Speaker 1: Then to, to take the place of Thurgood Marshall, who was a staunch advocate--
Speaker 2: As far opposed to the Thurgood, Thurgood Marshall position on everything--
Speaker 1: You couldn't get much further apart, could you?
Speaker 2: You can't, no.
Story_ID: 127779
Speaker 1: Now in the '30s [1930s], now you were in the California General Assembly when the '36 Olympics [1936 Summer Olympics, Berlin, Germany] took place, and--
Speaker 2: That's right, yes.
Speaker 1: --And in Southern California, a young black man from Southern California became a national, a national hero, right?  Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Well, many of the athletes that went both to USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] and to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] were very good friends of mine including Jackie Robinson, who started out at UCLA--outstanding football player--who became an idol as a baseball star.  The outstanding athletes at the University of Southern California were people like Dwight Riddle [John Riddle] and Brice Taylor, who later became a minister in Los Angeles [California].  The--Jackie Robinson, I suppose was the outstanding athlete at the UCLA, although Ralph Bunche became a Rhodes Scholar, and later, as you know, became quite prominent in the State Department [U.S. Department of State]--preceded me by two years.  And we often joked about the fact that there were three--three of us--another chap by the name of Dwight Eason, Newell Eason, pardon me, was the son of a school teacher in Los Angeles who went to UCLA, that the three of us were janitors at UCLA, which my last year or two at UCLA, I became a janitor, that was a little step up from being a--a clerk at a drug store.  But, as I recall, Ralph Bunche was a janitor in the administration department. I happened to be a janitor in the girl's gymnasium.  I often joked with him that had I had the administration building rather than the girl's building that I would have become a statesman, rather than a politician.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the administrative background that he had. (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes and the implication was that we could have gotten the answers to all the quizzes in being a janitor in the buildings. But, Ralph Bunche was one of the outstanding men in this country, a brilliant scholar, also a good basketball athlete, although that isn't well known. Newell Eason was my tennis partner, so we continued that, even up until a few years ago, I did.
Story_ID: 127780
Speaker 1: Okay so you played tennis up until just a few years ago, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you, did you know Mac Robinson [Matthew MacKenzie "Mack" Robinson], who ran in the Olympics with Jesse Owens?
Speaker 2: I knew him.  He wasn't a close friend.  Many of these students were from out of the ghetto, as they were not from the ghetto, I--I, meaning that the South Central area.  Some of them came from the Pasadena [California] area and the more affluent area.
Speaker 1: Okay, and Jackie [Robinson] and his brother Mac, were from Pasadena?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, as the '30s [1930s] drew to a close and we drew near the war [World War Two], what--you were saying that you accomplished quite a bit in California, in terms, terms of getting rid of restrictive covenants and doing other--breaking down the--
Speaker 2: Well, I recall--
Speaker 1: --The blatant discr--discrimination.
Speaker 2: --That at the state level, I would count the greatest things that I was--the best things that I were able to accomplish, one, I was able to get childcare centers established.  I always had an interest in children, and I was able to get a--quite an array of childcare centers established, which at first was thought to be socialistic, and I was criticized by the Los Angeles Times for being a Socialist with this idea as you wanted to take children out of the home and put them into centers.  And that idea prevailed until the war came along--World War II [1939-1945]--and women were needed in the defense industry to work, including black women.  And so suddenly it became popular to have these centers in order to allow women to work in the defense industry.  And so the [Los Angeles] Times reversed itself and supported my idea of establishing childcare centers.  The other great idea that I think we were fortunate to be able to promote was the idea of fair employment practices.  The unions in particular, discriminated against the membership of blacks in the unions.  And that was a great issue for the Times, because from their point of view, it was an issue to use against unionization.  However, we used it in order to get--to break down these color barriers to get blacks into, first of all, defense industries and later into the construction trades.  So, eventually we were able to establish a fair employment practices commission in the state to outlaw discrimination in employment.  So FEPC [Fair Employment Practices Commission] I count always as one of the accomplishments.  Another great--great accomplishment, in my view, was the establishment of mental health centers.  These community centers were concerned with taking the mentally ill people off the streets and putting them in an organizational setting.  And so, today, in the state [California], they are common.  And no longer do we have these mentally incapacitated people walking the streets, but they are treated--their needs are treated in an institutional setting.  A thir--another accomplishment, which was not so great at the time, but later proved to be very helpful, I was the author of the state slum clearance and low cost housing program.  Under that program we established a great number of public housing projects to accommodate low-income people.  And so that was another great accomplishment.  I would say, however, the greatest accomplishment were the FEPC, the Fair Employment Practices Commission, and also the establishment of childcare centers.
Story_ID: 127781
Speaker 1: Okay, those are important.  Now do you remember in the--as we approached World War II [1939-1945] in California, there was a crisis regarding the Japanese [Americans].  Do, do you remember those discussions?
Speaker 2: The state was very anti-oriental, anti-Japanese, largely because they were anti-Chinese at first, and then anti-Japanese.  The labor movement was anti-Japanese because they had fought against the importation of Chinese to work on the railroads.  I was always on the other side--very, very strongly on the other side--and affiliated as an advocate to opening up opportunities for the Japanese and the Chinese, particularly the Chinese in San Francisco [California], who were really hated as a group, as well as the Japanese in Los Angeles [California].  The Japanese people in Los Angeles had somehow gravitated to agriculture--large, large vegetable farming and so forth, was under their control, and that persisted even until today.  It's a very shameful history.  Even a liberal such as Culbert Olson found it necessary to support putting them into special camps during war time, evacuating them to a special set aside.
Story_ID: 127782
Speaker 1: That--it just dawned on me, that you were the only non-white member of the California General Assembly, right, in those days?
Speaker 2: That is right, yeah.  That--for a number of years it was a lonely position to be the only really, non-white minority person in Sacramento [California].  It meant that out of the 120 members, I had to do all the research, to have someone reading the bills, to get the impact on minority groups, and so we worked liked the devil to get another minority person in Sacramento.  I remember that we felt that we could elect someone from the Oakland Berkeley [California] area where--was another great concentration of minorities and there was a popular pharmacist in Oakland by the name of [William] Byron Rumford that we selected to support.  I had been a very close friend of his uncle and as a result of that friendship we selected him to support.  And so it we gave great support to Byron Rumford, the pharmacist-the pharmacist and a resident of Oakland, but his pharmacist was in Berkeley.  As a result of his campaigning and that of the efforts that we put forth and his connection and brought in the entire group backing the Fair Employment Practices Commission [FEPC] and so forth, we were able to get him elected.  He became a member of the Assembly and chairman of the public health committee of the State Assembly.
Speaker 1: So that added one more at least, correct?  Did you have any white allies in, in the General Assembly?
Speaker 2: I, from the very beginning had a great number by necessity because that was the only allies I could have.  There were no minorities.  And so my support of the labor movement, to which I was a very strong supporter of the labor movement, particularly the members of the State Assembly from San Francisco [California], all of whom were pro-labor, were natural allies of mine.  And they came along on the legislation that I was able to sponsor and I was able to line them up, for example, for a fair employment practices committee, and for the other pro-labor bills that I sponsored.  I sponsored many pro-labor bills for people who worked on the railroads because I counted labor among my strongest supporters.  For example, at that time, railroad people in transcontinental trains, overnight trains out of Oakland particularly, had to sleep on the tables from the dining room that people fed from.  I put in a bill to prohibit anyone and--to prohibit the railroads from allowing people to sleep on tables from which food had been served.  Which obviously meant that they had to put in dormitory rooms or units on the--such trains to accommodate railroad people, which to them was a great relief.  But, I had the support of the pro-labor people.  The State Assembly was, at that time very pro-labor that was a big issue.  The other big issue, of course, was senior citizens' pension--the pension group.  That--before that, an elderly person had to go to what was referred to as the poor house, which were places that--we didn't have social security, and they had to go in their senior years to places where they would be taken care of, served minimal food and rather crude accommodations in these so-called poor houses.  We did away with that because we established a pension for senior citizens in California.  That wasn't my legislation, but it had my strong support.
Story_ID: 127783
Speaker 1: Okay, anything else--do you want to mention anything else from the [California] General Assembly days?  Or should we--
Speaker 2: Well, I think we've covered the General Assembly.  In 1962, I figured that I'd been in Sacramento [California] long enough-twenty-eight years.  As I say, it wasn't my first selection to be in.  Even a politician wasn't my first selection--to be in public office, but I figured that that was long enough.  So I decided in 1962--when [John Fitzgerald] Kennedy was running for president, that this was a good time to get on the national scene because in Sacramento you--the best thing was speed limits, the weight of--the weights that people could handle. Local issues became--were important, but to me the greater issues were national.  So I ran at--with the support of John F. Kennedy for the [United States] Congress and also with the support of the delegation--the congressional delegation because I had supported many individuals as Congress--for Congress from my area who had always been white, obviously.  Franklin [Delano Roosevelt, FDR]--not only Helen Gahagan Douglas, but I had supported FDR's son, James Roosevelt and others.  They supported me in carving out a district [21st district] from the ghetto area that I could be elected from, and I succeeded in doing so.  The--
Speaker 1: So you, you, you represented, when you were initially elected, the South Central, Los Angeles?
Speaker 2: South Central area.  Although--
Speaker 1: What we would call Watts [California] and--
Speaker 2: It did not include Watts.
Speaker 1: It didn't include Watts, okay.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, it included other small towns that Huntington Park [California] and Southgate [California], that--where there were few minorities, possibly a few Hispanics, but mostly white districts.  So, I was very fortunate in getting a district that, that was carved out in such a way that not only minorities, but pro-labor people were the dominant voters, and I had no trouble being elected, and that started a twenty-eight year career on the federal level.
Story_ID: 127784
Speaker 1: Right, now you had, you have a reputation as a congressman for writing legislation--composing legislation.  Tell us about some of the legislation you actually composed that was--and a lot of it was passed.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I had always had an interest in children.  When I came to [United States] Congress I was determined, however, to make my priority education.  I felt that was a dominant issue at that time.  I still think it's a priority issue before the nation.  The nation has grown in a symbiotic way along with education.  When the colonists came to shore--these shores, they overthrew the idea of private schools, schools for the so-called well off--well born children.  They developed an attachment to the concept of the common school--schools that were compulsory, nonsectarian, tax supported, and theoretically, at least, open to all.  Now, we didn't admit all at first, but over a time--we always moved in that direction.  The disabled, for example, were not in public schools.  They were usually in some isolated room in a private home, away from the public.  We didn't, at first, admit limited English speaking students. Eventually we did.  Abused, neglected, the so-called disadvantaged--those who are at risk of dropping out--all of these groups were added to the common school over a period of time.  The common school idea--that is admitting, compelling the admittance of all to the schools came out of the nineteenth--mid-19th century common school idea.  But it was on the education committee that I had the privilege.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was because of my concern about children that I selected [United States House] Education and Labor Committee [now, United States House Committee on Education and the Workforce] to become a member of.  And fortunately we had some good people elected at the same time that I was.  And on that committee we were able to expand the number of disadvantaged, limited English speaking, disabled people, et cetera to the public schools.
Story_ID: 127785
Speaker 1: Well, what about employment legislation, I know you were the author of the--
Speaker 2: The other big issue other than education, in my district [21st district] was jobs, j-o-b-s.  That was a big issue.  We were able on the Education and Labor Committee to sponsor many of the jobs programs of the New Deal [1933-1938] and of the--at that time--the LBJ, the Lyndon Baines Johnson era of public service jobs, the Jobs Corps, and others.  So we developed the idea that why not require, therefore, that the national policy should be to employ everybody, on the theory that an employed person was able not only to take care of himself, or herself, but the family and could contribute also to the economy.  Only employed people were able to pay the taxes that would support the programs that we were interested in providing.  So I, together with Hubert Humphrey, a liberal senator in the [United States] Senate, joined together and we conceived of a--what came to be known as the Full Employment [and Balanced Growth] Act [1978] , which req--in effect, required that over a period of five years, the unemployment rate, the official unemployment rate, would be reduced below four percent and would create economic growth sufficient to provide a job for everyone desirous of having one.  Over a period of some several years I would say, about three, we were able to pass that act.  As a matter of fact, Hubert Humphrey had passed away when we got it passed and his widow, Muriel Humphrey became a co-author with me.  We got that act passed and its still on the statute books.  It provided for economic growth and balanced growth.  We had a tax reduction component in the act, but it was quite different from what is now being sponsored by the current administration [President George W. Bush].  We had it balanced so that the ones who got the tax reduction were the moderate and low-income people, that was--those who got the tax reduction.
Speaker 1: And the bill was known as--popularly known as the Humphrey-Hawkins Bill?
Speaker 2: Popularly known as the Humphrey-Hawkins Bill.
Story_ID: 127786
Speaker 1: Now, you were responsible for the, the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act [1973] too, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: CETA.
Speaker 2: The Comprehensive Employment and Training Act, which, among other things, provided jobs for the persons who were unable to locate jobs in the private sector, as was, so-called Jobs Corps, itself.  And we also had a public service employment program to provide that unemployed people would be employed in public entities that provided public services of all kinds--health, transportation, and so forth.  That, I think, for a long time was accepted.  Unfortunately, since about 1985, most of the administrations have been more concerned by the issue of tax reduction of the wrong kind, rather than employing people.  The official unemployment rate is misunderstood.  It is a rate of unemployment only of those who are looking, diligent--diligently seeking employment.  It doesn't provide--it doesn't include those who have given up, for example, looking for jobs because there are no jobs available.  They're not counted even though they are unemployed.  The unemployed--the unemployment rate also includes those who earn less than the poverty wage.  All a person has to do is earn any amount of money during the previous week, when the unemployment rate is compiled.  And if you included all these other groups--if we included for example, some two million people are in illicit, unlawful employment, and they are still counted as employed, even though they work in a occupation or a field that is prohibited, illegal. All these are employed, or are included in the of--in the official unemployment rate.  If you included all of these people, the unemployment rate would be several times the official rate.  I would say it would include eighteen or twenty percent easily of the--of the population, the civilian population.
Story_ID: 127787
Speaker 1: Now, I, I wanted to, to, sir if I could, I, I want to change a little bit and talk about the development of the Congressional Black Caucus because I know you, you've got a limited amount of time, but can you tell us about that idea and how, how that got off the ground?
Speaker 2: When I came to [United States] Congress at that time, there were five of us from the basic large cities of the country.  We went out to add other black officials primarily from the deep South.  When we added Stokes from Philadelphia [sic, Louis Stokes, Representative from Ohio], Bill Clay from St. Louis [Missouri], we came together and said, look, we have the same type of constituency, we have the same interest in basic issues such as jobs and health, and--and public service, we have the same interest in civil rights.  Why not join together and pool resources and work as a group.  As so we conceived of the idea largely as a result of Bill Clay of St. Louis--I think it was his idea--of, of organizing a Congressional Black Caucus.  And so, that idea was in the '70s [1970s].  We invited Ossie Davis, the playwright, to address us.  And he presented us with a plan, and his famous slogan was "It is not the man. It's the plan."  And he figured that, look, nationally we always depend on one or two individuals. What we need to do--to do is to develop a plan containing all of the prominent issues and not worry about one or two individuals.  You have a [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], who was assassinated and then you lose your leader, that shouldn't be. So we developed the idea of all the black elected officials serving as a caucus and that was the beginning of the so-called Congressional Black Caucus, which now has thirty-nine members.
Story_ID: 127788
Speaker 1: Right, right, it's [Congressional Black Caucus] larger now than it has ever been, I suppose--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Thirty-nine.  Now, what do you see as the future of the Congressional Black Caucus, I mean in terms of being able to change things.
Speaker 2: I think it should play a much more prominent role than what it actually does.  For example, in the [United States] Congress my first chairmanship was chairman of the House Administration Committee [Committee on House Administration]--the House Committee, and the House Administration Committee.  We developed the idea of providing an expense account for every member of Congress so that he could take care of traveling back and forth, be at home to take care of his constituents more often.  He could put out newsletters.  He could employ other staff people.  When I went to Congress we could employ only two or three staff people.  But--so now, a member of Congress has the ability to employ up to twenty--approximately twenty people on his staff.  He can pay them up to $120,000 annually, which is quite a good sum.  And now that means that you have thirty-nine members of Congress who today have an--an expense account of over a million dollars in expenses.  There is no reason why they shouldn't have someone on their staff who's an expert in the field of education, for example.  One of the great barriers that we have today of getting jobs, of participating in the civ--civil life of a community is a lack of proper education.  Two-thirds of African American and Latino students at the fourth grade, for example, are functionally illiterate. That shouldn't be today in schools in the black or minority community.  And minorities are more segregated now than they were before segregating was outlawed by the Brown decision [Brown vs. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas, 1954].  They suffer from incompetent, inexperienced teachers, for example.  The quality of teaching among the minority community is much worse than it is in any other place. That shouldn't be.  So they don't have equal opportunity in the schools to be educated as well as other students.  Now that should be the dominant issue before minority people today.  It should be the dominant issue before the country because of the great unemployment of these people, who are not taxpayers, but who must resort to welfare and in too many instances become juvenile delinquents and incarcerated.  There are today more black males incarcerated in prisons than on college campuses.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Story_ID: 127789
Speaker 1: Sir, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: To be what?
Speaker 1: Your legacy.
Speaker 2: I would say that I would be best remembered by, I hope, my efforts to give to every child in [United States of] America, including the disadvantaged, minorities, an equal educational opportunity.  I think if we did that, we would be a different nation all together.  I think we would be able to get along with each other.  I think that we would have individuals who would be able to take care of their families. We would not have as much teenage pregnancy, for example, among females who today gain distinction only because they have children.  I think it would be a much stronger country.  I think our future depends on getting that job--a decent job for everybody to become a positive contributor to the economy and active in our civil life.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Thank you sir.
