Story_ID: 656527
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Full name is Donald E. Hudson [HistoryMaker Donald Hudson], capital D-O-N-A-L-D, E dot, Hudson, H-U-D-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And the E stands for Edward (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Edward.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Eleven, twenty, twenty-nine [November 20, 1929].
Speaker 1: And where were you born?
Speaker 2: Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, in Homewood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation and title, or what was your occupation, title?
Speaker 2: Teacher, football coach.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you have been widely reported to have been the first black football coach in a white college in the United States, in the modern era at least, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  Today is the--
Speaker 1: Oh, it's the--
Speaker 2: --twelfth, is it?
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: August 12th.
Speaker 2: August 12th.
Speaker 1: And the year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fourteen [sic.] (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Twenty fourteen [2014], right.
Speaker 2: Twenty fourteen [2014], whatever.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where are we at the present time?  And you don't, you don't have to give your address, you know.
Speaker 2: Where am I now?
Speaker 1: Yeah, where are we right now?
Speaker 2: Oh, not sure.  This is brother--well, we're at my home at 9094 Kestral Ridge Drive, in I guess Chicago [sic.].
Speaker 1: Cha- Charlotte, right.
Speaker 2: Charlotte, well.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: Gee louise.
Speaker 1: Is--all right, don't be so nervous.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --how about that.
Speaker 1: This is Charlotte, North Carolina, right?
Speaker 2: North Dakota.
Speaker 1: Is that true, Charlotte, North Carolina, right?
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --28269.
Story_ID: 656528
Speaker 1: Before we get started there are five questions we ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.  First one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: (Pause) Bananas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Like to go to the beach and been to a lot of them, you know, but the Atlantic Beach [North Carolina], been out to the Pacific [Pacific Ocean] and just the beaches they have.  I know it's something about them that draws you to them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or a saying?
Speaker 2: I guess the (laughter), I guess the boys would say, you know, "Damn it, let's do it over again" (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, a coaching phrase.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: Let's do it over again.
Story_ID: 656529
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [George Hudson] side.
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side first.
Speaker 2: (Clears throat) Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Alice Theodora Nelson [Alice Nelson Hudson].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: That was her married, that was her birth name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what's her date of birth and place of birth.
Speaker 2: Mine?  Eleven, twenty, twenty-nine [November 20, 1929].
Speaker 1: No, hers, your mother's.
Speaker 2: Hers?  I don't know offhand.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you, would you think she was born in--
Speaker 2: Wait a minute.  She was born in--I don't want to get it mixed up with her birthday.
Speaker 1: About 1905 or so?  What do you think?
Speaker 2: O-seven [1907].
Speaker 1: O-seven [1907], okay.
Speaker 2: She was born in 1907.
Speaker 1: Nineteen o-seven [1907], okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family.  I mean, how far back can you trace her side?
Speaker 2: As far as my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was his name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And some--he's told me some stories, but they were people that I really never got to meet, you know, so--
Speaker 1: What did your grandfather say?
Speaker 2: What did he say?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what kind of stories did he tell you?
Speaker 2: Not many.  He was a, he was--had done a lot of things.  He had worked in a tailor shop.  He was half musician (clears throat).  He really wasn't into the sports thing, been strictly hard work.  He was strictly a very hard working guy.  He tell you, you know, he ran a tailor shop, and he could sew.  He could press.  He could do it all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then he taught us.  He had three, he had three sisters [sic.], and he had three children that I know of, women children, which was my mother, one, Isabella [Isabella Nelson Green], who was the oldest, and Pauline [Pauline Nelson Gould], who was the youngest.  And they all worked in the tailor shop and, you know, they seamstress.  And then as I got older they had me working in the tailor shop.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now was your grandfather born and raised in Pittsburgh?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ooh, you got me on that one (laughter).  (Pause) My grandfather came here out of Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he was from Maryland.  Okay, all right.  Did he, did he talk about why, why he came to Pittsburgh?
Speaker 2: Work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  You know, he came to get work.  And he said he liked Pittsburgh.  And that was about it.  And that was the strongest thing that I knew for rea- for his reasons for coming here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he still have relatives in Maryland?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: By all means.  (Laughter) I knew he had a couple of wives in Maryland and 'cause I used to go there in the summertime and visit a couple of them.  One of them, the name was Mildred [ph.] and Aunt Mitchell [ph.].  And believe it or not, I guess when you get my age, that's the only ones I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what part of Maryland is this?  What--did he live--
Speaker 2: He was right in Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 1: In Baltimore, okay, okay.  What was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: Nelson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  His first name?
Speaker 2: Grandfather was George E. Nelson [George Nelson].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 656530
Speaker 1: What about your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't know a whole lot about her, except she worked in the tailor shop also.  Her name was Lavinia [Lavinia Sorrell Nelson].  Don't ask me how to spell that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she's Lavinia Nelson, I guess (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: And was she from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] or--
Speaker 2: No.  She was from (cough)--from what I understand, she was from Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And she worked in the tailor shop too?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, everybody worked in the tailor shop.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, okay.  Now what did your mother [Alice Nelson Hudson] say about growing up?  I mean, did she talk about what, what it was like when she grew up?
Speaker 2: Everybody in my family wanted me to be a musician.  My mother played piano.  My grandfather [George Nelson] played everything.  He played piano, trombone, saxophone.  Pi- let me think.  Well, I don't know what he didn't play.  And they had (unclear) play piano and guitar.  And from what I gather, everybody wanted me to be a musician.
Speaker 1: Now did they have a family band?  Did they play together at all?  Did they ever do that?
Speaker 2: Only, the only time I knew that they played together was on church Sunday.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  So they all played at the church together.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And they--that was, that was pretty much what I recall.
Speaker 1: You remember the name of the church they went to?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 656531
Speaker 1: Did [Hudson's mother, Alice Nelson Hudson] she have a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: She went to Pennsylvania Musical Institute [sic.].  I do know that (clears throat).  All of them went to school somewhere.  Some of them went to Pittsburgh Musical Institute [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  Some of them went to some other musical schools there.  Everybody in the family at least at one time took lessons from some school out of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], I know that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your mother, did she ever teach in the public schools.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or any, or did she give private piano lessons or--
Speaker 2: No.  She could play too.  She could play guitar.
Speaker 1: Did she--so she primarily just played in church, or did she play at--in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and she played at home, piano and guitar.
Speaker 1: And guitar, too (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And she sang, and she sang.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And took her out on the road.
Speaker 1: So she went out on the road with her--
Speaker 2: Little church group, she and my grandfather [George Nelson] and my dad [George Hudson] and all them.  I really never heard, honestly heard the group together.  You know, I have heard them practicing, but I was a baby.  I was, I heard them practicing, so I know they'd play songs, you know, and I know people off the street would be singing and that kind of thing, you know.  I don't think they had a street band, but I know they played the street once in a while.
Story_ID: 656532
Speaker 1: Now let me go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: George Edward Hudson.
Speaker 1: And how do you--you spell that the regular way, George Edward Hudson?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was his date of birth and place of birth?  Was he a little older than your mother [Alice Nelson Hudson]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So what do you think, about 1900?  I don't know.
Speaker 2: I think he was two years older than my mother.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  That put him in 1905, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now, so that's pretty interesting.  That's close, right?  Nine- 1905.  And where was your father born?  (Pause) Is he from Virginia or Maryland or--okay.
Speaker 2: Alabama.
Speaker 1: Alabama?  Okay.  Could you sit up?  'Cause we lost your head (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, oh, I forgot, I forgot.
Speaker 1: You got completely out of the picture (laughter).
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, no.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: He was born in Alabama.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm not sure what town it was.
Speaker 1: Big town like Huntsville [Alabama] or Selma [Alabama] or Birmingham [Alabama] or Bessemer [Alabama] or--
Speaker 2: I think it might be in my folder.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But anyway, so he was born in Alabama--and was he raised there too?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what brought him to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: I guess the music--his grandfather [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay, so your father's, your father's grandfather or your father's father?
Speaker 2: My father's father [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So your grand- okay.  And what was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: George E. Nelson [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He could play.
Speaker 1: And what did he--what was his last name?  Was he, was he--
Speaker 2: Nelson.
Speaker 1: Nelson?  George--wait a minute.
Speaker 2: George E. Nelson.
Speaker 1: Oh, no, no, your father's grandfather.  I'm talking about your father's grandfather.
Speaker 2: Yes, it's--oh, my father's grandfather's name.  I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you're saying--well, wait a minute.  I don't want to confuse this.  You're saying that your, your mother's father is the one that brought your father into the band?  Is that what it is?  Is that what you're saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So George Nelson brought your father, George Hudson, into the band?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So that's how he got, he wound up in Pittsburgh with the, with the band.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, you spilled your, spilled your--
Speaker 2: Oh, shit!
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (laughter).
Speaker 2: That ain't even had nothing in there.
Speaker 1: And we can get it up I guess at some point.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right, well, at any rate.  So your father, he came, you know, somehow he met your grandfather and came up to--
Speaker 2: Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: --Pittsburgh, okay.  And what did your father play?
Speaker 2: Trumpet.
Story_ID: 656533
Speaker 1: Did your father [George Hudson] have a chance to finish high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my mother [Alice Nelson Hudson] and my father finished high school together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Westinghouse High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania [Westinghouse Academy].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did they meet in high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And they--is there a story about how they fell in love or how they met and--
Speaker 2: I don't know, except the fact that they did play together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she sang, and of course he played the horn.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is all church music?
Speaker 2: All church music.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So nobody ever played any secular music or any jazz or anything?
Speaker 2: I don't doubt my dad, knowing that he--as soon as school was out, they were playing a little (gesture) bebop stuff, you know.  But I don't know.  I don't think they did that in the church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But he did have some--did he have some gigs as a (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, he played gigs (unclear) ever when he was fifteen.  You know, they had a gig somewhere.
Story_ID: 656534
Speaker 1: Now Pittsburgh's a pretty good music town, from what I understand.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And we lived, we lived in a section of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] called Homewood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, tell us about Home- Homewood.  What--describe Homewood for us.  Is it mostly a black section of Pittsburgh or what?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Believe it or not, Homewood was like--kind of quiet like this area [in Charlotte, North Carolina].  And it was, it was a fairly nice area, that had at one time had been white, and blacks had moved in.  And if you lived in Homewood you were kind of considered upper crust.  And I don't know how we got to live there, what they did, you know, got somebody moving.  But that's, you know, we lived there, lived there my whole life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were you born--was (unclear) born there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was born in the building--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Pittsburgh on Monticello Street--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and lived there 'til I went to college [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri].
Story_ID: 656535
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this.  When you think about your parents' personalities, you know, their sense of humor, how they walk, how they talk, you know, what they were like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My mom [Alice Nelson Hudson].
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Without question.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Push, push, push, push, don't take no back step.  She weighed about that big (gesture), you know.
Speaker 1: So she was little.
Speaker 2: Oh, a hundred and five pounds.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Five foot one [inch].
Speaker 1: But she was aggressive though?
Speaker 2: Yeah, very aggressive and a very good athlete.  She could ride ponies.  She could ride horses.  She could swim.  She could do just about anything athletic.  And she got me a job at the swimming pool one summer and--in fact, two summers, and wanted me a li- be a lifeguard, so I ended up being a lifeguard at the pool before I left.  And I'd swim in every day, every day, back and forth, back and forth.  Then she kept forcing me to learn how to dive off the board.  And it ended up that I could do the inward back and half, you know, off the board.  And, so went to high school [Westinghouse High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and went to the--went out for the swimming team, and I messed around with the swimming team.  But during high school, the seasons ran together, and I couldn't give up my football.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I had to give up the swimming, you know, but then I turned out to be a lifeguard.  And the last seven, eight jobs I had, at camps or anything else, I've been a lifeguard, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Even at Smoky Hill High School [Aurora, Colorado] I was always--
Speaker 1: Smoky--
Speaker 2: --a lifeguard.
Speaker 1: So you got your athleticism from your mother.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: Well, my dad [George Hudson] couldn't swim a lick (laughter).  He ain't showed me how to do nothing.  He, the only thing he ever show me how to play was a trumpet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It never went past that.
Story_ID: 656536
Speaker 1: Do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Half brothers and sisters.
Speaker 1: Oh, so these are your father's [George Hudson] or your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm the only child.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then the one I was talking about, the brother I was talking about was from another father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But in my immediate family I'm the only child.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So when you were growing up you--it was, who was in the household, your mother [Alice Nelson Hudson]?  Was your father in the household when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he left at a certain point or--so you and your mother.  Then your mother, did she remarry, or did she marry somebody else?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you had a half brother?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: From a previous marriage.
Speaker 1: Okay, previous marriage, okay.
Speaker 2: But he didn't, he never lived with me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So your mother was married before she married your father then--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --or before your father--
Speaker 2: My mother was married and then when she and my father could not get back together about a year later she married again.  That didn't work out either.  So I had this stepbrother named Billy [ph.].  And she never married again, and that was it for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She hasn't married since.
Speaker 1: So did you live with your grandparents [Lavinia Sorrell Nelson and George Nelson]?
Speaker 2: I lived with my mother.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Wherever I want I lived with my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So did she have her own house or what?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we'd rent and, you know, she'd--we'd have our own place.  And I guess in sticky times my grandfather would help out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Cause this is--
Speaker 2: I've learned to realize this.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is during the Depression [Great Depression]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --when you're--you're born in '29 [1929], right on the, at the beginning--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of the Depression.  So I know, you know, money was scarce--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --during those days, so.
Speaker 2: Everybody worked at the tailor shop.  I worked at the tailor shop.  I learned how to sew.  I can sew buttons on, you know, sew buttons on pants.  At that time I could, I could--
Speaker 1: You could hem pants, the pants.
Speaker 2: --hem the pants and stuff like that, you know.  Then they taught me how to press.  Then they taught me how to stitch and so forth.  You don't see a young fourteen year old, fifteen year old boy that knows how to sew and do all them kind of things, you know.  Sometimes I've tried to hide it from the other kids that I knew how to sew.  But believe it or not, I taught a couple of kids how to sew--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know.  (Laughter) So, and I liked it.  I didn't, I didn't, I wasn't against it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --just didn't want, you know--a lot of kids in the beginning laughed.  Then after a while they had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --said, "Hey, can you fix this?"
Story_ID: 656537
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?  What's the first thing that you remember?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I guess the first and earliest childhood memory I have is everybody being involved in music.  It was always music around, you know, on the piano and couple of them played guitar.  And I'd hear them in there practicing.  And of course, you know, everybody going, "Oh, he's going to be a musician.  He's going to be a musician," you know.  But I, I liked football, and I kept reading about this Don Hutson who played for the Green Bay Packers.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now he spelled his name H-U-T--
Speaker 2: D, D- T, T, T.
Speaker 1: --T-S-O-N.  Hutson, and you're Hudson [HistoryMaker Donald Hudson].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I didn't care then (laughter).  And fact, I went to a game, he gave me a helmet.
Story_ID: 656538
Speaker 1: So you were getting ready to tell us a Don Hutson story where you met Don Hutson, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now he was like an all-star (unclear), right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was every, he was all-world (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: So we're talking about Don Hutson, H-U-T-S-O-N--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --who's a big star for the Green Bay Packers when you were growing up.  And you said you read about him, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And the first time I ever saw him on TV, you know, I saw a game, and he was playing.  He did everything.
Speaker 2: (Pause) How old were you when you met him?
Speaker 1: Maybe twelve.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And you said he gave you a helmet?
Speaker 1: No, he didn't give me a helmet, no.  He had these helmets, and I was trying to get one from him sign--autographed helmet, you know.  I never did get the helmet.  But he seemed like a nice guy, you know.  He shook hands and talked.  And after that, a while, I became (cough), you know, all of the player, all my buddies used to call me Don Hudson [HistoryMaker Donald Hudson].  And I told them I changed my name.  My name is Don Hutson from now on, you know.  And I could, I could catch the ball.  I could catch the ball.  I practiced every day, every night.  I'd have my buddies throw me a hundred balls a day.  And, you know, I told them I wouldn't care where it was, just throw me the ball, and I'd catch the ball, you know.  And I did.  I'll be--I probably was without question the best end player, really offensive end that, on the team.
Story_ID: 656539
Speaker 1: Let's go back a little bit.  And when did you start playing football?  Were you in grade school [Belmar Elementary School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, in 1934.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, you're five years old, 1934.  Okay.  So did they have a neighborhood team or a team (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No more than the little pickup team we played in the alley.  But every kid that played in that alley team, they were planned so that in the years to come they'd play with Westinghouse [Westinghouse High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Everybody wanted to play for Westinghouse.
Speaker 1: So was football the biggest sport in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Pittsburgh, and basketball.
Speaker 1: I know Pittsburgh, that area, western Pennsylvania and northeast Ohio, that's the football cradle of the United States they say.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's what they call it, with Canton, Ohio, there and--
Speaker 2: Steel mill towns.
Speaker 1: --Canton McKinley [McKinley High School, Canton, Ohio] and the Pittsburgh teams over there, Allegheny [Allegheny High School] and all--you know.
Speaker 2: Them the steel mill towns.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: John Gagliardi [sic.], the quarterback they used to have--there'd be some big guys, you know.
Story_ID: 656540
Speaker 1: When did you start--I mean where did you start grade school?  What was the name of your grade school?
Speaker 2: My grade school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, grade school.
Speaker 2: Belmar [Belmar Elementary School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, Belmar.  Okay, now is this an integrated school or--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was the black population percentage wise roughly?  What do you think?
Speaker 2: If they had three hundred kids in the school, I would say at the school we had at that time.  We had fifty blacks.
Speaker 1: So it wasn't, yeah, that significant.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but we weren't scrambling.  You know, we weren't scrambling against each other.  It was the singing and talking between each other was good, you know.  We didn't have any problem.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: We had little fights just like anybody else.  There was little fighting between a white kid and a black kid.  We had a little fight over there between the girls, you know, and little fight over there against the boys.  And as we got a little older, you know, the word used to come out, and the older you got the worse it got in terms of calling each other names and being a part of that.  But it never broke up our football team.  We knew we had a good football team, and nothing ever stepped in between that.
Speaker 1: So this--on the, on the grade school level, did--was there an organized football team?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: Just the, just the alley team?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  What else were you interested in in school when you were in grade school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I liked all of them.  I liked swimming, and I've never been a baseball fan.  But I like swimming.  I liked to play baseball--softball once in a while.
Speaker 1: Now that's interesting 'cause you had like two baseball teams in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], two of the famous baseball teams, the Crawfords and the--
Speaker 2: Pittsburgh Crawfords.
Speaker 1: --and the Homestead Grays.
Speaker 2: Yep, and the Pittsburgh Pirates.
Speaker 1: And then the--yeah, that being the white professional team--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in those days.
Speaker 2: Never liked none of them (laughter), never liked none of them, not to the point where I go out--well, let's go out in the street and play--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know.  One thing, the ball was too damn hard when it was thrown--(unclear).  That stubbed my fingers a few times.  Couldn't, then I couldn't throw, you know.  And I don't want to play.  I'd catch the ball and go out there, but I didn't want to play baseball.
Story_ID: 656541
Speaker 1: Were there any recreation centers around or, or community centers?
Speaker 2: Not near us.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: We were kind of in the middle.  There were--we had, they had Baxter High School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], Westinghouse High School [Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  No, here we are, Home- Homewood [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  And what that tell you is like where I lived, we all lived around each other.  There must have been forty of us within two blocks.  And we'd meet in the morning, you know, walking to school and throwing stuff at each other and all that kind of stuff, but we all walked to school except for Ahmad Jamal and them.  They walked the longest this distance.
Speaker 1: This is Ahmad Jamal, the piano player?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Ahmad Jamal walked the longest this distance.  And--
Speaker 1: Was his, was his name Ahmad Jamal then?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was he called in those days?  Well, it's okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fritzy Jones [Frederick Jones].
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.  Frick--
Speaker 2: Fritzy Jones.
Speaker 1: Okay, Fritzy Jones, okay.  All right, so he hadn't become a Muslim yet.
Speaker 2: And, well, he was starting to when he got his name changed.  And I think his brothers pushed him a little bit on that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he was such an exceptional musician.  Everybody realized it, you know.  And then he started making albums and stuff, you know.  And the kids bought them up, and everybody bought them up.  They were bought all over the nation.  And then he got so, he was traveling.  And his first traveling job was with my dad's band [George Hudson Orchestra].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was George Hudson.  They came to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  He picked him up.  And Pittsburgh ain't never seen him since.
Speaker 1: So your father had his own band?
Speaker 2: Yeah, eighteen piece (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, okay.  Okay, all right.  So--
Speaker 2: I was so mixed up between sports and music, you know, I was just in between.  He don't, he wanted me to play, and my mother [Alice Nelson Hudson] wanted me to go into football and--
Speaker 1: So your father was a trumpet player, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And he taught you how to play the trumpet.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And were you pretty--
Speaker 2: A little.
Speaker 1: Okay, a little 'cause he wasn't in town all the time, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: 'Cause he was--yeah.  So could you play pretty good?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I was a lousy trumpet player.
Speaker 1: So it was--was it because you didn't like it that much or what?
Speaker 2: I loved the music, but I was putting more time in on my piano and my studies.  And I became, I liked piano.  But when you know you got a like, a guy like Ahmad Jamal around, that's all he played all day long and that was his whole life.  And he'd sit there and play twenty pages of 'Hamlet' or something and never look down at the keyboard.  You know, I'm (laughter), I'm picking out notes and stuff and, you know, you--it don't take long to learn that you can't play with him, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you realized he was the talent, real (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I realized where I stood, you know, with him and everybody else, you know.
Story_ID: 656542
Speaker 1: In terms of sports, now, now you're not that big of a man.  You're like 5'4".  I think you're full height is 5'4" (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You hit it right on the head.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So I mean, we--did your mother [Alice Nelson Hudson] ever think that you, you might get hurt playing football, being so little?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  She never ragged on it, you know, kept telling me, "Stay in shape," and she never ragged on it.  Of course, she said, "You play quarterback, you play back," you know.  "And you get your--," but my thing was, you know, we'd go out in the street.  We used to get, we used to get run off the street every day, you know, out in front of the houses.  We're tearing up people's hedges and all that kind of stuff.  But there must have been about four years in there where I didn't do nothing but throw the football every day.  If I couldn't do nothing else, I would throw the football.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now you were telling us that you were practicing catching too after you met Don Hutson.  And you could catch better than anybody else around.  So you're throwing too, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I had a buddy named Sonny Dent [ph.].  And Sonny catch the, plain could catch the ball.  And we'd go out, and he and I would catch the ball, and he could catch the ball.  Then we got so we'd go in the alley, and we'd throw and we'd throw.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  So we were talking about throwing the foot- football, your friend that could catch.  And, so you would throw the ball like every day?
Speaker 1: Every day.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Every day.
Speaker 2: Now did you have a favorite quarterback?
Speaker 1: I was the quarterback.
Speaker 2: You were (laughter), okay.
Speaker 1: And Sonny Dent--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --was the receiver.
Story_ID: 656543
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know how you want to write this but I--
Speaker 1: Did you have, did you go to middle school--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or junior high school or--
Speaker 2: Junior high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, junior high school.  And what was the name of that one?
Speaker 2: Baxter, B-A-X (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --T-E-R.
Speaker 1: Baxter Junior High School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  Did they have a football program?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it wasn't until high school that you actually had a football program that you could get involved in.  But up until this time were there any adults trying to guide your athletic skills other than your mother [Alice Nelson Hudson]?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well tell us about high school football.  Now this is at Westinghouse [Westinghouse High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], right, high school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: This is a pretty big high school, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: A lot of students, so.  So you're competing with a lot of boys that are a lot bigger than you are.  And, but you go out for quarterback?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But what you have to remember is, when I went out for quarterback at Westinghouse, we played the single wing.  And I don't know if you know what that is.
Speaker 1: Well, you'd have, you'd have to explain it anyway, even if I did know so (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I'm not sure I know.  I think I might know, but explain what it is.
Speaker 2: The single wing was old time football.  And you had an unbalanced line to the right or to the left.  In other words, instead of being balanced up in the line, you'd bring another guard over, and you'd have two guards, a tackle and an end, okay, instead of a, you know, the balance thing you see when you go to see pro, the pros.  Only thing is, they make it unbalanced once they put a man in motion and send him over there.  Now they're unbalanced, what they call the unbalanced single wing.  And the center has centered his ball through his legs with his head down.  And you had a tailback, a fullback and then you had this quarterback over here.  And he would sit between those two tackles because the two, one of the tackles--it--he--one that came over, and then we had an end.  So our center always had his head down, and he would snap the ball to one of the guys in the backfield.  Now mainly, the guy he snapped the ball to would be the fullback, and he would be what they called the spinner.  And he would spin one way.  The halfback will go another way.  The quarterback will go another way, and you're trying to get all this mixed up stuff, you know.  And then we had--
Speaker 1: So you're trying to confuse the defense.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're trying to con- we did a good job (laughter).  Then you had the tailback, fullback, quarterback.  Ball would be snapped to the tailback.  He'd take a step over and then drive forward, and it would be a trap.  The quarterback would trap a man, let him through, and they'd run that play.  Then we'd have the lineup again, and ball would be snapped to the tailback, and we'd run the power play, what we called the power play then.  Then the ball would be (unclear) snapped the next time to the fullback.  And the fullback would fake the ball to him and then go off the other side.  In the meantime, the quarterback would block somebody.  Well, we had a good running game, not the greatest, but we could, we couldn't throw.  And--
Speaker 1: So this is Westinghouse before you got there, right, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or at, or afterwards?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So when I got there, I was the first one that could throw the ball.  And a lot of the plays were revised to suit me to--no, no, I hate the word they'd used, but to use me.
Speaker 1: To use your talents, right.
Speaker 2: My talents, you know.  So sometimes they'd send the ball to the fullback, and the fullback would spin to give the ball to me.  Then I would drop back to pass.  Sometimes it was sent to the tailback, and he would spin and turn around.  And I'd come around, and he'd give me the ball.  And it got so it was like a circus.  (Unclear) I got the ball, you know, and even our end, Flacare, he had come back in motion.  They would snap the ball to me.  He'd come back in motion.  I'd fake the ball to him.  Then I could keep the ball or pass the ball.  Then but in the two, but in this particular year I had three of the best pass catchers that Westinghouse had ever had, this Felix Castrizola [ph.], Frank Flacare [ph.] and oh--can't think of--Bit--Ben [ph.]--I can't think of his name, played in.
Story_ID: 656544
Speaker 1: Once again, this is an integrated high school, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, and--
Speaker 2: They were all white.
Speaker 1: So was it unusual in those days for a black teenager to be the quarterback of a high school football team in those days, you know?
Speaker 2: I think I was the first.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's--I was thinking that's probably true (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was pro- I was the first black quarter- especially in the single, and in that year I threw seven touchdown passes.  And that's the thing that made my mother [Alice Nelson Hudson] mad.
Speaker 1: She--it made her mad?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when they advertised the city championship game, they named the fullback Westinghouse's ace passer.  And he knew--never threw a pass the whole game.  My mother was going to make me quit.  She wasn't going to let me play the championship game.
Speaker 1: Oh, like the ace passer, is that, that the--I mean, did he make an all-star team or something, or what was it?  Who was it?  Just recognition in the newspaper or--
Speaker 2: He made the recognition as the all-city fullback.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And they said he was an ace passer?
Speaker 2: He was the ace passer for Westinghouse [Westinghouse High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: But it was you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was zero.  He never threw one (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Everybody had to know it was you.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: My mother was going to go up to school that morning.  I kind of talked her out of it, although she had already called (laughter).  And of course that hurt me, you know.  I'd already thrown seven touchdown passes.
Speaker 1: Well, these are the days when you didn't have a lot of media coverage.  And if the paper said something, everybody believed it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So anyhow, we went on, and we won the city championship.  And we were undefeated, and we were unscored upon.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is re- I just want to say this is remarkable.  This is Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So this is--when you win the city championship in Pittsburgh, you've beaten a lot of good football players--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --right?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So of course we were happy, you know.  We took some great pictures afterwards.  And guys spread out.  They went different ways, yeah.
Story_ID: 656545
Speaker 1: This is your senior year when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My senior year.
Speaker 1: Oh, you won, you won the city championship?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my junior year we won the city championship.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's two years in a row.
Speaker 2: We won it three in a row.
Speaker 1: Three?  All right.  And were you the quarterback every year?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was the quarterback the senior year.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So that's the year you had seven touchdown pa- passes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how many games were in a season then?
Speaker 2: Eleven.
Speaker 1: Eleven, okay.  So you almost threw a touchdown pass in every game.
Speaker 2: Almost, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Did you run too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I ran.
Speaker 1: Were you a pretty good runner?
Speaker 2: Very good runner, fairly good runner.  I was the smallest guy on the team, you know.  I had--they didn't give the ball to me that much to run.  But it's kind of like, we got them tricked.  Let's give Hudson [HistoryMaker Donald Hudson] the ball (laughter).  I was the smallest guy, you know (laughter).  But I was also one of the toughest tacklers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No one ever ran by me.
Speaker 1: So did you play both ways though?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went both ways.  No one ever ran by me.
Speaker 1: So what position did you play on defense (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Safety.
Speaker 1: Safety, okay.  And so what, what were your school colors for Westinghouse [Westinghouse High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Blue and gold.
Speaker 1: Okay.  With what kind of helmet and what kind of pants (unclear).  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Oh, hell yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, tell us so people will know.
Speaker 2: I got them flappers, man (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, yeah, leath- leather helmet--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you wear them leather helmets and turn them up, you know, so you could hear.  Then fold them down, you know.  And--
Speaker 1: So you'd--what'd you have a gold helmet (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No face mask.
Speaker 1: Gold helmet, blue jersey and gold pants?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, we painted them different each year, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they were gold pants, gold helmets with blue around the front, you know.  And by them being leather, they were leather strips, you could, you could paint them different colors each year.  You can make the strips gold and blue and white and whatever you wanted to, you know.  And we, and the pants, oh, canvas.  We had no colored pants.  They were canvas.  They were like, they were dark at the knee (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was just natural, natural canvas pants.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were natural, the knee.  When we finished playing in them they looked like mudslides.  You know, we never wore white pants or blue pants or green pants, never.  The only thing we wore was our jerseys would be blue, and we used to call them white.
Story_ID: 656546
Speaker 1: Tell me about the rest of high school [Westinghouse High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  So it, so you were like a--were you fairly popular in high school--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) as the quarterback?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you run--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: Did you run for class office or anything or--
Speaker 2: No.  I did gymnastics.  I did, I did gymnastics.  I did regular physical education class.  Then I did--oh, what was it called?  (Unclear) just hard to remember now.
Speaker 1: You said you didn't, you swam, but you couldn't really swim on the swim team, right?
Speaker 2: I did.  I was a swimmer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was not at Baxter High School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  I was a swimmer, and I was kind of like a coach.  And my--during the summer, my mother [Alice Nelson Hudson] worked at South Park High School [South Park, Pennsylvania].  And I used to go out there and work during the summer.  And I worked there all summer.  And you know, I'd go out there starting in June and didn't start until football players start in June 'til back in August, you know.  By the time I'd come back there I was blue, man (laughter), being out in that sun every day.
Speaker 1: So you had, you had darkened up pretty good.
Speaker 2: Oh, boy (laughter).  And I would help with the swimming courses in, at the swimming pool.  So I became a fairly good swimmer and a, and a pretty good lifeguard.
Story_ID: 656547
Speaker 1: Now what about your grades in high school [Westinghouse High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?  Did you make good grades otherwise?
Speaker 2: No.  I was fair.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was fair in high school.  Boy, (pause) I was fair in high school as it came along.  Then I got better my junior and senior year because all of a sudden it dawned on me, wow, man, you can go to college.  And I used to tell all my boys, "Hey, man, you can get a scholarship to college, you know, (unclear) you're good swimmer, a good football player."  And you know, this is before it was really famous.  So I worked out hard in the swimming pool.  I worked out hard in the foot- football, you know, doing pushups and running.  And I had bags and things set up in my garage.  Then after school, kids would come down, and we would, you know, hit the bags.  And we had, we had bags where we could hit, you know, that kind of stuff, boxing bags and so forth.  And I had that stuff set up in my garage for years.  And sometimes we would take kids we knew that weren't very good (laughter) to the garage and then we'd, you know, put on the gloves and beat the shit out of them (laughter), send them home.
Story_ID: 656548
Speaker 1: After you'd beat up the innocent kids--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's good.
Speaker 1: --of the neighborhood [Homewood, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and you got, you got yourself into real tiptop shape.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did you have any recruiters coming after you in high school to, you know, was there any college recruiters checking you out?
Speaker 2: If college, (unclear) college, ten college recruiters came to my high school.  Seven of them were after the big guys.  And I was never big, and I guess the most I ever weighed when I was at Westinghouse [Westinghouse High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], I weighed about 147 [pounds].  And I was looked over pretty much.  Couple of them asked me to go down on the field and throw.  They wanted to see me throw.  And I could throw the ball.
Speaker 1: But what kind of a pass did you throw?  I mean, did you have like a sidearm delivery, over the top or--
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) how did you, how did you throw the ball?
Speaker 2: Over the top.  I never threw sidearm.  I threw over the top.  And--
Speaker 1: Could you throw it pretty far?
Speaker 2: About seventy-five yards.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's pretty far.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was far.  None of my buddies could throw that far.  And that--just give you some ideas.  Like, when we were practicing in the back alley, we'd go in that back alley and practice, and there would be an electric wire running from that garage (gesture) to that garage across the alley.  And we'd go like fifteen feet away, fifteen feet away, who can hit the wire, you know.  And we'd do that, we'd do that half the day every day, just drop back and see who'd throw the wire, drop back and see.  And we'd say, "Okay, we're going to throw today.  We're going to throw right shoulder," and we'd throw to the right shoulder.  We'd throw to the (unclear) left shoulder, and we'd throw to the left shoulder, and we'd throw to the left shoulder.  Then we would stand still and say, "All right, throw the ball here in the mouth."  And then after we threw it around the yard, throw to the right ear, throw to the left ear, see if you can hit the chin, throw to the numbers.  And we would do that for hours and hours at a time, me and Sonny Dent [ph.].  And then we'd, then we'd stand, we'd go to the football field.  People don't do this now.  You take the hurdles, and you set up the hurdle, one on the ten and one on the ten yard line, and you go back to the thirty.  And the hurdles were set like this (gesture), okay, with an opening to them, see.  And we'd go back, and we'd start back with the thirty, see if you could drop it in there, see if you could drop it in there, overhand.  You know, we had none of that underhand shit.  (Gesture) Throw if you could dop--drop it in there.  We'd do that for a half hour, forty-five minute, nobody else around.  And we'd move the hurdles to the middle of the field, drop it in it, drop it in, drop it in.  And we'd do that stuff for an hour, you know.  And then we'd go and we'd say, we'd stand about ten yards apart and say, "Okay, right ear, left ear, nose, chin."  And we were trying to put it right on the ear, put it right on the ear.  Well, you know, after a while two things happen.  You learn to pass, and you learn to catch (laughter), you know.  And then we say, "Okay, top of the head.  The ball is going to be at top of the head.  The ball is going be at your chin."  Anyway, say, "Turn sideways, right.  All right, the ball's going to be here.  We're going to throw the ball there."  I did that every day of my life.  And then when it came (laughter), when it came recruiting time, they always wanted the bigger guys.
Speaker 1: So you had the skills, but they were looking for somebody big.
Story_ID: 656549
Speaker 1: Were there any special teachers or mentors or coaches in high school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: What--who, who was your coach at Westinghouse [Westinghouse High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Peter P. Dimperio [Peter P. Dimperio, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Pete, Peter (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Peter P. Dimperio.
Speaker 1: Dimperio?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Dimperio?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  D, D, D-I-E-M-P-I-E-R [sic.], something like that.  It's over--I got it over there.
Speaker 1: Was he Italian?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he's--and you know, I loved the guy.  I thought he was--you know, I'd've died for him.  He was the first guy to let the little football players play.  He had a lot of them little kids that the--lot of them kids that played after me were a lot of the Italian kids.  A lot of them weren't big kids, you know, and he let them play.  And I don't know if it was because of me or what or because what happened was, during the year, I used to practice with a lot of the Italian kids.  And I would tell them what to do, you know, stand over here, run down and break out, run down and jump, run down and do this, the ball will be there.  And they would catch the ball and throw the ball back.  We all laughing and talking.  And it just became that Don Hudson [HistoryMaker Donald Hudson] could throw the football and would, you know, whenever we're going to pass, Hudson going to pass.  And we got into the championship game.
Speaker 1: Who did you play for the championship (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Carrick High School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Carrick.
Speaker 1: Carrick.
Speaker 2: C- C-A-R-R-I-C-K.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother [Alice Nelson Hudson] wasn't going to let me play in the game.
Speaker 1: Why?  What happened?
Speaker 2: Because they call, because of that (clears throat)--
Speaker 1: Because of that article that--
Speaker 2: Because of the article that came out the day before the game.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: They had this big article of the white boy, and they said, "Westinghouse ace passer."  Never threw a pass in the game.  And my mother called the coach and said, "Don ain't playing."  And he talked all that smack to my mother, and I ended up playing in the game.  I didn't throw a pass.  I think I threw one pass that was complete.  But, you know, we--Carrick was easy.  We could beat them any kind of way.  Anyhow, we went on and won the city championship game.
Speaker 1: So that had to be--I mean, did you want to throw?  I'm sure you wanted to throw more passes.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, heck yeah.  I was, I was leading the league (laughter), you know, in touchdown passes.  I was leading the league in catches.  You know, the guys catching the ball.  I was leading the league in--what do you call it--the, in the statistics, you know.
Speaker 1: This is in a time when the passing game wasn't on the par of what it is today.
Speaker 2: No, no, but they had a lot of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) More of a running game, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they hadn't got a lot of boys out there throwing the ball, but you know, I was, I was very accurate.  And, but every look--everybody looked at you as small.
Story_ID: 656550
Speaker 1: You graduated from high school in, what was it, 19--
Speaker 2: Forty-eight [1948] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) forty-seven [1947]--'48 [1948]?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay, 1948.  And, so how did you wind up at Lincoln?
Speaker 2: I--they had come in two or three times to, they had come in two or three times to look at Westinghouse [Westinghouse High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  And eventually what happened was they took all the big guys.  And it got down to me, and of course I wasn't one of the big guys.  And finally, (unclear) one of the coaches said, "Hey, better take Hudson [HistoryMaker Donald Hudson].  He can throw the ball.  We need a quarterback."  And--
Speaker 1: So this is Lincoln University in Pennsylvania or Missouri?
Speaker 2: Missouri [Jefferson City, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Missouri, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And he finally--
Speaker 1: 'Cause there're two black Lincolns.  That's why--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I asked.  Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: They took fin- they finally picked me as one--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of the football players to go to Lincoln.
Speaker 1: So did they give you a scholarship?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Lincoln Uni- did you work during the summer before you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --went to school?  Okay.  Did you work in the tailor shop, or did you do something special?
Speaker 2: I did a little of both.  I did a little work at our tailor shop, but I also had another job on the side.  It wasn't nothing, about fifteen dollars a week, one of them dollars, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But pl- I played every day (laughter).  You know, I was out throwing the ball every day.
Story_ID: 656551
Speaker 1: This is 1948.  Now were you paying any attention to--who, who were the star football players in college football in '48 [1948]?  Would you, who would you see?
Speaker 2: That's not fair.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, I'll retract that question.  Well, I'll retract (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) At that time for the most part, I--
Speaker 1: Did you have any heroes playing college ball in those days?
Speaker 2: My hero was Don Hutson (laughter).
Speaker 1: The white Don Hutson in the--
Speaker 2: The white Don Hutson was my hero.
Speaker 1: All right, all right, okay.  Oh, that's okay.  We don't have to go through but--
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think of some of their names.  I know all them dudes.
Speaker 1: And, now what--they had the--I don't know if it's too early, but I think it's that Army [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York], Army hadn't (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Glenn Davis and--
Speaker 1: Glenn Davis, yeah.
Speaker 2: --and the, and his fullback.  Can't think of his name, great big dude.  They had great--and the quarterback off the Army team.  I got his name over there.  They were three of the great football players that I admired.  I admired Crazylegs Washington [sic.], Crazylegs--
Speaker 1: Hirsch [Elroy Hirsch]?
Speaker 2: Hirsch, from Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin].  I had always been a Michigan man.  I loved Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Was that Thom Darden?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Trying to think who else played for them at the time.
Speaker 1: At, at any rate, well, so the professional football teams weren't as popular then, right?  I mean, I mean, or were they?
Speaker 2: They were.  You know, I watched Pittsburgh Steelers.  You had, you know, they had Bullet--way, I go way back with the Pittsburgh Steelers, see.  They had Bullet Bill Dudley and those guys, you know.  Then they came along.  And I can't even think of some of the names of their stars.  But Pittsburgh was my fan--was my team, you know.
Story_ID: 656552
Speaker 1: At Lincoln [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri], so you got to Lincoln.  Who was your football coach?
Speaker 2: Peter P. Dimperio [sic.].
Speaker 1: No, no, at Lincoln.
Speaker 2: Peter P. Dimperio.
Speaker 1: Oh, I thought he was the coach at Westinghouse [Westinghouse High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Who did you say?
Speaker 1: Lincoln.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry.  The head coach at Lincoln was Ray Kemp.
Speaker 1: Okay, Ray Kemp, all right.  And--
Speaker 2: And then Coach Reed [Dwight T. Reed] came over and took over as the football coach.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so, well, how did you do at Li- at Lincoln?  Did you--now could you play as a freshman, or would--did you have to wait?
Speaker 2: No, you could play.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I waited (laughter) a long time.  You know, you get that stigma put on you.  You're too small.  And everything you do is exaggerated.  You know, you--(makes sound), "He's too small."  (Makes sound), "I told you he couldn't make that catch."  "Oh, I told you he couldn't throw that ball."  And, you know, it's--you know, when it came time to give you a chance to do that, there was so much pressure on you.  You know, sometimes you'd do, you could do it, and sometimes you couldn't.  I mean, you just--there are some things, you know, I could throw the ball through the, through your eyeball, you know.  Come out there today and I throw the ball over there by the chair.  It's, you know, you're pushing, and then they catch you--and they're losing, and they put the little man in the game.  We're losing, we're not--we got a touch- now we got to get a touchdown.  Now all of a sudden they want you to win.  They want you to win the game.  And yay! Don Hudson [HistoryMaker Donald Hudson] won the game, yay, yay!  Next week, you might as well be down underneath the stairs.  You know, they're back to the old big man standard.  And the other point of it was like a tackle.  I wasn't afraid to tackle anybody.  They had, they put me in the game, you know as defensive safety and so forth, you know.  I went 5'4" and about a hundred and thirty (laughter), and thirty-nine [pounds], you know.  And I just made up my mind I'd tackle anybody.  And I don't know if they remember Deacon Dan Towler, who played for Donora [Donora High School, Donora, Pennsylvania], one of the big time, all time pro players.
Speaker 1: Who did he play for?
Speaker 2: Deacon Dan Towler from Donora [Pennsylvania].  I remember in our, one of our games I stopped him.  Everybody thought I was dead (laughter), but I stopped him, you know.  "Woo, way to go Hud," you know.  After that, you know, nobody see you as a coach or nothing, no.  It's a, it's (unclear) you're not big enough.  And, so you fight through that your whole life as a--if you're playing football and want to play and want to be a part of it.
Story_ID: 656553
Speaker 1: Then the other part of that was I probably knew more football than all the rest of them 'cause I had been, you know, into the football thing ever since I was a little kid.  And my mother [Alice Nelson Hudson] would send me to clinics.  And I would go to clinics.  You know, I'd go two or three clinics a week.
Speaker 2: These are football clinics, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, football clinics, see.  And I'd go to another one.  And she'd let me go, you know.
Speaker 2: So the football clinic, they teach you the fine points of passing and fine points of offense and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, they teach you to move--you know, their systems, the T formation, the slide formation, whatever forma- you know, coaches come up with all these names.  And I'd go listen and then come back.  And then all of a sudden, you know, the coaches would say, "What do you know about this?  You know this?  How come we do this?  How come we do that?"  You know, and I show them, I'd show them how to do this, you know, and how to do that, you know.
Speaker 2: So you're showing the coach.
Speaker 1: I'm showing the coach.  I'm a coach, but I'm showing the coach.  And he--he's home sleep.  You know, he ain't, you know.  And then, you know, when it came to running pass patterns, I'd probably did this more than any black kid around.  I took, I took Bill, my buddy, not Bill Harris, Bill Myles.  I took Bill Myles--Bill Myles is now retired from home--Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio].  He and I coached together at this high school team you're going to interview.  I, and I coached the team.  I took him to Michigan.  I took him to Arkansas.  He said, "I had never been to national clinics."  I said, "Come on.  We're going to the national clinic."  I took him to the national clinics and show him how the big boys are doing it, you know, and so forth and so on.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Came back, in fact (unclear) came back to Arkansas, and they were talking about a play, whether they should run this play inside, inside outside, how they're going to use the double on him.  And if they do, what's going to happen and so forth.  And I sat there and I figured it out.  I said, "You know what?  What I think you ought to do is do this and do that and do this and do that," and he did it, you know.  But my whole point is, just 'cause it's them, they don't know everything.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And your reputation in college [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri] as a strategist was well known to the team--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --even though they didn't let you play as much as you--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --should have.  They did know that you knew what you were doing.
Story_ID: 656554
Speaker 1: Now what about at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri]?  Was there any special teachers or coaches or any- anybody that was a mentor to you or helped you that you had a strong relationship with?
Speaker 2: No.  Without a question Coach Reed [Dwight T. Reed], the head coach.  He's a graduate of the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was one of these tough, a very tough, tough, very tough birds, tough.  He's one of these coaches, you know, he--, "I'll smack you in the eye," you know, "look you in the eye, smack you in the eye," you know.
Speaker 1: What position did he play at University of Minnesota?
Speaker 2: Defensive end.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And he wasn't that big, you know.  He's 6'2", 6'3", probably 195, 200, 2- 205 [pounds], but he was a mean hombre.  And he could play football now.  And he was my assistant, he was the head coach when I was at Lincoln for about six years with him and learned a lot of football from him.
Speaker 1: That's when you were the assistant.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the assistant (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: Learned an awful lot of football from him.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So was he there before you graduated from Lincoln?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He came afterwards.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 656555
Speaker 1: So you took ROT- TC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] at Lincoln, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So did--the war [World War II, WWII] was going on when you were in high school [Westinghouse High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: As you were graduating--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the U.S. integrated the [U.S.] military for the first time and got involved in the Korean War.  So, but I think--so in, so you graduated from Lincoln U- University [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri] in what, '52 [1952]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  And then you entered the United States Arm- Army, right?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Did you get a, get a chance to do any coaching in the Army or did--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You said you were stationed at Fort Belvoir [Virginia] first?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: First bet- Fort Belvoir.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: Mean.
Speaker 1: You said '52 [1952], and then you went--so, well, how was it in the Army?  And you--you're coming in, you're coming in as one of the early black officers that's mixed in with the rest of the--
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That is correct.  I got turned down like five times, four or five times before they let me go into the real Army.  And finally--let me tell you some stories about Korea.
Speaker 1: Tell me (laughter).
Speaker 2: Finally what happened was they hired us, and we went into the Lincoln Univer- we went into the regular Army, and we got our commissions at Lincoln that spring.  And we marched in June that summer.  And then, you're going to laugh about this.  This is the way it turned out though.  This is funny.  It tells you something.  I was the company commander in charge of first to eight weeks basic training at Fort Leonard Wood [Missouri].  I had done it for two years now.  So in the meantime, they knew that I wanted to get out of the Army or stay in the Army, but I wanted to do this underwater training that they had for soldiers.  And they, first they told me I was too small.
Speaker 1: To do underwater training?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But, now, they didn't have to carry these damn packs on my back and all this kind of stuff, but I'm too small.
Speaker 1: Now is this like underwater for those diver's suits or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that you see in the movies and stuff.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I was a very good swimmer.  I'm a very good swimmer.  (Laughter) I've been a swimmer ever since I was three years old, like I told you.  My mother [Alice Nelson Hudson] worked at the swimming pool, and I, I could swim.
Story_ID: 656556
Speaker 1: They told me the only way that I could change--oh, I know what happened.  This airplane came over, and I said, "Well, I want to change because I want to go to flight school and be a helicopter pilot or a flight school, a flight pilot for the [U.S.] Army."  And they said, "Well, we don't have too many flight--too many of them."  I said, "Well, I don't care how many.  That's what I would like to do, go to school and be a flight lieutenant."  And they came back and told me no, told me I had to write a letter to the [U.S.] Department of the Army and so forth and so on because I was a half inch too short.  And they were stalling.  I wrote this letter, and they kept bull jiving and bull jiving around.  And in the meantime, that--I never heard from the Army about me being too short to be a officer in there.  So when they, when the, when the thing came back that I had failed the physical and everything because I was a half inch too short, and I couldn't go because of these words (laughter), they said, "This white lieutenant told me, your ass is grass."  (Unclear) he said, "Yeah."  He said, "Your next move will be--set of orders will be to," where were we fight- Viet- not Viet- yeah, Vietnam [sic.].
Speaker 2: Korea, right?
Speaker 1: Korea.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: This was after Korea [Korean War].  Vietnam [Vietnam War] was after.  Yeah (unclear), okay, Korea, will be Korea.  You, if you--'cause I signed up to be a pilot.  So anyhow, what they do--the Army does, they send all your stuff back to D.C. [Washington, D.C.].  Now you know how long that takes--make sure your plans and your this and that is okay.  I'm in physical shape.  And they sent it back and said I was half inch too short.  Then they called me in the office and told me I was a half inch too short to teach these guys, these co-pilots and so forth and that my next job in one week--I think they gave me ten days--we'll be back on the DMZ [demilitarized zone] in Korea.
Story_ID: 656557
Speaker 1: So they send you to Ko- Korea, and what was your assignment in Korea?
Speaker 2: I was a platoon leader.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was a platoon leader for a platoon leader B.  And can I tell you this story?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: Okay.  They send me to Korea, so I'm scared as shit.  They send you on a train.  And the train is raggedy and so forth.  So anyhow, they send you on a train, and the guys got their packs and (unclear), and so forth, you know, and you're taking everything you own.  And they let guys off here.  I said, "Damn" (laughter), (makes sound) train's going like this.
Speaker 1: This is in Korea?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then they let you off here, you see.  I'm the last one on the train.  I'm sitting in a boxcar (laughter).  And we're still driving.  And finally, they let me off.  And where am I?  I'm the last one they let off, and I'm on the DMZ.
Speaker 1: The demilitarized zone, the border between North Korea and South Korea.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) want a DMZ.  This is home.
Speaker 1: This is the border they shoot across, right?
Speaker 2: This is right.  You're home now.  I'm the o- I'm the only one.  I got my pack in there, and I take it off.  Here's your spot down in the ditch, you know.  And, so one day, you know, I'm sitting, put on my fatigues and then I'm doing my thing, you know, Lieutenant Hudson [HistoryMaker Donald Hudson].  And I'm looking to see what I can see, you know, and when, basically looking for firebombs and North Koreans infiltrating and so forth and so on.  Now this is after we had signed the treaty to stop the war [Korean War].  And two nights later, I'm sleeping in my tent with--no, no, there wasn't anybody in that tent with me.  We had one of them tent that sleeps nine, you know.  I think there might have been one other guy.  And all of a sudden, boy, I heard this (makes sound) and (makes sound).  And then, oh, man, what is this?  And I got out, and I peeked out there, the tent, you know.  And (unclear) I didn't see nothing.  I saw a little fireballs different places, but I didn't see any men, you know.  Half a hour later, (makes sound).  And goddamn, they got me in this shit, you know (laughter), just 'cause I wanted to fly airplanes.  Next morning I woke up, everybody was just walking around like nothing happened, you know.  Then I asked a couple of guys, you know, and they said, "Well, they had infiltrated our camp."  And they'll come in, and the Koreans, the North Koreans would steal anything.  They're after your toothbrush.  They're after your teeth.  They're after your eyeballs.  They're after your glasses.  They're after anything that they can use, your shoes.  And the guy said, he said, "What size shoe you wear?"  I told him.  He said, "Take off your shoes."  He said--they'll take a pair of socks and (gesture) roll the socks up, and then put them back up under their shoes, in their shoes, besides the shoes that they're wearing.  And, now they got, you know, when you got up to check out, everybody checked out, they check out, they got, they had another pair of socks in their shoes.  And they, and they'll do that with them big heavy old army socks.  They can roll them bad boys up and put them on the bottom of the shoes and steal them.  And you wake up in the morning and you don't (laughter) have no socks and no shoes.  Oh, boy, it was something.
Story_ID: 656558
Speaker 1: So then, finally, finally they started football again for the second year.
Speaker 2: This is in Ko- Korea?
Speaker 1: In Korea.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Entertainment for the soldiers.  And the first thing the colonel said to me was, "You cannot play.  Your position is here with this company.  You cannot play football."
Speaker 2: Because it was enlisted men or what?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  Yeah, it were enlisted men, but he wouldn't let me play.
Speaker 2: Well, you were an officer.  That's what I'm saying (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: And I didn't sign up to play, see, 'cause I had been through this friction before.  I don't want the company commander mad at me 'cause I'm playing football, and I didn't ask to play football.  Lo and behold, this captain walks up to me and says, "We need a quarterback."  And I said, "Oh, shit."  He said, "You got to play."  I said, "Oh, man."  And he said, "You got to come down and sign up and, so we'll see that you get through."  So anyhow, long story short.  We wear these shoes called bumblebees, something like that, which you can take off.  They're about this high.
Speaker 2: White high top shoes?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the North Koreans can take a blanket and fold it on the floor and put it in your shoe and they would have stolen your shoes, stolen the blanket (laughter), unbelievable, unbelievable.  And, so anyhow, I ended up playing for the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps].
Speaker 2: For the Marines?
Speaker 1: For--
Speaker 2: For--
Speaker 1: --Fort, for Fort--no, wasn't, no, it wasn't Fort Leonard Wood [Missouri] then, but I ended up playing for the other team.  I got a couple of clippings there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And we won.  We played the number one darine--Marine division team.  And I played and threw a touchdown pass, and we won the game.  They weren't happy (laughter), they weren't happy.
Speaker 2: I imagine the Marines thought they would win--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So the next game we played I threw a touchdown pass again.  They weren't happy.  They were pissed.  Two days later, man, I end up--I'm out of the [U.S.] Army.  I'm out of the (laughter) football again.  I'm a company commander with comp- company on the front line.
Story_ID: 656559
Speaker 1: How long were you there?  You were, you were in Korea for--
Speaker 2: Thirteen months.
Speaker 1: Thirteen months, okay, all right.  Was there, was the racial tension--was that die- had that died down by that, by that time?  I know it was very tense during the Korean War.
Speaker 2: There weren't any white off- there weren't any black officers.  And of course, during the war--I wasn't there during the war--and hear- strictly hearsay, but guys didn't have nothing to sleep with, you know, they didn't have enough clothes at first.  And they ended up getting some.  But the biggest beef that, that it was cold, and they didn't have enough rations and stuff.  It's--now one of these, the second part of it, you know, they gave up and so forth.  They were getting more equipment and more food.  And I'll tell you what happened.  Now this is before--when I first got there, I'm scared, okay.  They drove a truck from (pronunciation) Inchean [South Korea], sixty miles all the way up to the DMZ [demilitarized zone].  When we got to the DMZ, I'm the only one left, only one in the truck.  All the officers and stuff they had let out.  And of course, I'm greeted with, "So you're the one that wants to play football."  And I said, "Well--," that, "they didn't have a quarterback.  They picked me."  "Yeah, we'll see about that."  That was the very first minute I got there.  And I'm sixty miles north now.  I am sitting on the DMZ.  I said, "Oh, buddy, this is--."  I wrote my letter, my wife a letter that night, you know.  "I know I might not never see you again, but this is, this is just crazy."
Speaker 1: Now did you meet your wife at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My first wife, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The lady who's with me today was my second wife [Constance Hudson].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So anyhow, I just, I had some bad experiences, you know.
Story_ID: 656560
Speaker 1: You got out in '54 [1954], right?
Speaker 2: I guess that's right.
Speaker 1: Finished in '54 [1954].  And what were your prospects?  What did things look for you when you, when you got out?  Where were you going?  I think you came to Chicago [Illinois], but how did that ha- well, how did that happen?  How did that happen?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a couple of friends, and they had heard--the word had gotten around that I was getting out of the [U.S.] Army, and I didn't have a job.  And one of the guys I had asked, I think he's been here.  No, he couldn't have been here.  I asked him, you know, and he said yeah, he knew of a job.  Well, I went over and applied for the job, and this is another job.  I went over and I applied for the job, even though that they had, the [U.S.] Army had brought me out to put me in the, you know, the spot, I get the job as director at the OFC--no.  I get the job, and lo and behold--as platoon leader, another platoon leader--and what do they do but send me over the--get ready to send me over to Korea again.  And in the meantime, we get up a little basketball team and so forth.  And I don't know how this happened.  They took me out of the baseball team.  I can't even play baseball.  They took me out of that baseball team and brought me back to the camp.  And I guess it was really a few days later that I ended up getting my divor- discharge.  I don't know why, don't know how.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's when you came to the United States, back (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --back to the states?  And, so you worked with George Pruitt, you said, of Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And George Pruitt was associated with the Chicago Bears in some way?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Nope?
Speaker 2: When I was a teacher at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri] I came to Chicago, and I recruited George Pruitt to play basketball for Lincoln University.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: He turned out to be a very, very great player.  And he didn't play with the actual Glo- Globetrotters [Harlem Globetrotters], but he ended up, he did play with the team next to them [Kansas City Steers], whatever that was.
Speaker 1: The Generals, the Washington Generals (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) I have no idea.  And he, of course, had that (unclear) that little cup they gave him to take out.  You know, I don't know what was in it.  But anyhow, he played for the Army for three or four years.  And I saw him maybe three or four times.  He is probably the best guy I ever recruited.  Yeah, as a, as an athlete.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then he died.
Speaker 1: And, but he played for Lincoln.  You recruited him--
Speaker 2: Yeah, for Lincoln.
Speaker 1: --for Lincoln, okay.  All right, so, what I was trying to figure out is when you got out of the Korean War--I mean the Army in '54 [1954], did you go back to Lincoln first, or did you go to Chicago?  Well, let's just get--well, let's just take you up from Chi- from Lincoln then--
Speaker 2: Okay.  I think--
Speaker 1: --when--
Speaker 2: --I went back to Lincoln.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  So when you went back to Lincoln you became the assistant football coach?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  All right, but you also taught track, gymnastics, swimming.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: It's a lot of things, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 656561
Speaker 1: Eventually you started working on your master's degree too.
Speaker 2: No, I had my master's, and I finally finished it up.  And--let me ask my wife.  Connie [Constance Hudson]?
Speaker 1: (CONSTANCE HUDSON):  Yes?
Speaker 2: I have a question for you, dear.
Speaker 1: (CONSTANCE HUDSON):  Um-hm.
Speaker 2: When I got--did I have my master's?  When did I get my master's, after I got out of--we came back from--
Speaker 1: You got it in 195- '59 [1959], according to your resume.
Speaker 2: (CONSTANCE HUDSON):  Yeah, sometime in the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: I got it after I got--
Speaker 2: (CONSTANCE HUDSON):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: --after I got back from Korea.
Speaker 2: (CONSTANCE HUDSON):  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-nine [1959].
Speaker 2: That sounds about right.
Speaker 1: (CONSTANCE HUDSON):  In Springfield, Massachusetts.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Springfield--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Springfield College [Springfield, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: --that's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Right.  Okay.  So you spent like a couple of years in Massachusetts, or did you do it correspondence or what?
Speaker 1: I did both ways.  I spent a little--one year there, and then I spent it correspondence.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So this is, so, so while you're teaching at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri], you're working on your master's too.
Story_ID: 656562
Speaker 1: So this is when you worked for Coach Reed [Dwight T. Reed], right, at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri]?  You were the assistant football coach in addition to all these other duties in the--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) physical education--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --department.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So did you and the coach constitute the physical education department at Lincoln pre- pretty much or--
Speaker 2: It was Coach Reed, myself, and I think there was one other woman there, Ms. Ord [ph.], and maybe one other woman, Connie [Hudson's second wife, Constance Hudson]?
Speaker 1: Was there a basketball coach too?  I guess there had to be a basketball coach, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and Ms. (laughter) did--was Ms. Ord girls basketball coach, basketball coach?
Speaker 1: (CONSTANCE HUDSON):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: We had hired one?
Speaker 1: (CONSTANCE HUDSON):  Yeah, I think there was a (unclear).
Speaker 2: I don't--
Speaker 1: (CONSTANCE HUDSON):  (Unclear) (Simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't got a name.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: (CONSTANCE HUDSON):  (Unclear) Theressa Ferguson was there, too.  I don't know the year.
Speaker 1: Oh, no we can't hear your wife from over here because of the mic situation.  So you--you'd have to say whatever she's telling you.  No, no, no, don't call her over.  But you have to repeat what she's saying--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) on the mic so we can hear.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: That's all.
Speaker 2: I'm looking at, I'm looking at your man [Scott Stearns] behind you there, and he hadn't said a word.  But I'm watching him.  He's moving around there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well, he would concur with that you have, you have to say whatever it is.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  I got you.  All right, what was the last question then?
Speaker 2: Well, I was just asking you about what was going on at Lincoln when you were there and what you were doing.  You're work- working on a master's degree.  You're teaching swimming.  You're teaching gymnastics, track.  You're doing a lot of different things.  Coach--you're assistant to Coach Reed and just how, I guess--here's a good question.  How is football changing--how did it change from the time that you played college football to the time that you came back to coach?  'Cause I know football was evolving and changing in those days, right?  You had more passing and going on, I guess, at Lincoln than it was before.  The game was opening up a little bit.
Speaker 1: Well, the game was opening up a little bit.  And I think recruiting was down.  So we put a big rush, for the most part, on our recruiting, you know, bringing in some kids that could, that could, we thought, could play, you know.  And of course St., and St. Louis [Missouri], Kansas City [Missouri], Kansas City, Kansas, and we had set up some programs before we left with different schools and different coaches.  And it was a matter of okay, now we're back, and we think that we can offer you a little more.  You know, we think we're a better program.  We're going to get some stuff through money and so forth.  And, so that's the way it was when we came back.
Speaker 2: So how many scholarships would you typically have for students on the football team?
Speaker 1: About fifty-five.
Speaker 2: Scholarships?
Speaker 1: Scholarships.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's a lot, right?
Speaker 1: Well, of course you had to earn them.  And you, you know, and you had to keep them with your grades and so forth.  And, so it was, it was split up a lot.  You know, kids come back.  They had to have RO- they had RO- no, not RO- ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] money, but some kids come back from [U.S.] Army and had money.  Some kids (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, the G.I. Bill money [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944].
Speaker 1: G.I. Bill money.  Then some kids would come back and they had finished a half a course or something, you know, and they had picked up a stipend here.  And the Army was giving them so much money for being a soldier.
Story_ID: 656563
Speaker 1: What league was Lincoln in?  Were they in a league?
Speaker 2: At the time, now let me say this--at the time when I left we were in a league.  Now that I've been gone, I looked at the practice the other day, when I got a chance to go over there, and they're in another league.
Speaker 1: Well, what league were they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know what league it is.
Speaker 1: What league were they in when you were there?
Speaker 2: Just I think it was called the Lincoln University athletic league, I think.
Speaker 1: No, I mean the schools, I mean the schools usually have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were just Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri].
Speaker 1: So it was an independent school that played--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We just--
Speaker 1: Who did you play though?
Speaker 2: Central Missouri State [Central Missouri State College; Central Missouri State University, Warrensburg, Missouri]--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: --Rolla [Missouri School of Mines and Metallurgy; Missouri University of Science and Technology, Rolla, Missouri] and--
Speaker 1: Did you play Pr- Prairie View [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] and some of those schools in Texas or--
Speaker 2: We still had them on the schedule.  We had--well, there was Prairie View, but we had played Prairie View.  We had--
Speaker 1: You played Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] or--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, we played Grambling and got our (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]--
Speaker 2: --got our butt beat again.  We played Grambling, played Southern.  I think they were in that league, Grambling, Southern, Jack- now they played Jackson [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Jackson State?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's all I can remember right now.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's pretty good.  That's a pretty good group of schools, probably--okay.  Mississippi Valley State [Mississippi Vocational College; Mississippi Valley State University, Itta Bena, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  And how did the teams do?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess they were four and five, something like that.
Speaker 1: Had kind of mediocre years.
Speaker 2: Yeah, mediocre, very mediocre.
Speaker 1: Were there any special players that you, that you coached dur- during this time?
Speaker 2: That I coached or you mean that were there?
Speaker 1: Well, you were the assistant coach so, you know, I'm just saying.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, oh, what are you talking about?
Speaker 1: At Lincoln University when you were the assistant football coach.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And bef- you're talking about before I left this last time, yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: No.  I'm talking about in the, in the--before you came to Minnesota, before you came to--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Way back.
Story_ID: 656564
Speaker 1: In the interest of our time, I'm going to just ask you about Macalester College [St. Paul, Minnesota].  We're going to get right to this historic time pe- period here.  Now you were the head coach at Minneapolis Central High School [Minneapolis, Minnesota] from '68 [1968] to '72 [1972].  And tell us how you found out about the job at Macalester.
Speaker 2: I found out through Bill McMoore [Donald "Bill" McMoore], a friend of mine who lived in Minneapolis [Minnesota] (clears throat).  He wrote me and told me that the job was open, and he knew I should--he said, "You should apply for the job."  And he said, "They don't have any black coaches in the school except the assistant coaches."  And he said, "They're trying to go on the move," so he said, "Why don't you apply?"  So I did apply.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is for the job at--
Speaker 2: At Minneapolis Central.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Minneapolis Central, okay, all right.  (Laughter) It's like--okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, well, tell us about what, what happened in Minneapolis Cen- Central.  Were you successful?
Speaker 2: Do you really want to know (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All right, when I first got to Minneapolis Central, of course, they had me fill out some papers and stuff.  And they wanted to know what my experience was and so forth.  And for the most part, I had had more experience than any of the coaches that were already there.  I had coached something like ten, fifteen years.  And they were much less than that.  And then I had coached in college against high school, although I had coached some high school ball before I got there.  So as the story goes on at Central, they moved a guy up to be the athletic director.  He was a very nice guy.  And he came to me, and he asked me if I had any coaches that I would be bringing, and I said no.  I was just coming myself as the head football coach.  So he said, "I'll take you around."  And he showed me around and all that kind of stuff.  And we finally got down to the nitty gritty there.  And I said, "Well, you know, how many coaches--?" They had had something--I think they had ten coaches.  I said, "How many coaches will I have?"  He said, "None."  I said, "What do you mean none?"  "They all quit because you got the job."  And I said, "Well, can I have maybe--maybe I need to see a superintendent or the athletic director of the city.  And here you, you know, here we are with a football, high school football team who's had a very good record, who has been known to have a good record, and all the football coaches on the team quit because you hired me."  And, you know, I'd been all over the country, not necess- you know, coaching at different schools and so forth.  And, you know, it's not like I don't know what I would be doing.  So anyhow, they went a couple of days and said that they would have to check on some things.  Make a long story short, I was still the head coach.  And they hadn't come back yet.  They hadn't made up their mind.
Story_ID: 656565
Speaker 1: So the first thing they told me was, well, I'd have to get out in the streets and start looking for some people that wanted to coach.  So one of the guys on the team had coached the sophomores, and he decided that he would stop and coach the sophomores.  But he didn't want anything to do with the freshmen, and he didn't want any do--anything to do with the varsity.  The only thing he would coach would be the sophomores.  That's what he did there, that's what he would do.  And, well, I'm sitting here, I'm begging for a coach.  I'm in a good league, you know.  I'm not a dummy here and, so I need more coaches.  So the word went out around (unclear) the school district that Minneapolis Central [Minneapolis Central High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota] was hiring coaches.  Well, I met a guy--I can't think of his name now--I met a guy that is getting out of the [U.S.] Army, and he had coached football.  And anyhow, I signed him on as assistant coach.  (Laughter) Then they told me the--this--the people, Minneapolis [Minnesota] and the friend I had named Bill McMoore [Donald "Bill" McMoore], who was part of the Minneapolis school system [Minneapolis Public Schools], told me about this young man named Eric Eversley, who had graduated from Central, but he was at, he was at the school [University of Minnesota Duluth, Duluth, Minnesota] getting his master's [sic.].  And he was going to graduate in about two months.  So I called Eric, and Eric was very, very happy.  And he was just getting his bachelor's degree.  So he graduates, school gradu- you know, school let out, and he graduated.  So, now I had two coaches.  So then they said, "Well, now we're going to have to scour the streets of the Minneapolis Central area and see if we can get some of the old coaches to come back."  And, so in the meantime, we did that, and we picked up a couple of guys.  So instead of having ten coaches like they had, I think we ended up with about six, and the same thing would happen with the players.
Story_ID: 656566
Speaker 1: Some of the players left?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  They didn't know who we were, or who I was.  And some of the players didn't come back to play.  Some went to other teams.  And then we made, or tried to make, a crusade through the community to call up people and call up kids who had played, black kids, white kids, whatever, they had played, to come back to school and play.  And, so the first day of practice we had six.  And that's when we went out and started trying to get kids.  The next day at practice we had somewhere between twelve and fourteen.  And then in Minnesota they play a game before the season opens, a little all-star like, you know, just to see what the, what the different teams had.  They play each other for like ten minutes.  Everybody plays ten minutes.  So we got ready to play that game.  We did have eleven players by then.  And I don't know if we won the game or not.  So we had another week before school opened, and we would pick up kids who had played the year before [at Minneapolis Central High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota].  Well, we picked up a few, and it ended up with a team who had had thirty-eight, forty players on varsity.  We ended up with about twenty-six.  And all our teams went down.  I don't even remember the numbers.
Story_ID: 656567
Speaker 1: The cry went out that we were not very good.  And, so when we played our first game (cough) we got beat.  We, when we played the first game it was, it was 0-0.  Then when we played the second game I--
Speaker 2: So it was a tie (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We did--yeah.
Speaker 2: A 0-0 tie.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's not bad.
Speaker 1: No.  When we played the second game we got beat twelve something.  Oh, man, we got in that fan thing, we got the scores.  Oh, this is good.  Then the next game we lost, and we lost by about six points or something like that.  And one of the sportswriters write an article in the paper that Macalester College [sic.] looked very poor.
Speaker 2: You mean Central--
Speaker 1: Central, yeah.  I'm sorry
Speaker 2: --High School [Minneapolis Central High School] in Minneapolis [Minnesota].
Speaker 1: Central High School, we looked very poor and that we weren't a very good football team.  Well, I wrote a letter back to that sportswriter and told him about the situation and, you know, we--our coaches quit, that people, you know, didn't come back to the games.  The kids did not come back to the games and so forth.  And he apologized.  But then--where's the article?  It was one bad article that they didn't know why they hired me.  I'd had no experience, and they should have hired somebody else.  And I wrote a letter back, and the guy shut up.  But I'd wrote a letter that I'd already coached four years of high school, six years of college [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri], been to two bowl games and so forth, so forth.  So I kind of knew what I was doing, you know.  So he quit.  He cut the article.  The guy that wrote the article was the one that did it.  So we lost in that first year, and we ended up, we ended up like--I forgot what the record counted--six and two.
Speaker 2: You mean two and six.
Speaker 1: Two and two--yeah, we lost--
Speaker 2: Lost six.
Speaker 1: Lost six.
Speaker 2: Won two.
Speaker 1: Won two.
Story_ID: 656568
Speaker 1: So people were going to quit, and they wanted a new coach [at Minneapolis Central High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota] and so forth.  But then what happened is I became the swimming coach, the football coach.  I also became the--they wanted me to become the soccer coach, but I didn't know anything about soccer.
Speaker 2: Were you the track coach?
Speaker 1: Track coach, that's what it was.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: I was swimming coach, track coach, football coach, and there was one other thing.  So anyhow, we did all right in swimming, fair, and we did all right in track, fair.  We--you know, in the league and, so that was fine.  So then when that was all over I was kind of beat up, and I was tired.  Then they asked me to be the choir director.  I became the choir director.  My dad [George Hudson] is a, was a musician.  And since my dad was a musician, I, and I had majored in music in school [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri], and I kind of quit in the middle of--and made--major--music my minor because football was taking up so much time.  But I could still do a little bit in music, you know, and I love music.  So they make me the--the choir dire- director quits, and they make me, the football coach, the choir director.  And I told them I can't do--be the choir director, and they said--I can't, said, "I can't play and watch all these kids."  They must have had eighty kids.  And, so what they did, they say, "Well, we'll get you a, we'll get you a piano player."  So they got this lady, who plays for the choir, from a church and so forth.  She was very good, Ms. Jones [ph.].  She was very good.  And she was one of these tough old ladies, and she kept that choir group together, you know.  "Choir, we're not having that back there in that back room," you know, and--so I had a pretty good choir room, see.  And so I had to put on a Christmas choir thing. So I ended up, I put on the Christmas choir program, which wasn't hard for me because I like music, and I had put a--done that before in lower grades, you know.  And we put on a music show, and we sang the Christmas songs as usual and, so everything went okay.  Everybody was surprised.  But I got more of the quiet thing--oh, they gave me a woman that could play the piano.  And, so I ended up, I was football.  And then I had choir.  And then they threw track on me.  I ended up being the track coach.
Speaker 2: Right.  We already talked about that.  So--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --so did the football team win more games?
Speaker 1: That first year we won two games.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  What happened the second?
Speaker 1: The second year we won six games and lost two.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And we ended up playing pretty, pretty good.  And I think, I think we tied for the city championship.  Yeah, we did, we tied for the city championship.  Then they gave me, they gave me the Christmas choir, the regular choir.  I was also track coach.  I was also swimming coach and anything else, I can't think of.  I didn't need anything else.
Story_ID: 656569
Speaker 1: What about the third year [at Minneapolis Central High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota] in terms of the football team?  Did they do any--
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't there three years.  Why they keep saying three years?  I was there--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, yeah, I thought you were there from '68 [1968] to '72 [1972].  No, it's not true?
Speaker 2: No, I went over to Macalester.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, tell us--okay, well, you started at Macalester in '71 [1971] now?  Is that '71 [1971]?  Or was it--yeah, it says in '71 [1971] you were offered an assistant football coaching position at Macalester.  That's '71 [1971], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, so you were the assistant coach until '72 [1972], when the coach, he moved (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Boldstead [ph.].
Speaker 1: Yeah, he moved on or something, right?
Speaker 2: He quit, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, he quit.
Speaker 2: He quit coaching.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was--well, tell us about Macalester College [St. Paul, Minnesota].  What kind of college is Macalester, and what were their expectations?
Speaker 2: I tell you the truth, I loved Macalester.  It was just a different atmosphere for a college.  You knew the people.  The kids that went there were really, really after a college education.  Money seemed to be no object to bring people into speak, to take children place- places, you know, where they had never been, to show them how programs work.  They had programs going to Chicago [Illinois], you know, going to New York, and going to these places and to see how people put on big time shows and things like that, you know.  And even in their history and English departments, they got all the latest equipment to work with, and that was good.  And, you know, you go to the cafeteria, you got the best of food.  All kids fuss about cafeteria food, but Macalester food was good.  And they ate--
Speaker 1: Now I have a note here that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Then I got involved, you know, work--if you're doing something, they follow you.  And I got involved with a couple of programs there.  And one of the programs I got involved with was a summer youth program.  And I think they carried it on at Macalester for seven years after I left.  And it was a summer youth program run by the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association].  And I became the charter member and ran the program, and I ran it for four years, five years while I was there.  And it gave people jobs at Macalester in the summer, but it also helped us recruit kids in the community.  And I guess we ran about a thousand kids during the summer.  And it gave teachers out in the community jobs.  The kids that we got, we took them a lot of places.  And they enjoyed it.  (Laughter) We had, we had tons of fun, and I can remember a lot of fun stories about it.  But it was a great program for our kids.  Kids learned to play tennis.  They learned to swim and--under great instructors.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I thought that was wonderful.  But I ended up the football coach.  I ended up the track coach.  I ended up--they wanted me to be the basketball coach.  They wanted me to be something else.  I don't know.  Well--
Speaker 1: You were, you were assistant chairman of the department of physical education.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And associate professor of physical education and kinesiology, yeah.  So this is a school that Walter Mondale's an alumnus of?
Speaker 2: Walter Mondale.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Whatchamacallit was there.  Who?
Speaker 1: Kofi Annan.
Speaker 2: Kofi Annan (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The secretary general of the United Nations--
Speaker 2: Yes, what's his name now--
Speaker 1: --went to school there.
Speaker 2: --that's there (gestures)?
Story_ID: 656570
Speaker 1: So distinguished alumni go to Macalester [Macalester College, St. Paul, Minnesota], but, but the football team was never really that good, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So before you started it was one, seven and one.  That's in '71 [1971].  And I think in three seasons you won like--four seasons you won like three games?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They, you know, we got--I hate to say this, but we got the shaft in some of our games, you know.  I'll never forget that.  We were playing one team, and our team, our guy caught the ball.  First, let me back--we didn't have the greatest football players in the world, all right, but the kids worked hard.
Speaker 1: Well, it's a small college with a smaller number of--no, no scholarships, right, for football players (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No scholarships.  The kids that I grabbed, I grabbed off the street, you know, and that kind of thing and the--yeah, I played on my team, that kind of thing, you know.
Speaker 1: Not off the street but off the campus, right?
Speaker 2: Off the campus.
Speaker 1: Off the campus, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean off the high school campus and so forth.  And they come in, you know, we teach them.  By the time they're juniors, you know, they had learned to swim.  They had learned to play different sports.  And some of the time they never expected us to win, but our kids, you know, they kept playing.  And in football it was the same thing.  We'd grab kids that other schools didn't want.  And, you know, they'd stand up, and they have no scholarship.  And, so you take them back to school, and you're going teach them, you know, worth.  St. John's [St. John's University, Collegeville, Minnesota] and Concordia [Concordia University, St. Paul, St. Paul, Minnesota] (laughter), you know, it's a different story.
Speaker 1: Those are other colleges that you played?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: St. John's is pretty--
Speaker 2: You know, they weren't tough teams in the nation.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Concordia College [Moorhead, Minnesota]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean, you know, we--a couple of games we went to we dressed forty-nine, and they dressed 110.  And they come down and circled the field, you know, and that kind of thing.  And the one game we played, the one game we played Concordia, we almost beat them.  They came down to our field, and they were just mopping us up.  And all of a sudden we got some energies from somewhere, and we played them, intercepted a pass here and (unclear), and we had--it was their homecom- oh, no, we played them at their homecoming place.  And at halftime we had them down twenty-one to seven at St. Olaf [St. Olaf College, Northfield, Minnesota].  And they ended up beating us by a touchdown.  And then this thing, you know, they come out, they're dressed, and they'd have seven coaches.  We'd come and dressed, and we'd have three, you know.
Speaker 1: So what team did you beat?
Speaker 2: But our kids played.
Speaker 1: But what teams did you actually beat?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) We beat Augsburg [Augsburg College; Augsburg University, Minneapolis, Minnesota] once.  I don't know who we beat.  We beat, oh, we beat Gustavus [Gustavus Adolphus College, St. Peter, Minnesota].  Never beat, never beat the guy up north.  Never beat either of the guys up north.
Speaker 1: What you say--north of Minneapolis [Minnesota] you mean?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was it St. Olaf's College or some other--I don't know--
Speaker 2: Concordia.  This school, I forget some of the schools' names.  I'd have to look at them.  Some of them we'd never beat, some we got.  We played them one, you know, down to one touchdown, two touchdowns and ended up getting beat.
Story_ID: 656571
Speaker 1: So you were able to recruit some black players for the team for the first time, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And there's a story here that I read that said that they--the other schools started calling Macalester [Macalester College, St. Paul, Minnesota] Black- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Blackalester.  I got that in those notes and things.  What happened was, we went out and we started recruiting kids and recruited a couple of kids, black kids--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, okay.  Let's start that again.  Please try not to touch your mic 'cause it--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, okay.  Just re- restart the answer again.
Speaker 2: We went out and--on our recruiting trip, and there were a couple of kids that we had heard were pretty good, and we tried them.  And the kids wanted to come.  The coaches were telling them they didn't want to come to our school, you know, and you don't want to go with those black kids.  And then we had the one incident where--well, like you said, we were playing, I don't know if it was--I hate to say this--St. John's [St. John's University, Collegeville, Minnesota] or Augsburg [Augsburg College; Augsburg University, Minneapolis, Minnesota] or somebody, and they were calling us Blackalester, you know.  And the kids, you know, they didn't like that.  And it was--that part of it was bad.  "Hey, you take them niggers home," you know, and, "Nigger coach!"
Speaker 1: This is mainly in Minnesota?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all Minnesota.
