Story_ID: 317768
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: It's Richard Lewis Holmes [HistoryMaker Richard Holmes].  Holmes is H-O-L-M-E-S; and I guess I can do Lewis.  Lewis is L-E-W-I-S.  It's Richard Lewis Holmes.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Columbus, Georgia; October 17, 1951.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm currently a senior vice president with Georgia Power Company, which is a unit of the Southern Company [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is the 26th.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're presently at 515 Auburn Avenue in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, I cut August off.  This is the 26th of August [2005], right?
Speaker 2: 26th of August.
Speaker 1: Yep.  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I thought I got that right, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you're right.  You're right.
Story_ID: 317769
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask you by management that only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food?  Not in particular.  I mean, I like vegetables.  Favorite food?  No, not really.  Not a favorite, per se.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, I love black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I like black cars, black suits.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think it's powerful.
Speaker 1: All right.  It makes sense to me.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Oh, I love the summertime.  I'm the one that--I like weather that I can wear short pants.   I'm not a person that likes cold weather.  I like warm weather, because I think that gives you an opportunity to just take advantage of nature, and get outside, and really read, and smell the air, and be able to do outside activities, which I like to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I do now.  I had an opportunity to go to Hawaii this past summer.  This past fall, rather, and I never been there before, and I had that opportunity--just says to me that is the absolute greatest place to go visit if you got to go visit from a holiday point of view.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite phrase, I guess one that I've really love to, and I think has a lot of meaning.  That's, "Face reality as it is, not as it was or as you wish it were."  That's actually a quote from Jack Welch that he used when he first took over GE [General Electric] some years ago.  I think it has a lot of meanings in terms of, you know, dealing in the now, dealing in the present, accepting things for what they are, dealing with those things that, that are there but understanding those things that you got to accept and understand those things that you can change and go about changing those.
Story_ID: 317770
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you about your parents and about your ancestors, about your family.  I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Carl Holmes] side?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We'll start with your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Her name is Janice Holmes, H-O-L-M-E-S.  Her maiden name is George.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her--is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Blakely, Georgia and, you know, I sit here and can't tell the year.  She is seventy--at this date, she is seventy-three years-old, but I can't tell you the year, whatever that is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: January 17 is her birthday, and so she's seventy-three year-old.
Speaker 1: January 17?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family in terms of the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --ancestors on your mother's side.  How far back can you trace that side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, obviously, she can go--I mean, we can go back to my great-grandparents, and I can do that from my mother's father [Abram George] actually died right after she was born, and--but my grandmother [Essie Mae George], my mom's mother, her family we can go back to their father--I mean, to my great-grandparents and then they actually can go back to our great-great-grandparents--my great-great-grandparents.  And I actually knew my great-grandparents on my mother's--on my mom's side on her mom's side, but I don't know on her dad's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What do you know about your great-great-grandparents?
Speaker 2: Well, I actually do not know the great-great.  I just know they can go back that far.  My mom can go that far.  My great-grandparents was Yancy [Yancy George] and Babe George, and I remember them very well who had pretty large family.  They pretty much grew up farming, and they pretty much grew up being able to--having their own land, which was pretty unique and they farmed their own land and, you know, most people back in that day, they lived off the land.  But they did own their own land--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --on that side of the family.
Speaker 1: So would that been--they would be active in the early part of century, turn of the century?
Speaker 2: I guess that would--yes, yes.  That's correct.  I'm sitting here thinking of when my mom was born.
Speaker 1: Of the 19th century, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they would have been--
Speaker 1: Twentieth century, the turn of the 20th century?
Speaker 2: It would have been the early 1900s that they would have been--they would have been active in terms of farming and doing those kinds of things.  They grew up on the south side of their--Blakely who was Early County Georgia, which is right next to the Alabama line, really.  They grew up in that area and farmed the land and, obviously, at that point no one was real prosperous, but, you know, but I do recall and remember about them, they said during the Depression [Great Depression] they never knew there was a depression because they--what they grew is what they ate, and they ate everything.  You know, for instance, if they had pigs, I mean, they'd use every part of the pig in terms of food and that kind of thing.  So I remember them talking about that, and I guess I remember my grandfather really paying a lot of attention to the--I'm sorry, my great-grandfather really paying a lot of attention to, at that time what would have been his great-grand kids.  He loved to be able to ride us on his wagon and his horse, and he always had fruit and nuts for us.  I mean, that was--you know, he always did that.  And I can remember that about them, and actually I was probably--I lived--I mean, I was probably ten, twelve years old before they passed away.  So I remember them very distinctly.  I do not know my mom's father's family, do not know that.  I know of relatives, but I don't know the--I don't know them as well, or I don't remember them as well as I knew all my grandmother's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the George side of the family--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you're familiar with?
Speaker 2: Yes, I know that side of the family.  And, in fact, that side of the family is kept fairly close together because we still have family reunions, and that's why I say they can do the tree very well because part of all of the family reunions they reiterate that tree and talk about that tree.  The family tree, if you will.
Story_ID: 317771
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --your mother [Janice George Holmes] was born as I calculated in 1932, sounds like?
Speaker 2: Well, I was going to say early '30s [1930s], yes.
Speaker 1: Yes, '32 [1932] something?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  When you say her parents [Essie Mae George and Abram George], yes we were talking about the early part of the century from them.  Are there any stories in your family traditions about where the family was way back in slavery or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I really don't--I never been able to get any significance of any history beyond the two great-great-grandparents.  And the only reason I know the two great-great-grandparents, is by virtue of the, of the tree that we always put on our, our, reunion T-shirts, and I only know of them in that sense.  I do not know of them relative to slavery.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So to your knowledge, they're always around that part of Georgia?
Speaker 2: Right.  My family grew up pretty much--both my mother and father [Carl Holmes] grew up in the same, in the same town [Blakely, Georgia] and county [Early County, Georgia].  My mom grew up on the south side of that county, and my dad grew up on the north side of the county.  But basically, they all--their history all evolved around that area, that part of the world.
Speaker 1: So did your grandparents live on your great-great-grandparents' farm or they--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Did your mother talk about growing up, and what she did when she was a little girl, and going to school, and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they talked--traditional stories.  At that time in that location, there wasn't but one school, and that school went from, obviously, from first grade to twelfth grade.  And, in fact, that was something that when we had family reunions, that's what they all reminisce about, because that was a--that and churches.  I mean, those were the places where they can all fondly remember each other, and they can all fondly remember--have memories of those times and the life and the things they experienced in.  So our family evolved around our church back then.  There were two churches that they actually went to.
Speaker 1: What were the names of them?
Speaker 2: Shady Grove [Shady Grove Church, Early County, Georgia] and Jerusalem [Jerusalem A.M.E. Church, Blakely, Georgia].  That was the name of the church.
Speaker 1: And the school?
Speaker 2: And the school was Booker T. Washington High School [Blakely, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I guess everybody had a Booker T. Washington High School.
Speaker 1: They didn't have a Dunbar?
Speaker 2: No, didn't have a Dunbar.  I guess that's--(laughter).  But, no.  And, in fact, that school still has reunions today.  They still have school reunion--they have a reunion pretty much every year around the Fourth of July, so people can have the Fourth of July holiday, and they do school reunions and they are now--they used to do it every other year and now they've begun to do it every year, because it just brings a lot of people back, and the irony of that is growing up in south Georgia a lot of folks migrated north or went to Florida, if you will.  Most went north to the D.C. [Washington, D.C.] area, to the New York [New York] area, New Jersey area; and now my--people that are my parents' age are now drifting back and coming back south.  They've had enough of the hustle--they were able to retire from jobs that they worked for years and now they're moving back south.  So coming back to this family reunion, there are so many that are saying we're moving back, or we're looking for land down here, we want to do this.  And now they want--because for the most part, it is still a rural setting.  And people just have the openness of that rural setting, and, obviously, the economics of that setting is not like the larger cities that they've come from.  So a lot of people want to move back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not me (laughter) but they want to move back.
Story_ID: 317772
Speaker 1: Now, does your mother [Janice George Holmes] have any stories about growing up that she passed down that she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, she, she--the stories I hear from her are just, you know, how life was.  I mean, how they walked to school and when they would go to school and they would come home they had to work in the fields to--because that's the only way we survived, how they would work in the fields until the evening time until they'd have to, you know, to clean up and do homework.  Basically, that kind of routine over and over every day and she just talked about the summers where--particularly, during the harvest time in the late summer and early fall, how life, you know, changed.  They talked about the social events of, obviously, church, because that was a big deal and they also talked about an event called the fair.  The fair would come to town in the fall, and that was a big deal, you know, because they actually allowed them to get out of school for half a day.  A day in some cases, and half a day in others to go visit this county fair, and that was a big deal for them.  And, obviously, they always talk about those relatives who would migrate north and would come back and tell them how life was in other places, you know, beyond the local town there.  Those are the kind of memories--of course, back then, because everybody was so close to each other, most social settings, I mean, were with themselves, they have great vivid memories of people, of events and things that happen.  When so and so got this kind of car, and when so and so's daughter moved and they came back, and they just--that's one thing that I'm finding with my parents that are so unlike what I've experienced, and so unlike what my kids experienced.  We don't remember all the names of various folks and back then they could relate to the, the names and the family.  They knew birthdays, they knew special events.  Where nowadays, you have to have your Day-Timer to remember all that stuff because you don't remember it.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother go to college?
Speaker 2: No, she did not.  She went to high school--she went to school and didn't graduate.  She didn't graduate and then she, of course, worked there, and she was going to go back but she never did.
Story_ID: 317773
Speaker 1: But my dad, of course, he went to college, and I know we haven't talked about him yet, but he was a--
Speaker 2: What is his full name?  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 1: Carl J. Holmes.
Speaker 2: Carl J. Holmes.  What does the J stand for?
Speaker 1: James.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: You know what, you are taxing me now (laughter).  I guess, I shouldn't have gotten that.  He was born in Blakely [Georgia] too, and I cannot tell you his birth date.  It is March, and I cannot tell you exact date.  He passed away in 1986, and that's no reason I shouldn't know it, but I just do not recall it, to be honest with you.  But he, he had the opportunity--you asked me about education.  My dad went to Fort Valley State [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] for two years, and then from Fort Valley State, he went into the [U.S.] military.  He served in the military for thirty years.  He retired after thirty years in the military.
Speaker 2: Did he go in as an officer?
Speaker 1: No, he was an enlisted man.  He reached the rank of first--sergeant first class, is the highest rank that he achieved.  I mean, he was a through and through military type, if you will.  Served in Korea, served in Vietnam, and, in fact, almost had a--almost had to do a second stint in Vietnam, but he was able to get some assistance and he did not have to go the second time.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So did he go to Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Blakely, Georgia] too when he was coming up?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 2: All right
Speaker 1: It was--actually, it was a, it was not Booker T. Washington.  It was a forerunner to that.  It was a smaller school on the north side that led--well, I guess, it was Booker T. Washington, because it actually merged with it, with Booker T. Washington, yes.  They had a little smaller school that kids from another county had gone to, as well.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, what do you know of the ancestors on his side of the family?
Speaker 1: Well, obviously, that's the name Holmes and from what I understand the Holmes name is, is from his--like an old English kind of name, and the Holmes name comes from, I think, what I understand is some of the, the--they were sharecroppers on my side of the family, on that side of the family, and as being sharecroppers, they basically farmed the land for someone else and my understanding is early on, the Holmes name was from the owners of the ancestors many many years prior to.  Not too many African names of Holmes, but that was the name.  And the irony of that is that there were two sets of Holmes in this county [Early County, Georgia].  Now, realizing this is a very small county, but they were two sets of Holmes, two African families by the name of Holmes, yet they were not related to each other.  There was no, no, you know, connectivity in terms of bloodline.
Speaker 2: But there's a possibility that they might have been--have served on the same plantation?
Speaker 1: Well, that's the only thing that we can think of.  The only thing I been able to gather is that it was two families, the families Holmes were related and slaves on this plantation, slaves on that plantation, but the slaves weren't connected beyond the name.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Because the, those two family names are still in that county now.  There are very few on my family's side.  There's more Georges on my mom's [Janice George Holmes] side that are still there, but not that many Holmes that are there.  And, in fact, a good number of the Holmes are the ones that are wanting to move back.  A lot of them moved up to the New Jersey, New York area; and, now, a good number of them wanting to move back to Blakely.
Story_ID: 317774
Speaker 1: Are there any stories from your father's [Carl Holmes] side of the family about life in Georgia back in, way back?
Speaker 2: I guess the only story that really reminds me--my father had a nickname of Sam, and the nickname goes with--it was the name of the favorite mule that they used to plow the fields with, and he loved this mule so much.  He grew up liking to, to play and then ultimately plowed this mule, so that's how he got his nickname, Sam.  It was Sam the mule.  My dad was pretty interesting because he was a pretty good baseball player.  Really really loved baseball, really really loved the Dodgers [Brooklyn Dodgers; Los Angeles Dodgers], because, obviously, Jackie Robinson and back in those days, you can only get--when they ultimately had radio and ultimately got TV, you only heard the games like the Yankees [New York Yankees] and the Dodgers, the Brooklyn Dodgers.  That kind.  So they loved those players, and--but he had actually had an opportunity when he was in the [U.S.] military early on to play professional ball.  He played in the military, and he had the opportunity to go to the new--the San Francisco Giants [New York Giants; San Francisco Giants] training camp in the '50s [1950s], because it wasn't the Dodgers he said he wasn't going to get out of the military to go do that (laughter).  That was pretty interesting that, you know, you get a professional team that wants--but he was so enamored with the Dodgers.  Even though the Giants at that time was in New York [New York] too, and they were probably on radio, but he was enamored with the Dodgers like, I guess, a lot of African Americans were at that time.
Speaker 1: Well, that's like way back when the--both the Giants and the Dodgers were in New York City [New York, New York], you know?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: A lot of people wouldn't suspect that--
Speaker 2: That's right.  He actually--he played in the military for a number of years and the interesting history was, he started playing there in Blakely [Georgia].  A lot of the, the--on the social events, particularly, around the holidays, Fourth of July in particular, Labor Day in particular, you know, a lot of the cities had baseball teams.  I mean, they had their own Little League and the cities would play each other and that's where he really started his, his love for baseball because he was one of the stars on their local team.  And what was really funny was that they always go back--when we go back to visit in the summer, particularly, around the Fourth of July and he was in the military at this time and wasn't anywhere near the shape as he was then, he always tried to get out there and they always--they remember his, his exploits back when he was younger.  They always wanted him to play, and he would play and sometimes he did well and sometimes he didn't do too well, but he'd always play.  That was--I remember that and I always used to hear stories, and he could tell you about baseball stories forever in a day.  That was one of the things--and not only that, but his relatives loved baseball.  All of his--all my cousins loved baseball.
Speaker 1: Did any of them ever play in the Negro Leagues?
Speaker 2: No.  None of them never did.  It was--their leagues were paramount to the Negro Leagues because it was small towns playing each other; the Blakelys, the Americus' [Americus, Georgia], the Colquitt [Georgia], and the Dothan, Alabamas and, you know, cities around there that played.  They all had a team, and it was a social event on Sundays to go to town, if you will, and watch these teams play ball, and it was a big deal.
Story_ID: 317775
Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Carl Holmes] ever talk about school at Fort Valley State [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  Other than, you know, he was fairly as far as school goes, he did his school work pretty well coming from a sharecropping situation that it was other than not having a lot of money trying to go to school.  And then, you know, obviously, just wanted to do something different.  He really wanted to make more money at the time.  That's what sent him to the [U.S.] military and, of course, going into the military in the--I guess he went in the military probably, oh, I guess about in the '49 [1949] or '50 [1950]--no, it had to be earlier than that, because he was in Korea.  So he must be in the military at that time probably '48 [1948], '49 [1949] somewhere in that neighborhood, because he was, he was--he served in the Korean War, and whatever period of time that was.  That tells you I don't know my history, but he was there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He actually had, had frostbite on his feet and almost lost some toes, and he always had problems with that throughout life, so I knew it was--he served there because I was born in '51 [1951], and he was in the military at that point in time, so he had to be somewhere in the late '40s [1940s], maybe '50 [1950] that he was actually in there.
Speaker 1: That was a tough period of time for black soldiers in the Korean War.  That's what they first desegregated--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --the [U.S.] Armed Forces, but also they were thrust, you know, in combat and some people say at a disproportionate level, you know--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --on the front lines against these human wave attacks at Inchon [Incheon, South Korea] and other places.  A lot of been written recently about the black soldiers in the Korean War?
Speaker 2: Well that's--
Speaker 1: --a lot of which, a lot of whom were shot, you know, everyone I've met has been--was wounded or something in some way.
Speaker 2: He never was wounded.  He didn't get wounded in Korea, nor did he get wounded in the Vietnam [Vietnam War].  The only, I guess, the major casualty he had was coming out of the Korea getting frostbite on his feet, almost having to lose his--lose some of his toes.  But other than that, he actually--the irony of it, is he was in an engineering battalion, where they built bridges.  So often times, they were, they were--sometimes they would be early on trying to build a bridge or they would be late after you bombed and tore up things, come back and repair it.  And they usually had a lot of sniper fire.  You know, the oncesy, twosy kinds of things where you're not trying to attack the whole group, you're just trying to inflict a little punishment on them, you know, sort of one at a time, if you will.  But, no, it didn't--that's--military and sports was his love.  I mean, he talked about those all the time and I believe he was the first of the family to ever go to college, to ever go--I mean, on his side of the family, I know he was the first.  And that makes me feel good because I was the first great-grandchild at least on my mom's [Janice George Holmes] side and my father's side to ever go and finish from college.
Story_ID: 317776
Speaker 1: Now, when you look at your parents' [Janice George Holmes and Carl Holmes] personalities, can you tell us who you think you take after?
Speaker 2: Well, probably some of both.  Being, being always--I call myself a military brat, because I didn't give up my military ID card until I was twenty-three years old.  And we lived pretty much, because he was in the [U.S.] military, all those twenty-three years, we lived military bases everywhere and so you get that kind of drilling in you.  So he was one of those that was a stickler for detail.  You know, you got to do it right, and this is the way you do it and so I learned that kind of learned that kind of regimen from my father.  He was also one that, that, you know, if you you're going to start something, you need to stick to it; so, I guess, sort of a stick-to-itness kind of feel I got from, from him.  From my mom, I mean, just like most mothers, they're more warm, they're passionate, the ability to just to get along with a lot of folks and deal with a lot of multitude of things and not be, you know, not be up and down with it, but stay pretty level.  That part of my personality, I think, I got from her.  She's one that could--because my father was gone quite a bit.  She had to sort of do a lot of stuff on her own, so just the notion that, you know, you got to live, you know, you got to take care of yourself, you got to take care of what you're responsible for.  Just sort of got that from her knowing that she did a lot of that, because she was doing it all by herself.  But I guess those are things I sort of take away from both them.
Story_ID: 317777
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Do I have an early--yes, I do.  Yeah, I have several.  I have--I guess, the earliest childhood I have was going to--I was telling you about my [maternal] great-grandparents [Yancy George and Babe George] on my--that owned their farm.  Well, they actually had a horse and my mom's [Janice George Holmes] brother used to stay with them.  They've gotten up into age and my mom's brother stayed with them, and they still do a little farming, and I remember telling the story about my dad [Carl Holmes] and the mule.  Well, I used to love to ride this horse, so when I was there in the summer times, or when I was there early on, my uncle would let me ride the horse.  I mean, that was a big deal to be able to ride the horse.  And I remember so well I thought this horse was huge, but I mean, obviously it wasn't huge.  It was just that I was small and everything was large.  I remember that part of the--prior to going to school.  Then I remember going to school in 1957 in Clarksville, Tennessee.  I remember going to an all-white school.  My dad was stationed at Fort Campbell, Kentucky and Clarksville, Tennessee is just right across the line.
Story_ID: 317778
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were just talking about experiences for me, and I was telling you I remember growing up when I was in first grade.  I didn't start first grade there in Clark [Clarksville, Tennessee], but my dad [Carl Holmes] being in the [U.S.] military stationed at Fort Campbell, Kentucky and we, we couldn't get military housing.  There weren't any available when he had his report date.  So we lived in Clarksville, Tennessee which is right across the state line, and I remember going to school where we lived and it was an all white school and this was first grade, and I remember so well my parents used to have a little taxi cab driver who used to come pick me up every morning to take me to school.  And I never really knew the implications of that until later on as I got older, they told me, "Well, the reason we had you a taxi cab driver, because you were going to an all white school and you are black and we weren't sure--we wanted to make sure that you get there and you get back safely."  And I remember going to school and I remember taking classes.  But we only stayed there like six, eight weeks because my dad eventually got military housing and, of course, the schools on the military base were very integrated.  So that was a good experience.  And I remember that from the standpoint of being around different people, particularly, different races.  Of course, it was mostly black white but I remember that so well.  And, in fact, that was really the forerunner to how I went to school all my years 'cause we were mostly in military environments so you went to integrated schools.  So maybe before it even became vogue, you know, I was--because of the military, we were in integrated settings.  And from a valuing differences point of view that in of itself forced me to understand and appreciate people that were different from me, looked different from me, and grew up in different surroundings than me.  So that was pretty interesting.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What were some of the--how many different places did you live in?
Speaker 1: Okay.  We lived in Tennessee, Kentucky; I lived in, of course, Georgia where he was stationed there; we lived in Colorado, and then I lived in Frankfurt, Germany.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And this is all from, you know, through your school years, all through in high school?
Speaker 1: All the way.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All the way.  As a matter of fact, I changed schools several times, but that's just part of it when you are in a military environment.  You gonna move to different locations, and then when you move to different locations you gotta, you gotta go to school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 317779
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, growing up was--being in a military setting, particularly, when I had an opportunity to go to live in Frankfurt, Germany for a little over three years or right at three years.  Just the notion of being able to grow up and having gone seen castles, things that you had read about in books, and things you sort of hear about, but we were actually able to go to real life castles that were built many, many centuries ago and just, just to have that experience.  But more so just to have an experience of living abroad, which we never would have had an opportunity to do if our dad [Carl Holmes] was not in the [U.S.] military.  So the military experience I remember more than anything else.
Story_ID: 317780
Speaker 1: Let's see if we can get these schools straight.  You started off in Clarksville [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Well, I actually started off in Blakely, Georgia.  My dad [Carl Holmes] was stationed--I'm not sure where he was stationed at the time, but I started school there, first grade, then we got--he was stationed in Fort Campbell [Kentucky], then I went to school in Clarksville in the first grade.  That's where I finished.  Then I also moved on base at Fort Campbell.  So I went to school there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Then you went to school again in Georgia, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, went to school in Georgia.  We came back-- we had bought a house in Columbus [Georgia] early on--they had bought a house, rather.  And so we moved, come back, moved and come back, moved and came back.  So this time we had come back to Columbus, and I had an opportunity to go to school, school there as well.  I actually finished high school in Columbus.  And the irony of that is, I--the high school when I originally knew Columbus, the high school that I really loved was Spencer High [Spencer High School, Columbus, Georgia] which was an all black school which had just awesome football teams through the years.  So when we came back, most of the kids that lived in my immediate neighborhood went to a school called Baker [Baker High School, Columbus, Georgia] which was integrated.  Well, it was--all the schools were theoretically integrated but Baker had several blacks that went to school there.  And the school system had not been thoroughly integrated in terms of teachers yet.  But, you know, kids could go to different schools.  And I remember that so well.  I purposely chose to go to the all black high school, Spencer, which, you know, I had not--I hadn't had that experience yet and I wanted to have that experience, and it was wonderful.  I enjoyed there.
Speaker 1: So that was your last year of high school?
Speaker 2: Well, last two-and-a-half years of high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you started in Germany, right?
Speaker 2: I was actually--first grade was in Blakely, and then in Clarksville, went to the third grade in Kentucky, and then came to Columbus and went to--from, I think, about the fourth grade to the seventh grade, and then went to seventh grade in Germany, and I went seventh, eighth and ninth in Germany.  And then I went to Colorado.  I was in the ninth grade a little bit and also tenth grade, and then from tenth grade, I came back to Columbus and finished up the tenth grade at Spencer, and went to Spencer my junior and senior year in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you graduated from high school in what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy [1970].
Story_ID: 317781
Speaker 1: Now, could you tell us about school?  Now, did you like school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I liked school.  I, you know, I never--I wasn't the A student, per se, but I liked school.  Never had any problems with school.  Never had any learning problems.  I had an opportunity in the third grade--I actually repeated the third grade.  I was ill a little bit that year, and we changed schools a couple of times, so when I got to--back to Columbus [Georgia], I was in a tail end, the school suggested that to my parents [Janice George Holmes and Carl Holmes] that I remain in that grade and I did.  And so--but I guess it doesn't really--people don't really notice it because my birthday is late in the year in October, so people don't associate my age as--they don't associate my age with returning that year.  But I think that was probably one of the best things for me.  Because after that point, I never had any problems with school whatsoever and school always became, you know, just pretty fairly easy and probably for me, I took it for granted.  But I came pretty good.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any favorite teachers that you had in school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I remember so well in high school in particular, I remember Mrs. Rosa Charles [ph.].  She was the English teacher.  And I never realized how important she will become in my life later on, because as you move in life, particularly, if you go onto college, writing is so critical.  Some folks can get through college without never having to write anything, but Mrs. Charles and the school [Columbus College; Columbus State University, Columbus, Georgia] that I went for college didn't have a lot but we had to write some, but Mrs. Charles cared for you and she actually made sure you understood, you know, how to write, how to put the sentences together, subject verb agreement and all of those kinds of things.  So, I mean, she was the one that I just don't forget.  She, she was very good at that.  And she actually--it was back when the school was all black, she just cared for every student.  She was tough now, she wasn't easy.  But she would make sure you learn something and you wouldn't help but learn from her.  So I remember her very well.
Story_ID: 317782
Speaker 1: Now did you take part in school activities or were you involved in music, or sports, or student government?
Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't--when I was--when I was in Colorado and Germany, I played sports very heavily.  When we moved back to the states, I went to Spencer [Spencer High School, Columbus, Georgia].  You know, I lived on the outskirts of town and most of the kids who went to Spencer lived in the inner city.  So--because we only had one car, if you will.  My dad [Carl Holmes], at that time, when I was in high school he had gone back to Vietnam.  So we only had one car and my mom [Janice George Holmes] had that car, so I did not play sports for that very reason.  Even though I had played sports leading up to that point in time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the latter part of high school you didn't play sports?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Go ahead, you were asking me?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Was asking you about--oh, so you didn't play sports your last year--couple of years in high school?
Speaker 1: No.  My last--sophomore year on, I didn't play any high school sports.  I had played sports in school all the way up to that point and, in fact, I was avid at sports; baseball, basketball and football, very good in each one of those.  Being in a military environment, usually when you're on a military base they have real organized sports activities for kids because there's not a whole lot else to do.  Go to school and play sports.  So I, I became--I was pretty good in all three of those sports.  In fact, when we lived in Germany in 1966--I'm sorry in 1964, I had an opportunity myself to pitch for the all Germany championship.  I pitched the last game.  It was our fifth all-star game.  Our all-star team represented Frankfurt [Germany], and I pitched for us and we lost in the bottom of the sixth inning, and so that was a downer, if you will.  If we had won that game, we would have had to play the all Europe championship but Germany was so far stronger than all the other locations 'cause Germany had most of the [U.S.] military troops and therein had more families, so they had a bigger base to pick from.  But we would have won that easily, and if I had won that game that I pitched we would have probably gone to Little League World Series and we would have had an opportunity to go by the White House [Washington, D.C.] to meet the president; and at time, it was Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson].  So I remember so well boohooing forever missing out on that opportunity, but, hey, that was an experience.
Speaker 2: So they got you at the bottom of the sixth, which is the last inning in Little League (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Last inning of Little League, yeah.  Team from Wiesbaden [Germany], they had a kid on there that was pretty big. I struck him out a couple of times, but he got the best of me on the last one when it counted.  And the irony of that I remember so well, we would have been out of the innings, except our third basemen made a couple of errors.  And our third basemen, we had one of our--the second guys playing third base 'cause our starting first basemen had gotten kicked off the team for drinking beer (laughter).  But he had gotten kicked off the team, so we used our second third baseman and he's the one that made the errors.  But if he had not made those errors, I never would have had to face the guy that hit the homerun off me.  But that's the way life is and, of course, looking back on it that probably had a lot of, you know, positive effect for me in my life going forward.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Positive?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think positive in the sense of--you know, you had to learn to deal with defeat.  You had to learn to deal with setbacks.  And so I think just having to get past that, because I went on to play Bayreuth [Germany] baseball, and I was an all-star in Bayreuth baseball also and did very well.  And it was just, just what I mean by getting over it.  I mean, you couldn't change it.  That was done.  And just as a kid, you know, that was pretty powerful to lose that kind of game knowing these rewards of going to Little League World Series and also going to meet the president, was going to be another end of that if we've won that game.  I had a great team, though; I still have a picture of my whole Little League team that year.  I don't remember everybody on the team, but I about remember most--over two third--
Speaker 2: What was the name of team?
Speaker 1: The Guardians.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We were the--each team in Germany they have sponsors and our sponsor was V Corps which is the Fifth Corps of the [U.S.] Army that was stationed in Hanau, Germany.  So they were our sponsors.  They paid for our uniforms and all that.  But we were the Guardians because that's who they--the V Corps, that's who they called themselves, the guardians.  So we were the Guardians and we had a great team.  Just didn't make it all the way that particular year.
Story_ID: 317783
Speaker 1: Were you involved in clubs or other activities in high school, or did the distance keep you from--
Speaker 2: Well, early on when we lived--when I was--before we came back to Columbus [Georgia], mostly sports was what I did.  In Colorado, I played on the high school teams, played on the baseball and basketball teams.  We weren't there during football, but I played on those teams did very well.  When I got to high school, I got involved in other kinds of things.  There was a social club called the ambassadors, I was really active in that in high school.  It was a pretty neat little club.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you go for student body office--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --president or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Not in high school, I did in college [Columbus College; Columbus State University, Columbus, Georgia].  When I was in college, I was in Student Government Association and I also got appointed to what we called student courts.  This is what is like a body that will review various infractions of the school's rules, people will get--lose grades, people could get expelled.  I served on the student--what we call student courts, and we would hear those and make decisions of what we thought.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 317784
Speaker 1: What was your major field of interest in high school and how did you choose a college?
Speaker 2: My major interest in high school was getting a Corvette, get out of school and get a Corvette.  That was my big thing.  I didn't apply; I went to school in my hometown, Columbus State University [Columbus College; Columbus State University, Columbus, Georgia].  I had applied at University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia], and I got accepted at all of those but--so I didn't even have a--I had not even applied at my--in the school in my hometown.  So when we got thinking about it, I wanted a car and I couldn't get a car and go to Athens, Georgia for the University of Georgia, so, basically, the deal was stay at home, we'll help you with a car.  So I stayed home to get help with a car, because, you know, driving back and forth from Columbus, Georgia to Athens, Georgia is not like a little short little ride.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So what was Columbus State University like?
Speaker 2: It was pretty interesting.  We were there--the school had been integrated only about four years and the prior to a significant number of African Americans coming to the school, the school's mascot was Rebels.  So when I came to the school, that had just been changed.  They changed it to Panthers but, you know, I'm sorry, they changed it to Cougars.  I'm thinking of Georgia State [Georgia State College; Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia] here.  They changed it to Cougars, Columbus State Cougars.  And, you know, is sort of that--that symbol sort of died away.  I don't think the symbol is out there anymore.  Oh, excuse me.
Speaker 1: So what did you major in Columbus State?
Speaker 2: At Columbus State, I was marketing major.  You know, the irony of that is my dad [Carl Holmes] being in the [U.S.] military all those years, I never had anybody to talk business around me.  But I knew I wanted to do something different so I chose the marketing, sales and marketing route, because I got a business degree with concentration on marketing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And by the time that you were in school a lot of the civil rights activities had kind of waned and people were starting to integrate and so forth. With Columbus State you were one of the first black students?
Speaker 2: No, there was, it was--I started in 1970.  The blacks had been going there since '66 [1966].  In earnest, in '67 [1967], so it was about--I was in the fourth year where there was any number of blacks going to Columbus State.  At the time Columbus State was--I had a great time there.  I make friends with people fairly easy, so I meet a lot of folks and made friends and it was fun for me.
Story_ID: 317785
Speaker 1: Any stories from campus life [at Columbus College; Columbus State University, Columbus, Georgia]?  I know you pledged as an Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm an Alpha.  I pledged Alpha in the fall of 1971.  The chapter name at that time was Theta Beta [Alpha Theta Beta], so I remember that very well, 'cause the grad chapter is the one that actually did all the activities, and they were bring chapters up from Albany State [Albany State College; Albany State University, Albany, Georgia] and Fort Valley [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] and also Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], so that was pretty interesting.  But I guess, I remember about that time it was twenty-three of us originally and twenty-two actually followed it all the way through.  I just remember looking up to all of those grad chapter brothers who were pledging us and knowing that they had great careers, good jobs and, you know, just saying, hey, I'd love to be like those guys one day.  But also when coming back and, you know, by just material standards, passing those folks many times over, but the good thing about it is I worked in my hometown with Georgia Power [Georgia Power Company] a couple of years and a good number of those folks were still there.  So I was able to reconnect with them and that was very interesting because, you know, I didn't try put anything a title--a little title I had, and they didn't try to treat me like they were a teacher or anything--principal anymore.  So it was a real good dialogue, really enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You said you served on student government?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: As what?
Speaker 2: I was a student legislator in the student government, and I also served on student courts.  Those are the two big things I did when I was in school.  I pretty much worked my way through school, so in after about lunch time I was going to a job somewhere, but it was great time, great university.
Speaker 1: How about race relations on campus?
Speaker 2: You know, the time I went there it was great.  Even though we had only been integrated for about three years, I didn't have any problems whatsoever.  In fact, I think that I was--because of--and I don't say this in a bragging way, but just it's very easy for me to interact with people and because of that, I was able to create some friends that others took a little while to create and by virtue of that, I mean, I got involved in a lot of different things.  So it was, it was a lot of fun.
Story_ID: 317786
Speaker 1: Are there any professors [at Columbus College; Columbus State University, Columbus, Georgia] that stand out particularly as influential?
Speaker 2: The one that didn't necessarily influence me but always stood out was a professor by the name Dr. Gallous [ph.], and he taught--he was in the fine arts area and he taught music and every business major had to take some fine arts course, one or two, and so I took music and Dr. Gallous was the instructor.  Now, what I remember from him is that he was saying, "All music is well thought out and well--when I say is done, is well thought out.  But it's creativity, it's your own imagination, it's the visualizing what you think something should be in terms of how it should sound."  And I used to always remember that from him because what that does is the roles that I've had in life and the jobs that I've had, you've always got to be thinking about new ways of doing things, got always be a little visionary and stay ahead, and you have to always be better than the next.  And then those are the things I remember so well.  I remember we had a marketing professor, and I'm drawing a blank on his name, that always would challenge us, "You gotta be thinking about what somebody else is doing because, you know, you're only as good as your, you know, your worst customer."
Story_ID: 317787
Speaker 1: When you were on a verge of graduating from Georgia State, I mean, what were your prospects?
Speaker 2: Columbus State [Columbus College; Columbus State University, Columbus, Georgia].  When I finished Columbus State, I actually had--I was fortunate enough I applied to several companies, and I applied to Shell [Royal Dutch Shell Group] and Texaco [Texaco, Inc.].  I remember that very well, and Shell actually called me and did a phone interview; and Shell actually flew me down to Houston [Texas] to interview with their folks.  And that was really neat because, you know, I had flown before but just going to fly by myself to go down to Houston, Texas.  Someone is gonna meet me in the airport, take me to the hotel then the next morning I'll get up and meet with all these different folks.  I was a little intimidated by that, but I did exceptionally well in that interview process and they offered me a job.  And, of course, I turned it down, to stay with Georgia Power [Georgia Power Company] but I remember that so well.  We had--we didn't have a huge number of recruiters come to the campus but just using the computers to look up different companies.  That's why I wanted to apply for Shell.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Can I swig this?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Go ahead, I'm listening.
Speaker 1: Those were the days when a lot of legal corporations were out trying to find young black students--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --to bring onboard.  Did they have some special program they were offering or was it just--why did you choose Shell?
Speaker 2: Well, it was--I remember you get this big placement book and you get all these companies and their contact information in there.  And at the time, companies like that were huge companies and very, very profitable and it just seemed to be glamorous, so that's what I wanted to do.  And I had a marketing degree, so I applied there and, you know, it's funny I had--I was talking to Texaco but I just never did follow up on all those things they wanted me to do to go for an interview.  But when I interviewed with Shell, they made me a job offer and, I guess, I was--I didn't--I really wasn't sure if I wanted to leave Georgia, so I didn't take it.  I went to work for Georgia Power Company, and then I got angry with Georgia Power Company, I said I have been year about a year and a half, and I called Shell up again and talked to the folks I had talked to and they made me another job offer.  And, believe it or not, I said, "Well, I'm not gonna let these people run me off," so I didn't accept the job offer and stayed at Georgia Power.
Speaker 1: So what level did you start at Georgia Power?
Speaker 2: At the bottom.  I was an entry-level professional, had an exempt job, and I was started off as, in our accounting management training program.  And at that time, we were trying to mechanize a lot of the systems, our accounting systems, and customer service systems.  So I came on board along with quite a few other folks to bring in this infusion of new educated talent, if you will, and I loved it.  I had an opportunity to work in--went through the training program and my first assignment was back home in Columbus, Georgia.  I worked in Columbus for about two years, and got an opportunity to come to Atlanta [Georgia] in a staff capacity.  I did that, and then from there I was promoted to a front line supervisor, customer service supervisor.
Speaker 1: Now, what year is that?
Speaker 2: That was in 19--let me back up, in Columbus, I made first line supervisor.  That was in 1976, and from Columbus, I was sent to Atlanta.  I worked in a staff capacity, and I did that for about six years until I became a front-line manager in customer service.
Speaker 1: Just like 1982?
Speaker 2: In 1983, I became a front-line manager--
Story_ID: 317788
Speaker 1: What was Georgia Power [Georgia Power Company] like when you joined Georgia Power?  How many black folks were on staff and what was your reception like?
Speaker 2: When I first came to Georgia Power is pretty really interesting because I came in 1974, September 1974, and prior to that in my senior, junior and sophomore year in college [Columbus College; Columbus State University, Columbus, Georgia], I interned with Georgia Power during the summers.  So I was interning working there at home with Georgia Power and had a great time.  I mean, I was--I remember so well my sophomore year of college that was at the end of my freshman year--I'm sorry my sophomore year, end of my sophomore year, we interviewed a friend that worked for the company and he had suggested that I try to get on for a summer job.  And I did and we have hired twelve, thirteen, fourteen folks at that location for the summer and of all the folks that they hired, there was probably about, if I remember correctly, there was four African Americans and maybe seven, eight whites that were hired.  And of all the people that they hired, I was the only one that had got a chance to work in the office.  Everybody else did work outside in some form or fashion.  And the interesting thing about that is I actually asked the guy that interviewed us, you know, I said, "You know, I'd like to learn something about the company, learn something about what you do."  I said, "You know, anybody can cut grass," I said, "but, you know, sort of I will really love to do something working, you know, where I can, you know, have a better appreciation for what Georgia Power does."  And he actually, I guess, took that as a challenge and put me on the inside and I worked in our engineering group.  And so I learned to do things from how we worked in engineering and did that three summers in a role to be exact.  So when I got to my senior year in college, I mean, I pretty much had support there within Georgia Power to help me get a job.  So, when I applied, I mean, it worked out very, very well.  So here I was coming from having a lot of support to now working in the company.  Coming to the big city of Atlanta [Georgia], working--going through our training program, and the training program went very well.  I remember so well they would test us and you had to score certain things on the various tests.  You were learning all the procedures, and policies, and the systems, and how the processes that make it work.  And I did very well in that; I scored very well and got reassigned back to Columbus [Georgia].  And the irony of that was that was some lean time for our company.  This was 1974 and we had--we were building a nuclear power plant and it was way costing a lot more than originally planned.  So we were thinking we weren't going to get the rate relief for it, and in actuality, what happened was there was layoffs with the company.  We were financially strapped at that time for cash.  And so--but it was decided that the people that came in through this accounting management training program, people who were--they were bringing in to help mechanize our whole accounting process that they will be exempted from these layoffs.  Well, the local folks there in Columbus laid me off.  And I remember that so well when I called to check into that and found that the program that I was in was not supposed to be impacted, and I called Atlanta, and Atlanta called down to Columbus and they got it corrected, and I came back to work.  But I remember so well that the guy who was responsible for making that decision wasn't a happy camper that I came back.  Not so much that I--he didn't want to see me back, but just it was, you know, I guess breaching his authority.  And seemed like things were a little tough for me at that point in time.  My evaluations were a little tougher but, you know, it took about a year or two and it got past all of that.
Story_ID: 317789
Speaker 1: And I made my first, first line supervisory job there in Columbus [Georgia] and that went well and--so I got a chance to come back to our [Georgia Power Company] corporate office [in Atlanta, Georgia] for our next job and that went very, very well.  But I guess what happened to me when I came back to that job, I was at different--three different levels.  I came in as an analyst, I made in about two years, I became a senior analyst and about a year-and-half after that I became what we call a staff analyst which was the next level up.  And it was--things were going well but I had stayed in that job a long time, say about six and a half years, and I wondered if I was ever gonna get the chance to go out to be a front line manager.  And lo and behold, we had a gentleman who was our second black vice president.  I'm sorry, he wasn't vice president then.  He was a region manager, what we called a region manager.
Speaker 2: And this is when?  What year?
Speaker 1: This is in 1982.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I made the first line--well, actually, it was 1983.  I apologize, because it was front line manager.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We had a guy named Jimmy George [Jim George] who was a region manager.
Speaker 2: Not related?
Speaker 1: Not related.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Believe it or not, we tried to run that dog down, but believe it or not, his parents are from Dothan, Alabama.  Dothan is right across the river from Blakely, Georgia.  You remember, I told you my mother's parents [Essie Mae George and Abram George] were Georges lived close to the Alabama side of Blakely.  But we could never find a tie to the families.  But his name was George, my mother [Janice George Holmes] was a George.  We never could find, which was very interesting, you know, you go work for somebody and you find out, you know, there might be a tie you just can't figure it out.  And we believe there probably was a tie; we just couldn't figure it out.  But I went to work for him, he was only the second district region manager we called him.  I'm sorry; I'm confusing it, because we've changed these titles so many years--throughout the years.  But during that time, it was called district manager.  He was a second black district manager we ever had.  So here I was having someone who looked like me who was coming to ask me to be his customer service manager.  And so I got a chance to go out and be a manager with Jimmy, and that was a good experience (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So is that what's known as a front line manager?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was a--the first job, I was a supervisor and I worked for a manager.  In this particular job, I was actually the manager over that particular department.  And it was part of the district, if you will.  It was the customer service function, customer services and accounting function, inside that district.  And I was the customer service manager.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What were your responsibilities?
Speaker 1: Well, I had responsibilities for all of our billing, all of our collections, all of our meter reading, all of our customer service, all of our budgeting and all of the financials for that business unit.
Story_ID: 317790
Speaker 1: Were there any interesting stories from that period of time?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we had some great times.  We had a small location.  We were down--I had a black manager which was like an oxymoron at the time because there were very few black managers.  But to be black and working for another black manager was very unique.  We had lot of good conversations.  He could help me grow and learn as, as a leader and understand how to manage, how to deal with people.  That was very good.  The irony of that, the president of our company [Georgia Power Company] now replaced him.  Jimmy [Jim George] was promoted to downtown and got Mike Garrett [Michael D. Garrett] who is the president of our company now, followed Jimmy as a district manager.  So way back in '80 [1980], '86 [1986], I worked for Mike Garrett as his customer service manager, which is ironic, who Mike Garrett is now the president of our company and as a senior vice president serving on the management council of our company.  That's who I report to now.  So it's pretty interesting.  Probably, if you had asked us back in 1986 whether we'd end up where we are today, we probably would have said we have gotten, moved up but we don't know if we would have been where we are today.  So it's pretty interesting.  But having to work for--back working for Jimmy George, a black manager.  That was pretty exciting.  We were a small unit, and one of the things that as an African American at that time we knew that we were in this fish bowl and people were looking at is and wanted to see how we were gonna perform.  So Jimmy performed well and I did everything I possibly could to make sure my business results were on target and above target, because I knew people were looking.  And, in fact, that's way we were able to accomplish.  But we accomplished it by truly--I think I was successful by virtue of most of my staff was white, I had some blacks on my staff, but my ability to deal with people, my ability to interact with a host of different people, all of that coming from my background in the [U.S.] military, I think afforded me an opportunity to create a high performing team, a team that really like being around each other, that liked coming to work.  We didn't have too many--too much controversy and as a general rule, we out performed most of our counterparts who were larger and staffed better than we were.  And so that's a fond memory, and I think that really laid a strong foundation for me, from a career perspective that I could achieve business results, and that I could lead a team of people, and create a good morale and good environment for those people.  So I think that was very helpful, and I often wonder if sitting in that corporate office [in Atlanta, Georgia] doing this analytical work, if there had not been that black manager out there who gave me that chance, what would I have done?  You know, would I still be doing analyst type work?  Because there are some people who did that analyst work way back with me, some are still doing that similar kind of work today or something akin to that.  So that was a blessing for me to have that opportunity for someone to give me that shot and ironically this person just happened to look like me, too, that gave me that shot, and it worked out very, very well.
Story_ID: 317791
Speaker 1: Now, now, does Jimmy George [Jim George], what is his story?  How did he achieve that position to be able to help you, you know, I mean, who helped him?  Is there a story (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well he was one of the first to come in.  He probably, oh, I'm guessing third, fourth, maybe, fifth black professional in the company.  And Jimmy was able to persevere and to reach that high.  He came in through our marketing area.  He had moved up from marketing supervisor to a marketing manager to eventually being an assistant district manager to ultimately district manager.  Jimmy, he's no longer with us.  Jimmy passed away several years ago.  He was a diabetic and had some complications related to that and passed away; but Jimmy just--Jimmy was in the right place, and he had the kind of personality and he had the kinds of skills that were, you know, you would take notice and so again that's the, the blessing for me was having to work for him and he could mentor and tutor me on things that I needed to do in order to be successful.  And the irony of that, Jimmy's roommate--Jimmy went to Tuskegee University--Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] at the time I guess.  He went to Tuskegee and his roommate is also with Georgia Power [Georgia Power Company].  And who also now is a black officer at Georgia Power.  Jimmy, before Jimmy passed away he became a vice president with the company.  He was a second vice--black vice president we had.  The first was a guy who's retired named Jim Davis [James Davis].  So Jim was first, and Jim was the only black vice president for years, then Jimmy came along and Jimmy was the vice president for several years before he passed away.  Then on one day our president, a guy named David Ratcliffe in 19--in 2000--I'm sorry, in 2000, promoted myself and another gentleman to vice president.  So we went from having two vice presidents one time to when Jimmy passed on, having one again to now having two being elected by a board on the same day.  That was pretty phenomenal.  It sent shockwaves through the organization because, I mean, that's just not happened before.  But Jimmy, I think, and Jim Davis were--they are the ones who created an environment for the current person, Lamont Houston [E. Lamont Houston], and I to come along to be black officers in our company.  And just laid some good groundwork, and in my case, having a chance to work for Jimmy.  And another irony is that Jim Davis who was the other black vice president; I had an opportunity to work with him as his manager.  So I had dubious distinction as an African American having being a direct report to the first two black officers of our company and not too many people can say that.  Not too many whites or too many anybody, particularly just working for those--having the opportunity to work for those two guys.  They were really good folks.
Speaker 1: Now, you were front line manager with Jimmy George until--for how long before you--
Speaker 2: From--I worked with him from '83 [1983] to '86 [1986] as a front-line manager, and I worked with Mike Garrett [Michael D. Garrett] from '86 [1986] to '87 [1987].
Speaker 1: And what position did you hold then?
Speaker 2: I was--for both of them, I was customer service manager.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Jimmy actually moved downtown to another district, and it was Atlanta [Georgia].  We called it central district at the time, but it was basically City of Atlanta.  It was a larger district and based on the way we did levels, it was a higher level or a higher paying district because it had a little more greater responsibility, greater number of customers, if you will, book of customers.  And, actually, Jimmy brought me down to be his customer service manager downtown.  So he gave me--he promoted me again.  And so I actually worked for him both locations.
Story_ID: 317792
Speaker 1: And then after being in that job for really only about nine months, I was promoted to an assistant manager and sent to of all places back to Columbus [Georgia] as an assistant manager, as an assistant district manager.  So its, it was a good move for me, but what's interesting about that move was we had, had in our company [Georgia Power Company] a young lady who committed suicide in the company.  She actually had shot one of her, her general manager and she shot her immediate manager and then she turned the gun on herself and killed herself.  It was an African American female, and it was because she was frustrated and had a lot pinned up frustrations in that every time new people would come, they'd asked her to train them, but they will be her bosses after she trained them, and she was very frustrated with that and she reacted in, of course, not the best way in terms of shooting folks, but that was her way of dealing with it, and coping with it, and she committed suicide there in the building.
Speaker 2: And when was this?
Speaker 1: This was in 1987.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And what was her name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was probably one of the dark times of our company history.
Speaker 2: What was her name?
Speaker 1: Mozella Dansby was her name.  I didn't know her personally, personally.  I knew her, I knew of her, I knew she worked on our payroll area in the company.  But she was--she left a note and pretty much had said that something along the lines of she was frustrated about having to constantly train people that would be her, be her boss.  And why couldn't blacks, in particular black females, progress in that business.  But that's how--I said all of that to say we had an executive officer said that, you know, if we are not getting people to move up I'm gonna identify some folks and we are gonna put them on a fast track program to get them into management roles.  So actually, he anointed about six of us, three blacks and three whites, and we started this program.
Story_ID: 317793
Speaker 1: And then I was actually sent to Columbus, Georgia, my hometown again, as the assistant district manager down there, which is pretty unique.  I had a great time, I went back home again.  The gentlemen that I was working for I wasn't sure how we were gonna get along.  He pretty much--because, you know--I mean, he didn't ask for me, the company [Georgia Power Company] told him, "Richard [HistoryMaker Richard Holmes] is coming there to work for you," so it's a situation where he's being put up on somebody he doesn't know, he don't know what kind of job I'm doing and in some people, he's just--he's been anointed so he's going to have this favoritism, and he's gonna have this corporate office looking down that you got to do something for this person very well.  Well, lo and behold being the gentleman became just excellent coworkers but more than that we became real, real good friends and I had a great experience.  I did that for three years, and after that I did something very unique.
Speaker 2: Now, what three years?
Speaker 1: That was in '87 [1987] to '90 [1990].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Eighty-seven [1987] to '90 [1990].
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-seven [1987] to 1990, I was the assistant district manager in Columbus, Georgia back in my hometown.  So, this was another stint that I have come back to work in Columbus.  I did that for three--and that was really great because it exposed me to in a management level back in my town.  And I don't know if I remember telling you earlier about when I pledged my fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], the graduate chapter pledged this, and a lot of these gentlemen, you know, who were positioned had various positions in the community, were, were the people that were pledging this and they were bringing back their youth having fun.  Several of them were my principal in my high school [Spencer High School, Columbus, Georgia].  And what was now, I was coming back to Columbus in a fairly decent level position, and now I'm on par with all these folks and yet not too many years ago, they were inducting me into a fraternity.  So that was pretty interesting and pretty neat to now know that I was in a management capacity with a large company in my hometown, which not that many large companies were in my hometown, so it was pretty neat.  And I guess, I got a lot of good experience and training from a guy named Buddy Merrill who was my boss at the time, but it was really, really good experience for me.  Didn't have any difficulty doing that role, got along very well with the people.  They thrust me into some external responsibilities that put--that made me interface with some of the movers and shakers in town, and I did well with it and I learned from it.  So it was a pretty good situation.  But like a lot of times, you were anointed into this position I was getting a little frustrated saying, hey, it's time to move on to something else now.  I'd be doing this two and a half almost three years.
Story_ID: 317794
Speaker 1: And so around about the end of that third year, I was asked to go take on an assignment that is--that I think was the next catalyst for my career.  I was asked to leave Columbus, Georgia to come back to Atlanta [Georgia] to go work for Maynard Jackson.  Maynard was on his third time as being mayor of the City of Atlanta.  This is 1990, and I went to work for him in June of 1990, and I was going to head up a--
Speaker 2: But before we go further, just how does that work, because some people might be confused now.  He was a mayor early in--he was first elected in the '70s [1970s], right?
Speaker 1: That's correct.  He was the first black mayor, City of Atlanta.  Served two terms; eight years.  Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] came in and served two terms after Maynard.  Then Maynard came back and ran again for a third time and became mayor.  Maynard was being the first mayor; he, he broke the mold in the sense that he changed some paradigms about being mayor and about trying to create a city where there was a lot of inclusion with the government, with doing business with the government.  So Andy--I mean, Maynard did some things that really alienated the white business community because he was about trying to say, "Okay.  We are gonna do something that'll run this government more representative of the total people, total population.  There are gonna be opportunities to do business with the city that are gonna be given to all segments of the community not just a few."  And so Maynard was pretty aggressive that he came up with the first, you know, minority set aside programs, if you will, to allow for participation in the whole procurement process with the city.  Maynard put city monies into the African American banks which had never been done before.  I mean, he went about trying to create some change and as a result, you know, he probably didn't--he served four years--eight years initially.  He was elected with great votes but he had still never won the business community over.  The third time around when he became mayor, he was running against a gentleman by the name of Michael Lomax and the business community threw all their weight behind Michael Lomax.  Well, obviously, businesses do not vote, citizens vote, and the citizens overwhelmingly selected Maynard.
Story_ID: 317795
Speaker 1: And so the business community wanted to try to get back on his good side, so a lot of the business communities went out there and tried to help him through his transition providing a lot of pro bono assistance to his transition team and getting his administration set up.  So Maynard [Maynard Jackson] being a very, very wise and cagy person basically said, "Hmm, I'm getting all of this, everybody is crowning me with all of these assistance during my transition period which is only gonna be about two months," you know, November and January.  He said, "I'm gonna try to figure out a way to use that during my administration on a pro bono basis."  So I came in to run what the mayor called, the mayor's Corporate Volunteer Program.  Where he'd bring volunteers in to help city government with its various issues, help them from a business perspective, how to create a better level of response to its citizens, how to create better processes and the things that it do, permitting and all those kinds of things.  And, actually, we looked at several projects.  But I came in to run that program, and I, after I had been here about a month, month-and-a-half, there was a conference in Atlanta [Georgia] called BEEP [Black Executive Exchange Program], which was the Urban League [National Urban League] conference.  And they, the mayor couldn't go speak, his special assistant to business community couldn't go speak, so they said, "Well, we got Richard [HistoryMaker Richard Holmes] here, let's let him go represent the city."  So, I went and brought greetings on behalf of the mayor, and they got a good feedback from that.  So the mayor sort of liked me.  And then about--just about a couple of weeks later, the mayor's special assistant to the business community got promoted to another job and the mayor at that time could not--because the mayor created this position.  It was a lobbyist position with the state government.  In a sense, the mayor moved this individual over in that job; he did not have any more authorized positions.  So he now had a vacancy as his special assistant to the business community, and he had no authorized vacancy so they said, "Well, Richard is on loan from Georgia Power [Georgia Power Company], he's over here, we like what he's done, we like him, why don't you let him be your special assistant, mayor, and still run this program?"  So, Maynard did, he allowed me to become his assistant for the business community.  So I was able to do that for about sixteen months as Maynard's special assistant in the business community.  And if you want to know what that was, it was just being his liaison.  If he had to go speak to a business setting, I would, obviously, find out what they wanted to speak about, give that information to the speech writers, speech writers will get a speech together.  I would go with him to those functions, make sure his got his speech, make sure where he's supposed to sit, who he--make sure he met some key folks.  I was his gofer, if you will, in that regard and I was on loan from my company, Georgia Power Company.  I wasn't a city employee.
Speaker 2: More like the shepherd, I think, than the gofer (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)(Laughter) As a shepherd, is that the way to look at it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you are kind of a shepherd.
Speaker 1: But it was fascinating, because here I am on the mayor's staff and I don't work for the city.  I don't get a paycheck from the city.  In fact, in my office I didn't even have a city computer.  I had a computer from Georgia Power (laughter) that I used, I mean.
Story_ID: 317796
Speaker 1: That was a great time, and it was really beautiful because in September of 1990.  We won the--we found out that we had won the Summer Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia] that were going be held in 1990--when was that?
Speaker 2: It's '96 [1996].
Speaker 1: Ninety-six [1996], yeah.  This was 1990; the Summer Olympics were in 1996.  And I remember being out in Centennial Olympic--it wasn't Centennial Olympic Park [Atlanta, Georgia] then, but Woodruff Park [Atlanta, Georgia] when I remember Juan Summerrite [sic. Juan Antonio Samaranch] whatever his name was, "And we grant the games to the City of Atlanta [Georgia]."  And, you know, everybody went crazy, Maynard [Maynard Jackson] accepted it, accepted the flag and, you know.  That was great.  So I was there when the city was just getting ready to get prepared for the Olympics.  So at that point in time, because I was a liaison to the business community, we had all these people now want to talk to mayor and so I could interface and interact with some of those folks.  So here I was someone from Georgia Power [Georgia Power Company] who had a--was not a high level manager at Georgia Power, but now I was getting exposed to things that I wouldn't ordinarily get exposed to.  And, in fact, because Maynard didn't have a strong relationship with the business community, I was able to ask our president who was Bill Dahlberg [A.W. "Bill" Dahlberg] at the time, to establish some meetings that he would take groups of business leaders and have small functions over at our building so that they can network and meet the mayor and understand that he had some great ideas which Maynard was just brilliant individual.  I mean, just absolutely brilliant and had a lot of positive things on how he wanted to move the city forward and wanted to, you know, solicit the corporation or the business community.  So we were able to host some meetings for Maynard at our building for him.  So, you know, here I am now this lowly peon at Georgia Power dealing with our president, and dealing with our president to help him help the mayor.  So just an awesome, awesome experience for me.  We had had one other a loan executive to the city at that time, a gentleman, a white gentleman, by the name of Fred (unclear), and Fred is the one that recommended me, by the way.  But Fred had done that but I had been the first and, thus far, the only that literally was a part of the mayor's staff.  So that was pretty, pretty unique for anyone really in business in Atlanta to be able to send a loan exec that did the kind of work that I was actually doing.  So it was pretty--for me personally gratifying, for our company it gave us a leg up to have an entree into city government.  And if you know anything about city governments, sometimes they don't, they're not as smoothly run they can because they got all of these bureaucracy and different departments don't work as well as they should with each other.  Information doesn't flow very smoothly across the different divisions with the different bureaus of the city.  But because I wasn't a city employee and I was from Georgia Power, no one was threatened by me.  So I could go about anywhere I wanted to go, get information on what I wanted to get and get things done.  And again, I go back to my parents [Janice George Holmes and Carl Holmes], and that [U.S.] military kind of upbringing that I had being thrust in different cities, learn different people, make different friends and have to do that every three to four years, I didn't have any problems interacting with anybody.  So it worked out very, very beautiful for me.  I mean, it was a--but what was so powerful about that was now I was interacting with some fairly high level folks, and one in particular was the president in my own company.  That gave me some exposure that, you know, you just couldn't pay for.  So now I've got--I've been seen by our president who seen me in action and Maynard such a loyal person, I had done a good job for Maynard.  He would constantly ask our president, "When are y'all going do something for Richard [HistoryMaker Richard Holmes]?"
Story_ID: 317797
Speaker 1: We left us at the crossroads here--
Speaker 2: What was I talking about?
Speaker 1: --says what can they do (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I lost myself.
Speaker 1: "Richard's [HistoryMaker Richard Holmes] done a lot for us, what do we do for Richard?"  That was the question, I think at the last.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure where I was.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Your role with the mayor was a springboard for (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh okay, oh yes.  When I--after having worked for, for Maynard [Maynard Jackson], Maynard, talked to our president and would, would, often ask, "When are you going to do something for Richard?"  This was before I went back over there.  Then, when I went back to Georgia Power [Georgia Power Company], he would still see him in the community and said, "When you gonna do something with him?"  And it's funny because our president came to me one day and said, "How about doing this, how about telling Maynard, I got the message.  That we are going to do something, but I got the message."  And the irony of it is, I wasn't prodding Maynard to go do that.  That's just the kind of person Maynard Jackson was.  He was very--I mean, he was very--if you've done something very positive for him, he would in turn try his best to do something very positive for you.  He--and he's--you just learn so much being around him because he, he was just so brilliant.  Style is totally different from--you know, he was succeeding Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young], which Andy had done wonderful things for the city, being having come, having been an ambassador.  Andy had a lot of--Andy sort of naturally made us an international city now, because people from different countries who know this man are now coming to Atlanta [Georgia].  In particular, coming to the City of Atlanta, coming to the mayor's office.  So Andy had that level of, of interaction.  And it's funny how all this works because Maynard first time around, Andy was next.  Andy had Shirley Franklin as his chief administrative officer.  Shirley sort of ran the day-to-day, Andy did all of the significant PR [public relations] and leverage work.  And you remember, Andy was working on the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia] during that period of time, so he was part of that effort.  Just, just a dynamic individual.  Andy sort of bridged the business community from where Maynard had gone.  Maynard had to change the mold, had to change the direction.  Andy, with his personality, with his style came on and leveraged that and brought the business community along.  And, in fact, when Maynard ran the third time, from my perspective, the business community felt that he wasn't the one.  They, they wanted someone like Maynard's opponent who was Michael Lomax.  They wanted someone like that.  I think the business community supported him.  And I probably shouldn't have said the name, but they wanted him, and--so when Maynard won, they just, they tried to do their best to, to reach out, but they still was not comfortable there.  And that's where my boss came in and helped with that.  But, but I think they were--Maynard was right as an African American mayor the first time, Andy was right for this time.  I think Maynard was right for the third time around, just as well as Shirley is right for us today, Shirley Franklin.  But anyway, long story short, that helped me launch my career because Maynard really said some positive things about me and talked to the right folks back at Georgia Power.
Story_ID: 317798
Speaker 1: So how long were you with the city [Atlanta, Georgia] government--
Speaker 2: I was with the city about eighteen months, about a year and a half.  And when you--when you're with, away from your company for that long, you get a little antsy because what you don't want to be is out of sight, out of mind.  Because the business of the company [Georgia Power Company] was still going forward, people were still going to different jobs.  But it was a, it was a great experience for me, even though I did the special assistant to the mayor [Maynard Jackson] about sixteen months, and--'cause I only started that after I had only been over there about two months.  But I did the special assistant and did the director of his Corporate Volunteer Program as well.  And that Corporate Volunteer Program did several things.  One of the major things we did was, we did a management study of the police department.  We were able to solicit the Deloitte and Touche [Deloitte] to come in and do a management study.  And--which was very, very good.  We also, during that period of time, from that study, we hired a new police chief named Eldrin Bell and we also hired a new fire chief.  And I remember, if I'm not mistaken, the gentleman's name was Chamberlain [Dave Chamberlain], but we hired a new fire chief at the same time.  We also looked at several departments in the city and trying to see how their processes linked up to-and how their processes linked to trying to get the end product done, and the customer service that went in to that.  We did several things along there.  We had built a new building in--for city hall.  We looked at the uses of that building, because we were looking at--external people were using the atrium and we were wearing the floor out, so we looked at--kinda rules and regs on how we would utilize that building.  We looked at our economic development processes and how we could more interact with the economic development community.  We had the Atlanta chamber, which there was--the mayor had some feelings that the chamber was not truly representing the city in its global mission, so we tried to take the mayor's economic development arm and try to link it more to the chamber and to other entities in the state that were dealing with economic development.  So as the mayor's corporate volunteer, I got involved in a lot of stuff, if you will--
Story_ID: 317799
Speaker 1: One of the more memorable things; in Atlanta [Georgia], we used to have a store downtown called Rich's department store.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It became (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was the--
Speaker 1: --a part of federated--
Speaker 2: --big, big, big one, yeah--
Speaker 1: It used to have a big Christmas tree celebration there every year.  A good, big program.  It's on TV at the, the Thanksgiving--it's the--yes, Thanksgiving night.  Have this big program, lighting of the great Rich's Christmas tree.  That's what the culmination of it.  And, Rich's had closed its store downtown, and like a lot of downtowns at the time, the downtown area was not growing like, you know, it had.  You had businesses that were moving out, we had white flight, just to be direct, and so Rich's, a huge department store, big history and legacy in downtown.  Now, they were going to move that tradition out to one of the malls, and Maynard [Maynard Jackson] didn't like that.  So we had an opportunity to solicit several companies.  Of course, Georgia Power [Georgia Power Company] being one of those companies, and we hooked up with BellSouth [BellSouth Corporation; AT&T South, Atlanta, Georgia], and with also Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia], and we were going to fund a similar celebration downtown to keep that tradition alive.  In other words, to keep the vibrant downtown that Maynard was envisioning and working toward.  And we--at the end of the day, we got Rich's to not relocate to the mall at that time.  So Rich's stayed downtown several more years after that.  They ultimately did move out to the mall, but at least three, four, five years they stayed downtown.  And what was really interesting was that the mayor--we had all of this publicity in the papers and all about what was going on, who was saying what, who was doing what.  And we had all these stories that were written and quoting the mayor and having this meeting and so forth; and in reality, it was me negotiating with the federated people on what we would do and wouldn't do.  But that just told me how the news media get a little bit of the information, and they write a story around something that is totally not true, 'cause it was actually me doing the back and forth with the folks from federated trying to keep the tree downtown.  And that was a real--that's a, that's--I tell my sons [Stephen Holmes and Mark Holmes] about that 'cause that's a real tidbit to know that sometimes what you read in the paper might not be exactly the way things actually happen.  And I could speak to that because it was me actually sort of behind the scenes doing some work.  Again, great experience for me.
Story_ID: 317800
Speaker 1: That's when I went back to Georgia Power [Georgia Power Company], when I went back to Georgia Power to work for, at that time, Jim Davis [James Davis], who was our--who had been our longest tenured black officer.  Worked for him for a while--
Speaker 2: So this was 1991, or--?
Speaker 1: It was in 1991, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-one [1991],'cause I went over in June of '90 [1990] and went back in the fall of '91 [1991].
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you were working for Jim Davis.  Now, in what capacity, what was your title?
Speaker 1: I was corporate relations manager for Jim.  Jim was a corporate relations VP, and I was his manager.  I was one of his managers.  And we basically did community relations type work in the minority community.  That's what we actually did.  So, I worked for Jim, and from that experience--remember I was telling you that Bill Dahlberg [A.W. "Bill" Dahlberg] was our president.  From that experience, I was identified and was given an opportunity to go to Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts], go to their business school, to attend an executive education program.
Speaker 2: Is this 1992?
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-two [1992]; that's correct.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I had an opportunity to go to Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] to attend what they called Program for Management Development [General Management Program].  I did that in--from August '92 [1992] to November '92 [1992].  Excellent program, great experience.  Cost the company a lot of money, so they were making a pretty sizable investment in me.  It was a program where you went to school Monday through Saturday.  It was sort of like getting an M.B.A. at Harvard in about a two and a half, three months' time.  I mean, that's how much data they cram into you.  But the biggest experience of that was being able to meet people from different countries because 68 percent--we had a class of about 128, if I'm not mistaken.  And about 68, 67 percent of that was non-American.  So we had all of these people from different countries.  That was, again, that was another experience for me.  And again, my old back--military background, dealing with people and understanding people.  And I have a fairly decent personality allowing me to be very affective in that environment, in that setting.  I think I learned a lot, not just the academic side, but I also learned a lot just interacting with people, and different cultures, and seeing how they deal with various business issues, how they deal with various people issues, you know, how their countries regulate them and so forth, so on.  So that was pretty neat.  So that was an experience I had there.  I was--at that time, I was only the, I was only the second black that had an opportunity to do that experience.  And it was a great experience.
Story_ID: 317801
Speaker 1: From there, when I finished that program [Program for Management Development; General Management], I was promoted to a fairly high level job [at Georgia Power Company].  I was promoted to--we had changed to--we had--the title was still district manager.  I was promoted to a district manager, and the irony of that, and a little unknown story, was we had done some reorganization in our company.  And in our district operations we had done some reorganization, and I was scheduled--I was called--I was told--and when I was up at Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], when you come back, you're gonna come and you're gonna have what is now the Atlanta [Georgia] district, or central district, which was basically where I'd worked for a period of time, where Jimmy George [Jim George] had been the manager.  But what people were looking at me, well that be an ideal for you 'cause, you know, Maynard [Maynard Jackson] is mayor and you have that experience with the city.  It'd be an ideal location for you to go work and have that responsibility.  Well, lo and behold, before I got back to town, I got another phone call about a week later.  They said, "No, we made some changes.  You're actually going to go out and work in Cobb County [Georgia]."  And at that time, Cobb County is a probably heavily, heavily, heavily, heavily Republican, majority white, and as an African American, you're going to go out and be the manager out there and interact--represent the company internally as well as externally to that environment.  And, and I say that to you because--just to give you a little flavor for it, not too much longer, Newt Gingrich became the speaker of the house and he represented that area.  So to give you a little flavor for the environment there.
Speaker 2: Now, this is right on the cusp of the Republican revolution.
Speaker 1: That is correct.
Speaker 2: Led by Newt Gingrich who--
Speaker 1: That is correct.
Speaker 2: --as I recall, reading his bio and the stories about him, he chose Cobb County to move to because he knew he could turn the minds of the people towards his agenda.
Speaker 1: The demographic shift that changed in Atlanta.  Newt was initially a congressman from the south side of Metro Atlanta.  But the demographics were changing to being a little bit more minorities then--in his area, so he moved to Cobb which was obviously more favorable to a Republican type mindset and a Republican agenda.  And mostly, in that general area, we had a large number of Republicans in our general assembly [Georgia General Assembly].  Most of the local politicians, the majority of them were all Republicans.  So here goes this young black man out there.  Well, I can tell you, I worked--I had responsibility for Douglas County [Georgia], Cobb County, Paulding County [Georgia] and Cherokee County [Georgia].  And they were all pretty much heavily Republican.  We had leadership from the state house that was out there.  We had the demo--the Republican candidate for lieutenant governor and the Republican candidate for governor were in my service territory.  The ones I was responsible for.  You know, I can tell you, and we had a county commission chairman who was Republican, who at the time was very--viewed as very controversial.  He was viewed as, you know, "We're an island out here, we got out own thing, we're doing, we got good tax base, we're a great place, great schools, you folks in Atlanta, y'all stay away.  Don't come our way."  He was viewed that way, even though I think that was not a correct assessment of him.
Story_ID: 317802
Speaker 1: But I can tell you, I went out there, and I guess the Lord was always with me.  I had an absolute ball.  Just the greatest time of my life.  I was successful by any way you can measure.  I lived on the south side of town.  I lived in Fayette County [Georgia], which was roughly about twenty-eight miles from where I worked.  I became well entrenched in that environment there.  I became, in the chamber of succession leadership--the Cobb [Cobb County, Georgia] chamber was the second largest chamber in Georgia.  And I ended up in 1999 being the chair, the volunteer chair, of the board of the Cobb Chamber of Commerce, and I did not even live in the county.  I was involved in everything that went on in that county.  All the politicians, I had excellent rapport, excellent relationship.  Newt Gingrich and I were on a first-name basis, and a little known fact is Newt Gingrich is from my hometown, and he went to high school right around from where I lived.
Speaker 2: In Columbus, Georgia (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Columbus--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Newt finished high school, his military background, finished high school in Columbus, Georgia, went to Baker High School there in Columbus, and, and so we had that little commonality about each other.  But when I was in Cobb County, on our chamber fly-ins when we'd go up to D.C. [Washington, D.C.], I mean, you know, obviously, I'd probably be one of the few blacks that's in the crowd, and I mean, I knew Newt just like you and I are sitting here talking now.  I mean, just--and I was very big in our chamber of commerce, sponsored many events where he was speaker, so I say all that to say, as an African American, I didn't change who I was, I mean, I'm the same person regardless.  But I think I'm very fond of the ability to get along with people.  I, I--and quite candidly, the county was very receptive to me.  They were very receptive to someone who willing, who was wanting to get involved.  And I'll tell you without a doubt, my company [Georgia Power Company] and my company's reputation gave me the entree to be--to get in the door.  And, obviously, it was up to me after that point to prove that okay, once I'm in the door, that I belong.  But I had a seat at the table for that community.  I mean, I was one of the players until ultimately getting chair of the chamber of commerce, which was a big deal in that county, and don't live there, and then be the first and, thus far, the only African American to have chaired that chamber of commerce.  It's pretty phenomenal.  My chamber, just recently this week, we had a reunion of all past chamber chairs of the Cobb Chamber.  We've only had two white--two females, or two white females, and I've been the only African American to chair that chamber.  And the chamber's been around since the '40s [1940s], the late '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s], and we had about thirty of the past chamber chairs at this meeting, and I got, just talking to various people and they were all saying, "Richard [HistoryMaker Richard Holmes], I remember your year, everything went well."  And I did.  I had an excellent chamber year. Raised a lot of money for the chamber, increased memberships, initiated some new programs.  I had a great agenda with our elected officials.  I mean, just--it--the Lord was looking after me, 'cause it just went very, very well.  I had an excellent time.  And because of that experience, I worked about six and a half years--I mean, I didn't just get to be the chamber chair.  I went out there in late '82 [1982], I mean, I'm sorry, late '92 [1992], and I left in 2000 when I moved back to town to become an officer of the company--
Speaker 2: That was about eight years, I guess, huh?
Speaker 1: Yeah. It was actually--well, in all reality, in '99 [1999] I did an assignment for our--I did a temporary assignment, come down to work for our president.  And, actually, I started in '98 [1998].  That was in '98 [1998], '99 [1999], I did a temporary assignment where I still had my job in Cobb County, but I was working for our first president [of the Southern Company], at the time was Allen Franklin [H. Allen Franklin].  It was supposed to be like a developmental assignment, go about three to four months, and it ended up being nine months.  And then when our next president, David Ratcliffe came on board, he asked me to be his assistant full time, so I came on and stayed his assistant.  So even though I still had the title in Cobb County, and still was doing the chamber thing in Cobb, I really didn't work out there at the time.  But for all practical purposes, if you look at technically years, I was out there about eight years.  Even though it wasn't eight in the truest sense.  But I had a great time in Cobb, just an absolute great time.
Story_ID: 317803
Speaker 1: Do you have any personal reflections on Newt Gingrich?  I guess he's probably one of the most articulate and organized of the conservatives that the country's produced.  I mean, what's your reflections on him?
Speaker 2: Well, Newt to me, I mean, I think he really--I mean, I think he's one--he's a historian.  I mean, he knows history and he bases a lot of his thinking, from my perspective, on history.  He formulates a lot of his ideas based on his, his knowledge of history.  He's a college professor.  He's a college history professor.  What I liked about Newt was, he was always down to earth with our groups.  He was always down to earth, you could talk to him.  He'd talk to you in very logical ways.  He was about changing the status quo.  I mean, that was his whole Republican revolution, as he put it.  I found him to be very easy to deal with, I found him to be very common sense.  Now, I realize when you get on the national stage, you get microphones in your face, you probably do a lot of different things.  But my interactions with him were very, very good.  He was very loyal to Georgia, he was very loyal to Cobb County [Georgia], he was very pro this state, and he did a lot of positive things for this state.  If you think about these BRAC Base Realignment and Closure commissions that's gone on for years, we were fortunate enough to have Sam Nunn in his position representing the State of Georgia, then Newt became the speaker of the house and Georgia was basically spared any base closing for all of those first rounds of the base closure commissions.  This year, 2005, is the first time Georgia has had any loss of any military bases.  And I think that's all tied into more recently Newt and then prior to that Sam Nunn, because Georgia has strong representation in the, in the senate and in the house [U.S. House of Representatives].  Newt was very loyal to protecting in his area.  He had Lockheed [Lockheed Martin] and the Dobbins Air Reserve Base [Marietta, Georgia]. He was very loyal in protecting that.  And so, he had different kind of views and different perspectives in terms of how some of our social systems should work and how the government should interact, and supporting those systems.  I truly believe--one thing I'll tell you about Newt, I was involved with the Urban League [Urban League of Greater Atlanta] in Cobb County.  And every year, Newt would come, talk to the Urban League and spend time.  He wouldn't come in to do the photo op and leave off.  He'd come, spend the whole day, talk to folks, talk to students.  We had a little education academy there.  I mean, he genuinely tried to be meaningful things, and I saw him from that perspective, and I saw him in a real way.  I mean, I didn't--I know I can watch TV and see him with a different kind of persona, and--but I saw him in a real way and I saw him being very true to--one his own personal belief, whether you 100 percent agree with those, but he's very true to those, but he was fundamental to those beliefs based on his perspective of history and based on his perspective of where we needed to go long term and not, not, not, not live in the past, but make sure we learn and deal with what's happened in the past as we go forward.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any disagreements with Newt?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we had different disagreements.  I mean, you know. I, I, I'm a strong believer in affirmative action.  Well, that wasn't necessarily one of those things that he, he totally believed in.  But, but, you know, I think at the end of the day we're trying to accomplish the same things, we just saw going from point A to point B a little differently.  I enjoyed always talking to him, and he'd sit and talk with you and debate with you.  A very articulate individual, very, very bright individual--just enjoyed it.  I remember so well, my company, Georgia Power [Georgia Power Company], we were really getting beat up by the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration, the environmental folks.  And Newt--and those environmental--they--director of EPD--EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency] at the time, Carol Browner would not give a lot of folks a lot of time, particularly utilities.  Newt would arrange for us, when we go up on our chamber events to D.C. [Washington, D.C.], we had some dedicated time with her because at that time, we had become a non-attainment area because of our air in the metro area and Cobb County, a growing county, was trying to build roads and, basically, our roads programs got stopped, so we so we wanted to talk to the EPA director because a lot of those policies were coming out of there.  So Newt would arrange us time that we could go spend with this individual.  I mean, we had a couple of meetings where we had this person one-on-one for an hour and a half to two hours, and that's not--you don't get those kind of sittings with that high level of Washington [D.C.] official one-on-one, just like you and I are talking now.  So I thought he did a lot of things.  But it also gave me an entree as a utility to talk to this person too, because those policies impacted us pretty adversely as well.  So it was pretty neat to have that kind of exposure to folks that I wouldn't ordinarily have that kind of entree to.
Story_ID: 317804
Speaker 1: So you worked basically in Cobb County [Georgia] until '98 [1998], and then, you know, on paper I guess until 2000.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Right.
Speaker 1: And so what did you do after that?
Speaker 2: After 2000, I was promoted to vice president. And it's funny because I became--in, in, in the summer of 2000, I became a region vice president and I had a responsibility for the western part of the state.  All of the Georgia Power [Georgia Power Company] operations in the western part of the state.  All of the retail distribution; that is the customers, their meters, keeping their lights on, building new lines, customer service, external relations, those kinds of things.  And my area included the City of Atlanta [Georgia], included Cobb County.  Basically, I had all the way up to north Georgia up in the Cherokee county area, come through Atlanta, go down 75 [Interstate 75 (I-75)], skirt around Macon [Georgia], skirt around Fort Valley [Georgia], go over to Jimmy Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] Plains in Georgia [Plains, Georgia], Americus, Georgia, go over to the river and come all the way back up. So I had a third of the state.  Pretty, pretty impressive area, and that was a great--
Speaker 1: Georgia's a pretty big state too.
Speaker 2: It's a big state.
Speaker 1: I think it's the biggest state east of the Mississippi, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  The irony of our company, I remember I said to you earlier that on one day, Georgia Power promoted two black officers, another black officer, Lamont Houston [E. Lamont Houston].  So there was three region vice presidents, and two of those three were black.  That was historic for our company.  Lamont had the southern part of the state.  He had the largest land territory, even though he didn't have as many customers.  I had Atlanta, so obviously, I had more customers.  We all had about--there was three of us, we all had comparable number of customers, but Lamont had all of the southern part, which is less populated than the northern part.  So we had a huge territory.  But that was phenomenal for now where--at one point in time, we used to have the state divided up into seven and eight different vice president areas.  Then we shrunk that down to have three, and two of those three were African American.  That was, that was eye opening.  But I did that role for several years as a vice president.  And then my boss, at the time David Ratcliffe said, "Okay.  I'd like for you to come in and work a corporate role."  So I came in and worked as an administrative services type vice president.  And what was really unique about that was, I had all these corporate functions, if you will.  At that time, we did not have a chief legal counsel, so I had the legal operations, I had the responsibility for the legal function, I had responsibility for--I went from legal to having responsibility for our facilities.  And the facilities part was who delivered your mail to you, so I went down to worrying about who sued us and also to worry about the next day, whether or not you got your mail, your inside company mail.  I had security, I had--I had labor relations.  Our labor relations wasn't in HR [human resources], so half of our company workforce is union craft labor, and we have a labor agreement with them.  Well, I had responsibility for managing that organization as well.  I had a host of internal things that I had responsibility for, as well.  And I did that for about a year and a half.  What I did not know when I took that role, was actually, I was being set up and exposed with another experience to move on to where I am, well, really the job that I had before this one.  My--at the time, I was being groomed to join our senior management council.
Story_ID: 317805
Speaker 1: In 2002, our president--when I'm--after moving over to the administrative services VP role, I was actually being groomed to take on a role in our senior management council, and that's in 2002.  Jim Davis [James Davis], who was at that time, our, our--the only African American we had on our senior management council, retired.  Jim's role was principally, he, he did--he was responsible for our diversity and corporate relations activities, community relations activities.  And so when I came on board, what I did was took the organization that I had already and then absorbed that org- Jim's organization, so I totally had a--we renamed the group Corporate Services, so I had a host of internal organizations that reported to me that supported our various business units.  I, again, became a member of our executive council, our senior leadership team, and that was a good, good move for me.  It was a good promotion and now I'm sitting around the table with all my peers who are making decisions to run the company [Georgia Power Company].  So that was a, a great move for me.  Since then, I've actually modified my role, or changed my role.  We've done some reorganization, and I gave up some of my, internal.  I gave up the administration services function and now I've taken on a dual role of having a corporate responsibility as well as having an operational responsibility.  I re- I still maintain the responsibility for our diversity and our corporate relations programs.  Let me just sort of tell you what that is so it makes sense.  Diversity is all of our diversity activities.  We have a diversity action organization that deals with leadership, work force and deals with culture change, organizational change.  I also have supplier diversity, which deals with, adding minority and females on suppliers to our, as our supplier base.  I have our community relations which deals with all of our minority publics; African, Asian, Hispanic as well as we do a lot of work with some, some environmental groups, as well as groups that deal with aging, because we have a huge aging population in the State of Georgia.  So I have that on one side of my, my, my business.  And I have a chief diversity officer of the company.  He runs all that.  He reports to me, and so that's my corporate role.  I report to our president on those functions.  I have another job--I'm still senior vice president as my overall title, but I also have an operational job, where I have operational responsibility for all of metropolitan Atlanta [Georgia].  And what I mean by operational, again is our dist--our retail distribution, where we--it's the--it's all the wiring, the wires, if you will, from our, from our substations that ultimately get to your, to your homes, to your businesses. I have responsibility for maintaining and building all of those lines, as well as all of our customer service; collection of bills, reading meters, and all of those kinds of things, as well as I have responsibility for all of our sales and marketing.  And I guess you'll say, well how do you have to sell electricity?  Well, we sell and use products, we sell business solutions that relate to electric kinds of operations, whereas customers can have a choice, they can go with other type of applications, if you will, gas as an example.  I have responsibility for those functions and also have responsibility for all of our external affairs function.  That's dealing with various communities, dealing with all of our governmental agencies; local, state and federal, so I have a responsibility for that.
Story_ID: 317806
Speaker 1: And the irony of this is that I have all of metropolitan Atlanta [Georgia], and as I told you earlier, Georgia Power [Georgia Power Company] is a unit of the Southern Company [Atlanta, Georgia].  Well, Georgia Power is about half of Southern Company.  Metro Atlanta is about half of Georgia Power, so when you look at my customer base, and my book of, of customers we deal with, it's about a fourth of the revenue for all of Southern Company, it's about a half of all the revenue for Georgia Power.  So it's a pretty substantial area, and to be an African American heading up that responsibility for our company, it's a, it's an honor for me, but it's also a lot of responsibility goes with that.  We have a hurricane down in Florida right now that's headed--we're not sure where it's headed, but my folks now are mobilizing because one, we might have to go help somebody else; or two, we might have to help ourselves if that hurricane ends up coming through here.  So, I mean, those are the kinds of responsibilities that I have. The key thing is just keeping the lights on, making sure everybody have power when they need it, and do it reliably, and, and, and in a cost effective manner.  So a good responsibility for me.  That's what I'm currently doing now.  I'm still a member of our executive management team, our management council as we call it.  We're the ones that are setting the strategic direction and policies for the company as a whole.  But in that capacity, I have a chance to do a lot of different things.  I'm serving on a multitude of boards here in Atlanta.  Just recently, started working on what we are calling the BeltLine [Atlanta BeltLine], which is a--the mere--Shirley Franklin's economic development arm opportunity for the City of Atlanta.  I'm on that partnership, and I'm on that board, and I wanna be leading some efforts along those lines. I serve on a college board here, I serve on a couple of--I serve on a literacy board, I serve on the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] board, I serve on our police foundation board, a couple of other boards that I'm involved with, so I do a lot of different things.  I serve on a couple national boards as well, so I'm not a loss for having something to do.
Story_ID: 317807
Speaker 1: What about the future?  You're still young in the corporate sense, so--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I like that.
Speaker 1: --where are you going next?  What do you think?
Speaker 2: Well, to be honest with you, my sights are on retirement.  No, I--the role that I'm in today actually sets me up for an opportunity to become possibly a CEO of one of our small subsidiaries.  We currently have one African American who is a CEO of one of our small subsidiaries.  It gives me the opportunity, exposure, the responsibility to see if I can handle more and even greater responsibility.  So that's something potentially in the future.  It's not something that I'm clawing for, if you will.  My whole thing is, if I do a good job, do the things I need to do, that'll take care of itself.  If it doesn't happen, I am--I'm not saying that I'm, you know, I'm gonna pack my ship up and go home, but I am, I've reached the heights in our company [Georgia Power Company] that if you'd asked me twenty years ago, would I be where I am today, I probably would have said, I'd be higher than I was twenty years ago, but to be this high, I don't know.  So it's one of those things where I want to do a good job, have a great team, and I think we'll do well, but it's--we'll just have to see.  But it does set me up to be positioned--to potentially be a CEO of one of our smaller companies.
Story_ID: 317808
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of the power company and the African American community, I know there are--most cities have programs to help people that have a hard time trying to pay their bills.  Does Georgia Power [Georgia Power Company] have such a program?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We actually have a program that we do with The Salvation Army, we call it Project Share.  What we do is we have an opportunity for customers to pay small amounts from their bills; maybe one, two, three or five dollars.  Where for every dollar that a customer will give to this Project Share, we, Georgia Power, will match that dollar for dollar.  And that allows The Salvation Army to use that money to help customers who are in need.  We also have other programs whereby, we direct some of our customers to agencies that support items like this.  We're a huge United Way [United Way Worldwide] supporter and a lot of United Way agencies help customers this way too.  So, but Project Share, by and large, is the largest vehicle that we use. It's statewide, we use The Salvation Army and we do not administer the funds, we do not decide who gets the funds, but we do match customer contributions on a dollar per dollar basis.  And we put in probably, our portion, probably, one and a quarter million dollars right now to that effort.  So we got a fund that's close to two, two and a half million dollars out there for customers, for Salvation Army, to use toward customers to help them pay utilities, pay rent, or any other things that customers might need, who come in with an expressed and documented need for assistance.
Story_ID: 317809
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I tell you it's--one of the issues that we face is--you know, our company is very big in economic development.  And the way you look at economic development is, that's the prize, if you will.  When you have businesses that expand, when you have businesses that relocate to your area, because that's very critical to us because our boundary is the State of Georgia.  If the State of Georgia doesn't grow, that means that we can't incrementally sell more kilowatt hours.  So we're all about trying to help this state grow.  Well, before you can get to those prizes of the businesses expanding and relocating, you've got to have infrastructure in place to make a business want to come to you, want to expand their business.  And at the forefront of that is, is the leadership at the local communities and the services at the local community.  And one of the most critical things of services at the local community is education.  And a City like Atlanta [Georgia], a large inner city, and other smaller cities throughout the State of Georgia, we've got to get our education system a far better shape than it is today.  We've got to have better achievement by our students. The dropout rate is extremely high in some places.  And so, that has a real negative effect, more so in African Americans, than it does the greater population at whole.  It affects all of the population, but has a real tremendous impact, so that's one of the concerns I have.  The other concern is just this whole notion along those lines of African American males, being that they're not carrying that legacy of getting a little bit better from the prior generation.  I'm really concerned that we're not progressing in that sense.  In that we might have a generation of males, in particularly, that's gonna do--be--have achievements that's far less than their parents.  And that has a, a negative impact on economic development.  A loss, we have, as you probably have heard so many that are in our criminal system from, you know, from in jail to some type of probation or, or whatever, if you will.  We have more there than we have going through our education; at least higher education systems.  So our company [Georgia Power Company] is real involved with an organization called 100 Black Men of Atlanta [100 Black Men of Atlanta, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia] where it focuses on education, focuses on giving at-risk kids an opportunity, trying to expand that program to include more kids.  That's one of the areas that I'm really, really concerned with socially and from an economic development point of view, realizing that in terms of a workforce and having a high performing workforce, it has negative impact on you growing existing businesses and attracting even more businesses.  Atlanta is a mecca for a lot of things, Atlanta is a great place, the State of Georgia is a great place.  But if we can't really tame that particular beast and the dropout rate for kids, and if we can't handle that--and the other component of that is, if we can't deal with mothers and teens having children, that creates a vicious cycle in our welfare system.  We've got to deal with that.  Again, that's another lost productivity I think we had that leads to some of the other problems I just spoke about.  So those would be concerns I have in terms of state, in terms of African Americans in particular, but I think it has a tremendous impact, not only on African Americans alone, it's just our total state and everybody involved with our state.
Story_ID: 317810
Speaker 1: Tell me, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, sir, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I guess, probably not too many things I would do differently.  One of the things I know I would probably do is I would pro- I went back and got my M.B.A. while I was working for the company.  I probably would have done that maybe a couple of years earlier.  I think the other thing that I would have done is try to find mentors in our company earlier.  Oftentimes, if you don't have someone to show you the ropes, or at least you can bounce things off of, someone who can help you understand the corporate culture.  You know, you go on blaming things for, let's say, your lack of mobility, upward mobility, for probably some of the wrong kinds of things.  I think it's one of those notions where you think if, if I perform and do my work very good, I'm just going to automatically going to get promoted.  Well, it doesn't work that way.  You've got to perform at--well, let me back up.  You see there's a little acronym that I use called PIE: performance, image and exposure.  And I got that from a--and a, a, a good consultant and author, Harvey Coleman, and his book ['Empowering Yourself: The Organizational Game Revealed' Harvey J. Coleman].  It talks about performance, image and exposure.  Talks about perform.  You gotta perform to be able to get in the game. If you can't perform, you'll never get up to the plate. Then you gotta have this image, you know, whether it's, do you know the social graces, do you have the right business acumen about yourself, do you dress well, can you speak the king's language, can you write, can you talk, can you interact and have social and interpersonal skills.  Then it talks about exposure in terms of who knows you and who knows you in a favorable way.  Well, finding a mentor early on in your career, it don't have to be one, it could be several mentors, finding mentors who can help you navigate the culture of the company, who can help you deal with this performance, image and exposure equation, if you will. 'Cause what Harvey says, is that in terms of success, you know, I measure success by how I see it.  You and I might call--what's successful for me might not be successful for you.  We have to make that determination on our own self. We, we empower ourselves in that regard.  But as a general rule in a capitalistic society in the U.S. that we have, basically, he says for success in terms of upward mobility, performance is about 10 percent of that, image is about 30 [percent], and exposure is about 60 [percent].  Well, oftentimes, we get hung up on the 10 percent saying that's what's going to make us move well.  But it's--that only gets you in the ballgame. It's the exposure, people that know you, know you well, know about your work, know that you have the skills, the social graces; they know that you can contribute at the next rim, if you will.  That's how you move ahead.  And you learn a lot of that from mentors.  Mentors who know the company, who have experiences, and I would do it--that's--if anything I would do is I would try to find mentors early on.  And realize that when I came along, there weren't that many folks, and like I said earlier, I had the opportunity to work for two African American leaders.  Well, very few folks have that opportunity so I was blessed in that regard.  So that's what I would do, and that's what I would recommend to anyone to try to understand the culture.  You know, culture is how we do it around here.  And I think Georgia Power [Georgia Power Company] has a good culture, but we all have nuances, and it's those unwritten rules that people step on, what I call those land mines, and blow away their careers, and never knowing that they've stepped on those mines.  So if you can master those unwritten rules to deal with this whole notion of performance, image, and exposure, and you do that by creating--by developing mentors who can school you, and guide you, and who can tell you things that you wouldn't ordinarily know until you've learned it the hard way.
Story_ID: 317811
Speaker 1: By the same token, when you look back at your life up to this point, what would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think for me, and terms of on a personal level, I am very blessed.  I, I, I--my spiritual belief guide me quite a bit, but I'm very blessed to--I'm married, a beautiful wife [Linda McCrary Holmes].  We've been married now twenty-seven years.  We have two, two sons [Stephen Holmes and Mark Holmes], two African American males.  One has been able to finish Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia], and ironically works for our company [Georgia Power Company] now.  I'm very proud of that.  Two, I have a second child, a son, who is now in his third year at Auburn University [Auburn, Alabama].  So I'm very pleased with that, so from that vantage point, I'm hopeful to have a stable household with a husband, wife, raising two kids.  One child that's sort of on his own--he ain't quite off the payroll yet, but he's still--he's on his own for the most part.  Our youngest one who's almost approaching achieving a college education, he's in his third year now.  So I would have produced, in this state that I was telling you about, African American males not going in the right direction, at least I produced two that are going in the right direction, or at least heading in the right direction.  So I'm very, very proud of that from a personal perspective.  And on a, on a, on a very work life perspective and career perspective, I'm very proud of where I've been able to reach here, the heights that I've been able to reach in our company.  But more importantly, through my travels--and this--coming up this corporate ladder, I've reached back and brought others along with me.  I've--there are many blacks that can--I can look to, and point to, and say I hired them, or I gave them that first opportunity.  Just like somebody gave me that opportunity.  But I can also equally look back and say there are many whites I gave that first opportunity to.  So I'm proud of being able to reach back and pull others of my race, but I'm also--it's, it's, it's about making our company better and making all our employees better, and, and, and knowing that we all have something to contribute. So I've, I have, I mentored both black and white.  And I'm very, very proud of being able to--as I've talked to you about mentorship earlier to know that I've done that, know that I've not just done it for African Americans, but I've done it for all of our employees and still do it today.  In fact, it probably takes a lot of my time, because I meet with people often to share with them my experiences.  And the only thing that I ask them is, you know, listen to me, if you ask me a question and you want to know about this, that and the other, you want to know how I've been successful, or what I think you need to do to be successful, all I ask is you listen to me, internalize it, take it in, and whether you use it or not, that's up to you.  But don't dismiss it, but just internalize it, go back and process it.  If it doesn't work for you, so be it. But, at least, take advantage if I've given the time to give it to you, you know, don't dismiss it because it might not meet your way of thinking.  And for the most part, I would say 90 plus percent of everyone does just that.  I've had very few people that just, you know, dismissed the notion right off the bat.  And I believe in the whole, the whole notion of PIE: performance, image and exposure.  I believe in that.  And that's what I try to share with folks.  I also try to tell people, you know, work--try to be a servant leader.  You know, when you serve and help somebody else, it'll benefit you long term.  You might not see it right off, and never burn your bridges, 'cause the person that you're looking down at today, tomorrow might be your boss.  I mentioned to you the gent- when I first went to Columbus [Georgia], the gentleman that I worked for, Buddy Merrill, he worked for me when I became vice president.  But because he was very--we had a good relationship when I worked for him, we had that equally good relationship when he worked for me.  Now, he shared things with me and be forthright, I shared things with him and be forthright.  But he knew, all I asked from him was do his work and do it well and I was going to look after his interest until the day he left this company.  He just recently retired this year.  He always tells me, "You helped me out tremendously," and he's older than me.  More years with the company, but our relationship grew such that I could share with him things I knew, and he could share with me things he knew.  So that whole--that's what I think I've--the legacy that I leave is being able to reach the height, and brought some others along, and then on a personal level, being able to raise a family in a stable environment, and done the things that I think we as men should do, hold our brides up pretty high, and let them be the focus of our lives in terms of the offspring that we have, and try to bring them along and nurture them very well.  So I'm, I'm very pleased with that.  You know, I'm not asking that the good Lord take me away tomorrow, but I think I've, I've done well and, and quite candidly, if I do not progress beyond where I am today, I think I've, I've done well and think I've given--set a mark for others to follow behind me and to do equally as well.  And I know that many will do equally as well and that will make me equally as proud as well as--whether I get there or not.
Story_ID: 317812
Speaker 1: Just two other questions.  One of them is, you're--you've been helpful to this project that we're working on today, and I just wanted to ask you why you think preservation of history is important?
Speaker 2: Well, it's sort of like the old--it's like a road map, you know, if you don't know where you're goin' any road will get you there.  If you don't know where you've been, you surely don't know where you need to go.  And I, and I believe that's very important.  I can tell you now from a roadmap for me, you asked me the question earlier, what would I do differently?  Or what would I rec- would I change, if you will, and I can look back at history and say based on that, I should do X.  And I think as, as, as--because we are not Native American, African Americans that is, I think that we need to understand that we've been here and we've made a significant contribution to the, the wellbeing of this country, and I think we need to have that history well documented so that no one loses sight of that.  And I think we need to be very proud of that history.  Our history is one to be proud of, it's not one that we are proud of how we got here, but that's neither here nor there.  We're here, and we've been here and we're an integral part of this fiber of this country, just as well as anyone else so we should be--we should have that record of where we going, pride ourselves in our history, and then use that history as our road map for how we go forward.
Story_ID: 317813
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  I guess, as we talked earlier, just be remembered as having made some small contribution; having truly lived the notion that services are price that you pay for being on God's green earth.  I want to be remembered as providing service to family, providing service to an employer, providing services to fellow employees, providing service to community where I live.  And that people can say, well, you know, he tried to make a difference in a positive way, in every aspect of what he was involved in.  I think that would be very, very noble to have those kind of words said to you.  And--but not only said, but truly heartfelt and meant and that I've truly been able to accomplish those things as well.  So that's, that's the way I'd like to be remembered.
Speaker 1: All right.  Thank you, sir.
Speaker 2: Good.  Thank you.
Speaker 1: All right.
