Story_ID: 8576
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson.  I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer and Samuel Adams is observer.  And I'd like to have you start out, I'd like to have you state your name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: State your name.
Speaker 2: Now?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh we're running, oh.
Speaker 1: We're running.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My name is William R. Hudgins and my residence is in New York and Florida.  And my--.
Speaker 1: Spell your name for us?
Speaker 2: Oh my--W-I-L-L-I-A-M, William, R-A-N-D-A-L-P-H Randalph, H-U-D-G-I-N-S, Hudgins.
Speaker 1: And Randolph is R-A-N-D-O-L-P-H.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 8577
Speaker 1: Give me your date of birth.
Speaker 2: My date of birth is April 30th, 1907.
Speaker 1: And I'd like to have today's date?  Today's date is April 15th.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, I--.
Speaker 2: April 15th--.
Speaker 1: 2002.
Speaker 2: --2002, yeah okay.
Speaker 1: You're going to have a big anniversary coming up in five years.
Speaker 2: I made a big promise.
Speaker 1: Yeah you're--.
Speaker 2: All of the people who were at the, at my party--my ninetieth birthday and I made my speech and I had a few cocktails you know.  And I said, "Now everybody who is here ten years from today are going to be on a Continental [Airlines] airplane.  We're going to fly to Paris [France], and celebrate and then come back home."  That's what I promised.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.
Speaker 2: About ten of the people are dead already.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's sad.  That's bad.  I hate that but I'm not going to do it anyway.  I'm going to do something else just as exciting.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I got five more years.
Speaker 1: That's surprise--I'm telling you, you're doing well too.  You're still driving.
Speaker 2: Oh sure.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Okay, now I want to--let's see, the location, let's just say the location is the Hilton Miami Hotel in Miami, Florida.
Speaker 2: Miami Airport (unclear).
Speaker 1: Hilton--it's 5101 Blue Lagoon Drive, Miami, Florida.  So I wanna ask--I want also to have your profession.
Speaker 2: Have what?
Speaker 1: Your profession?
Speaker 2: I am an entrepreneur.  I must tell you this, that the things that I've done and the way I've done them does not bespeak truly my preparedness or education.  I did not go to college.  My parents [William and Agnes Moody Hudgins] were poor.  I finished high school [Peabody High School, Petersburg, Virginia] and that was it.
Story_ID: 8578
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite what?
Speaker 1: Food.
Speaker 2: Food?  My wife [Dorothy C. Hudgins] is a nutritionist by profession and she see to it that I get everything unless I put my foot down sometimes.  I like--cabbage is my favorite vegetable.  Chicken and fish are my favorite meats and well that's it.  And I, I do not abuse myself with diets.  I follow the instructions of those who know more about that than I do.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yellow.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Favorite vacation destiny.  I consider coming to Florida for the winter a vacation.  I don't need no more vacation than that 'cause I'm, I'm--while I am not involved to the extent in business as I was, I still like to keep busy.  So work is my favorite vocation.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, this is very simple.  "If a task has once begun, never leave it till it's done, be the labor great or small, do it well or not at all."
Speaker 1: Thank you sir.  You know our HistoryMakers they always have the phrases and sayings, very--I mean I--anyway it's good.  It's a good thing.  And your wife obviously being a--you think she has helped you live a long life?
Speaker 2: I, I think she's helped but I think the, the real guardian of my longevity is myself.  I don't abuse myself.  I read, I get health letters from Harvard [University] and through different health letters.  I have about three or four.  I kind of can't keep up with it.  So much reading I can't keep up with it but it's helpful and I think that has more to do with my longevity than any other single thing.
Story_ID: 8579
Speaker 1: I'd like to talk about your parents and I know you were adopted at two.  Do you know anything about your birth parents?
Speaker 2: Nothing at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I know their racial condition or situation but my mother was fourteen years old when I was born, I was told.  And she, and naturally she wasn't married.  But that's, that's it.  That's it.
Speaker 1: Now how did you, you were adopted at age two.
Speaker 2: Age two.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Do you know anything about any, by work hearing anything what happened in those two years?
Speaker 2: Nothing at all.  Nothing at all, no.
Speaker 1: And you were born, were you born in Petersburg--?
Speaker 2: Born, born in Richmond.
Speaker 1: Oh born in Richmond, okay.  In Richmond, Virginia?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And give the name of the mother who adopted you.
Speaker 2: The name of the father and mother who adopted me, they gave me their name and they gave me their love and that's it.  I don't know anymore.  My mother died, my adoptive mother died when I was eleven years old so--(brief pause)--my father remarried after a few years and I became, I had another mother, did not like me.  But I needn't go into all of that.
Speaker 1: Well we, we do want to a little, just a little bit.  But tell me, give me the names of your mother you know your mother who raised you up until eleven.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And your father, give me their names.
Speaker 2: Her name was Agnes Moody and she married my father and became Agnes Hudgins.  And his name was William Hudgins.  I'm named after him.  And he was--my mother was a concert singer but my father was a laborer to speak.  He drove truck and made deliveries and that sort of thing and money in those days wasn't very much.  So we, we were poor.  And I came up as a poor.  We were active in the church.  My mother was leader of the choir and my father was head of the deacon board, Baptist church and that was my religious exposure and it was good.
Speaker 1: When you think about your childhood in Richmond, what was Richmond like at that time?
Speaker 2: I was two years old and I knew nothing about it.
Speaker 1: Oh two years, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then when did you move to Petersburg [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Same day I was adopted I was taken to Petersburg.
Story_ID: 8580
Speaker 1: Can you talk about Petersburg [Virginia] and what that town was like?
Speaker 2: Well, in those days there was a quite noticeable difference between the treatment that white people received and that that black people received.  And that put a handicap on anything that you wanted to do that was constructive.  There was no support for it.  It was long before [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] came.  And I went to school, I played baseball on the team at Peabody High [School, Petersburg, Virginia] and I left Petersburg I was eighteen years old.  And since, from that time on I was in New York.
Speaker 1: Mr. Hudgins I want to go back though to Petersburg.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I want to know what type of child were you?  You know what, were you quiet, shy, were you rambunctious, were you an average boy?  I mean what kind of child were you?
Speaker 2: I was aggressive.  I remember one of my teachers in school lived next door to me and she used to sit on her porch and listen and watch us kids play.  And one game we played is cowboy and Indian.  And she asked me one day, "Why do you always have to be the chief?"  So I, I asked her why did she ask me that question.  She said to me that, "It showed leadership qualities in you.  And you study hard and do, obey your mother and father and teacher and it will come out in a different form when you grow up."  It happened that way too.
Speaker 1: And as a young person did you have any dreams about what you wanted to be?
Speaker 2: My mother [Agnes Moody Hudgins] and I were coming from church one Sunday and there was a rally on to raise money for the church.  So she stopped in the grocery store of a black man in the neighborhood and seeking a contribution.  Well while there I asked him about the horses in the back.  He had horses in his backyard and they were race horses, he trained them for racing.  I learned also that he had a hotel down the street a piece and he had this grocery store.  So on the way home I told my mother that when I grow up I want to be like Mr. Thornton, that was his name Thornton and I think I did.  I think I did a little better too, yeah.  So that, that's one experience I had as a child.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about some other experiences too?
Speaker 2: I'm trying, trying to see if I can bring up something.
Speaker 1: You know let me ask you while you're thinking of those, I want you to talk yourself back to that time you know in Petersburg and I want you to think about what sights, smells or sounds remind you of Petersburg and your growing up, sights, smells or sounds?
Speaker 2: I liked pretty girls.  When I got to be a teenage--I can't think of any smells.  I, I have difficulty answering that.  That and my, my dreams of becoming a businessman like Mr. Thornton, I can't think of anything else.
Story_ID: 8581
Speaker 1: Your parents, your mother [Agnes Moody Hudgins] was she a nurturing, the mother that you had up, who passed away when you were eleven, was she a nurturing person?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: She was nurturing, yes.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what were the things she would tell you?
Speaker 2: She, her whole family were into music.  One was a teacher of music in high school and she had a brother who played the drums and she had another sister, oh she did, she sang I think and my mother was a concert singer.  So I often say now that I'm sure the kind of exposure I got from my mother, if she had lived I would probably have been into music.  I have a little piece of voice now that I, I sing sometimes but I, I think I would have definitely been into music if, if she had lived.
Speaker 1: And your father [William Hudgins], what kind of person was he?
Speaker 2: He was a gentle man.  He had none of the habits that I would consider improper.  He drank very little, little wine, something like that.  He did not smoke and he was, he was a good man, good man, hard working and religious.
Story_ID: 8582
Speaker 1: I was exposed to, to religion in my home and in the church.  I was active in BYPU [Baptist Young People's Union] you know, yeah.  So--.
Speaker 2: And was it, was, was the Baptist church that you went to, what was the name of it?
Speaker 1: Harrison Street, First Baptist Church of Harrison Street, Petersburg, Virginia.
Speaker 2: And do you remember who the minister's name was?
Speaker 1: [Rev. Eli] Tartte.  I remember it very well because there was a fight, church fight split and this man Tartte was a little active with the sisters and the people on the deacon board didn't like that.  So there was a split between the other leadership and the leader as a pastor.  And it actually turned to fist fights, there was fist fights in the church.  But after he left--they threw him out really and got another minister, his name was [Rev. S. T.] Eldridge, one of his sons are in New York now, Rev. Eldridge and he was a different type of man.  He didn't have hungry eyes for the sisters.
Speaker 2: Now was the church was it a whooping and hollering church or was it a more proper Southern Baptist church?
Speaker 1: More proper Southern Baptist, no big time shouting and, and shaking the roof and all that sort of stuff.  No, there was, it was dignity and, and intelligence.  It was a very nice church, the largest church in the city for black people.
Story_ID: 8583
Speaker 1: I know you went to Peabody High School [Petersburg, Virginia] but was there any other--I mean where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: Same.
Speaker 1: Same so it was one school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You know, sir I have another question to ask you, but you would still be, this would have been something you would have heard but not experienced--,
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --cause it was many years before.  But did you ever hear about things that happened during reconstruction?  Did you ever hear older people talking about that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No. No.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's just a question.
Speaker 2: No I didn't have that exposure.  I, I missed a lot education wise when my mother [Agnes Moody Hudgins] passed.
Speaker 1: Now tell me when she passed and the other--what was the name of your new mother, your stepmother--?
Speaker 2: Hattie [Hudgins].
Speaker 1: Hattie.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what happened then 'cause you said that there, you know you're eleven years old at this point?
Speaker 2: No, I was about fourteen.
Speaker 1: Fourteen okay I'm sorry.  Oh that's right, she--okay.  Your mother passed away.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I was--.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then your father [William Hudgins] got remarried when you were--?
Speaker 2: About three or four years later.
Speaker 1: Okay, I see.  Sorry okay.  That's right, sorry. (laughs) "He was a good man," that's what you said.  Sorry I didn't mean to--so when--so what happened then in your household and what impact did it have?
Speaker 2: She did not like me because I excelled in behavior over two, two boys and a girl.  Their parents died on her side.  Their parents died in Boston [Massachusetts].  They lived in Boston and she adopted them and the boys didn't have the right attitude about life and about things, not like I did.  And because of that she disliked me.  And the girl was quite different.  She, she liked me, the--my foster sister liked me.  She went to Virginia State College [later Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] and got a degree.  She was older, a few years older than I.  She went to Virginia State College, got a degree and she taught school and she taught me a lot too and that's, that's it.
Speaker 1: So your father, did he try to come to your aid?
Speaker 2: Oh definitely.  Definitely, all the time he would tell her and she would try to impose, but she wasn't very successful in imposing because the resentment of me was--and there was no reason for it really.  There was no reason for it because I was--my behavior was all together different from that which she was getting from them.  But I think it was envy.
Speaker 1: So you were the only child up until that point?  Were you the only child?
Speaker 2: In that household?
Speaker 1: Right, in the--?
Speaker 2: The second household?
Speaker 1: No, in the first household you were--?
Speaker 2: I was the only child.
Speaker 1: Only child.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this was a big adjustment then?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.  So who did you talk to and rely on at that point?
Speaker 2: My father.
Speaker 1: Your father, okay.
Speaker 2: And he was supportive of me and he knew just what was going on.  And he took care best he could, but he couldn't be there all the time.
Story_ID: 8584
Speaker 1: What were your thoughts at this point in time?  Were you wanting to, I mean 'cause I know that at age eighteen you leave for, for New York but how did you, how did that even come about?  You know between fourteen and eighteen I guess is what I'm--I'm trying to understand what really--how were you developing as a person?
Speaker 2: Fourteen, I had dreams as I told you before of being a business person, a businessman and I know that I had to study for that.  And when I finished [Petersburg High] school in Petersburg [Virginia] and there was no employ, there was no employment there to speak of that I, that pleased me so I left and went to, went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] first and I met a girl that I finally married.  My--I had three wives.  The first wife was this girl I met in Philadelphia and she was wonderful, a wonderful person but she didn't have any, any dreams, any hopes to go ahead.  And as a result of that finally we separated.  She's still alive.  She's a year older than I, but I take care of her.  I did.  And she--I was only--well she never got married again.  And let's see now what, what happened then?  It was--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Sir, what I want to know, how did you end up choosing Philadelphia to go to?  How did you end up going there?  Did you have a relative there or you just--?
Speaker 2: No.  I, I went to work in the hotel, when school closed I went to work in the hotel in Atlantic City [New Jersey] and I met some people there for the same reason I was there working in the hotel in the summertime.  And one of the fellows invited me to come and live with him, with his family and I did.  When I left Atlantic City I went to Philadelphia.  I got a job in Horn and Hardart.  You ever hear of Horn and Hardart?  It's a chain, it was a chain of restaurants headed, headquartered in Philadelphia.  And I talked my way into becoming a short order cook and that was my work there.  And see I, I'm going way back in my mind now.  That was--it's history.  And I met this girl in Philadelphia and we got--she was from Virginia also.  As a matter of fact my foster sister introduced me to her so I married her.  It's a good marriage.  I have a wonderful son [Alvin C. Hudgins] as a result of that marriage.  And he was, he's an entrepreneur also.  So--(unclear)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) What was her name, Sir?
Speaker 2: My son?
Speaker 1: Your first wife?
Speaker 2: My first wife's name is Martina, Martina Fitzgerald.
Speaker 1: And how long were you married to her?
Speaker 2: Oh about twenty five years.
Speaker 1: Now how long did you live in Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: I only lived in Philadelphia about a year and a half then I wasn't, the progress wasn't to suit me.  So I had a friend who was in high school we played on the ball team.  We developed a friendship and I called him.  He was in, in New York and I called him and told him what things were happening and we exchanged ideas.  And he said, "Well why stay in that little one-horse town?  Come on here in New York."  "I have--," he was married then--"I have an apartment and I have an extra room for you and Martina.  And you can get a job too."  At that time I became involved in dry cleaning and I was a finisher and I, I learned the skill real well.  As a matter of fact women at that time wore a lot of velvet, velvet dresses and velvet coats and all that kind of thing and I developed a method of steaming velvet.  You know you can't, can't press velvet like you would a cloth like this or this because it has, it has long nap and it would just make it a bunch of shiny mess.  So I developed a method of steaming velvet and I became known in Philadelphia--I mean in New York when I got there and got involved.  And I got a lot of off--as a matter of fact at that time men were working for like fifty dollars, fifty dollars a week was a pretty good salary.  Well I made twice that amount, a hundred dollars a week because I had that skill of steaming velvets.
Story_ID: 8585
Speaker 1: I developed that skill steam, steaming velvets and I was offered positions as a velvet steamer in three, four different plants--dry cleaning plants.  There are wholesale dry cleaners then there are the retailers and these were by wholesale companies.  And they offered me, that's how I happened to get more money was because I, I told my employer I said, "I've been offered a job by X cleaner and which pays me much more than you're paying me so can you do anything about it?"  So they did it a couple of times and finally they, they decided that I was greedy.  I just wanted to get paid what somebody else would pay me for doing the same work and I left there and went to, that's when I went to New York.  No, I was in New York.  I left there and I wanted to go into the beauty business.  I took a course in beauty culture and I got that idea from observation.  There was a fellow who was a good looking chap in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], in New York rather and he was quite successful in the beauty business 'cause he was a handsome guy and so forth.  And I looked at him and I looked in the mirror.  I said, "If he's handsome enough to do it and make a success of it, I'm sure I could do it," so I did it but I didn't have any money.  So I went to a bank and tried to get a loan and they told me, "No, you don't have any security you can't get a loan."  So I went to a supply house and convinced him, supplied beauty products and all that sort of thing and equipped me to set up a beauty establishment and convinced him that I was good.  I don't know how I did it but I did it.  And he set my shop up, took notes for the money I owed him and it was a beauty, it was the most beautiful beauty parlor and I lived in Harlem [New York, New York], I worked in Harlem, most beautiful beauty parlor in the city and there were a lot of them in New York.  In Harlem there was a lot of black people and I made out very well.  I made money and I paid him off.  But in doing that I established credit and I made profit too.  For years I had it.  And from there I went into the hair manufacturing business and I got that idea from dealing with people in the, in the beauty business.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I want to take you back--,
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --a little bit to when you're first arriving in New York.  And I mean or even let's take you back even to when you get, went to Philadelphia.  But you had, your whole exposure really had been--well you had that exposure working in Atlantic City [New Jersey].  But I'm just wondering when you first came North what you saw as really different from what you, you know from Virginia and where you were raised?  Was there things that were different and you know were different in terms of your adjustment or did you just fit right in?
Speaker 1: No, I had no part, no problem making any adjustments that I had to make because fortunately every move I made was another step progressive step that I was accomplishing as I made those moves.  I, I'd been in a lot of different businesses.  As you interview me it will come up.
Speaker 2: But Mr. Hudgins what I have a question about, you got married [to Martina Fitzgerald] what in nineteen, was it like nineteen--?
Speaker 1: '27 [1927].
Speaker 2: '27 [1927] okay.  And then you, you arrive in New York really just a little bit before the depression, right?  You arrive in Harlem just in--?
Speaker 1: In '33 [1933] I think the Depression was--.
Speaker 2: Oh you, I thought you were just in Philadelphia about a year and a half?
Speaker 1: Yeah well I was.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was there a short period of time.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So in 1933 you're in Harlem, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And Harlem is a bustling place, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And you know when you're doing this dry cleaning what I'm wondering is in what year was it when you set up the beauty salon and what was it called?
Speaker 1: Model, Model Beauty Salon.  I don't know where I got that name from.  What year?  It was about thirty, I think around '33 [1933], 1933 something like that.
Speaker 2: And Modell was M-O-D-E-L-L?
Speaker 1: Single L, M-O-D-E-L.
Speaker 2: Oh M--I keep wanting to add letters, M-O-D-E-L.  You don't know where you got the name?
Speaker 1: No, I don't know where.  Probably, my wife's name was Martina and maybe I got it from that because she did work in the shop that was--yeah she did work in the shop.
Speaker 2: Now where was the shop located, what street?
Speaker 1: 132nd Street on 7th Avenue.  You know New York?
Speaker 2: A little.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, it was in, in the very heart of Harlem and it was, my shop was patronized by progressive people because it was something unusual.  It was really a dream.  Each booth, I had seven booths and each booth was a complete beauty shop.  Get everything done on there, shampoo, press, curl, fingernails, the works.  You don't have to move out of your booth just pull the curtain, yeah.  It was wonderful, beautiful place.  Had lot of people, white people coming to visit, see it, they heard about it and I had a few white customers back, way back then, yeah.
Speaker 2: How did you--but see I'm trying to figure out how you were able to do, you know to, to be able--who consulted with you?  Why did you want to do such a high-class place and who and where did you get that from?
Speaker 1: Within, within, within.  I saw white people were going, going to beautiful shops like that.  I had a catalog with the man who sponsored me and I read and saw and I was impressed with what I saw and said, "Well they have it, why can't my people have it?"  So I gave it to them and it was a total success.  And from that I learned about the hair business and a need for hair, braids, bangs, chignons.  You know what a chignon is?  And all of those pieces I made, plus a cap, wig, the whole wig.  I had twenty three women working for me in my factory.  The factory was where my office building is now in New York.  And well that's it.
Speaker 2: But let's, let's talk about that a little bit though.  You, here you are, you have Model the salon.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: And how long did you have the salon sir?
Speaker 1: About twelve years.
Story_ID: 8586
Speaker 1: Was there something about having the [Model Beauty] salon that was a little too small-time for you and made you decide to go into manufacturing or was it because you were buying hair pieces and working with people?  I'm just trying to find out how you got into the hair manufacturing and the wig manufacturing business?
Speaker 2: I had--I forgot to tell you this.  I had a magazine but I had a partner.
Speaker 1: Who was your partner?
Speaker 2: Earl, Earl Bather (ph.) was his name and he, his, he was in the hair business, not business but he was a hair dresser and his sister was a hair dresser and she worked for me in my shop.  So I, I brought him in as a partner and he was also a part-time writer for New York, for the Amsterdam Newspaper [sic, 'Amsterdam News'].  And he, he saw, saw this--he brought to my attention the need for hair pieces.  That people were coming in talking with his sister and my wife [Martina Fitzgerald Hudgins] about hair pieces and so forth so I just energized myself and got into it.  And I, and there was a, a, a Puerto Rican, Puerto Rican fellow in, also in the hair business and he taught me about the making of these hair pieces and so forth.  I only knew it from observation and from the business side of it.  I couldn't do the work myself but I learned about it and then I made this contact to get hair--there were two Jewish fellows downtown that did the process--the first initial, initial processing of the hair.  They were put in a big vat, big, five times bigger than this and with hot, the heat coming from the bottom fire there and put the hair in it and dyed, all the hair was dyed black different degrees.  Now yours has that tanish tint and but, the--we could make that color and make a deeper dark color, make it even brighter than that.  And so they did the work.  They did the dying of the hair and, and process, processing it and into different lengths.  And the hair comes from--like in China in those days women would comb their hair and men too because men wore long hair too and that, that would break off in the comb they'd put it aside, put it aside and that's what I would buy.  I would buy that hair and bring it here.  And these two Jewish fellows processed it.  It was spikes in a board and they were very sharp and like a comb you know.  And, but it was stay up like this and it would take that hair and we--and work it and work it into different lengths for bangs this length, for chignons and so forth at different lengths and so forth and that's the way I got into the hair business.
Speaker 1: But see this seems sort of amazing.  There are lots of people who have salons but they don't go and try to you know get into the, the manufacture--.
Speaker 2: I was enterprising.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I've always been enterprising.
Speaker 1: So you saw an oppor-, by this time you've already gotten credit, the person you know who--because the bank didn't loan you money but you know the person who allowed you to get started with your salon and you know--.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --you paid back the note successfully and everything worked?
Speaker 2: Oh I paid him back, paid him off.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: I could get anything I wanted them.  I could have set up a chain of those shops but that wasn't my dream.  My dream was this hair business [Best Yet Hair Products Company] and--.
Speaker 1: And why did you see a business in that, that's what I'm wondering?  What intrigued you about that?
Speaker 2: There was a market for it.  There was a market for that hair, and black women were then getting jobs in, in plants you know then the war's heating up and they, they were getting, making money.  And I advertised in every black media in the country, every one--every newspaper, that is, I advertised.  And I--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) 'Pittsburgh Courier', '[Chicago] Defender'.
Speaker 2: 'Courier', Baltimore whatever.
Speaker 1: Oh 'Afro-American'.
Speaker 2: All that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Every one.  And as a result, 'cause they were weekly, most of them were weekly papers, Monday and Tuesday orders, orders flowing in by mail.  See, in the ad they would have a little place, and the orders really excited me.  I had a partner [Robert A. Bell] and it, it was just--"Mail Order Millions", that's the title that a magazine ran.  "Mail Order Millions", that was on the front page of the magazine and that's what it was.  I had, you know these big garbage tins, garbage cans this high and this big around, I had, I had as much as fifteen of them filled with orders.  And then the filling of the orders then the money order comes back.  That's the people--or their--all money orders.  I had no walk-in customers.  I didn't want them, didn't need them.  It was all in the advertising and these ads just paid off.  And I had fif-, about fifteen of those big barrels of money orders that needed processing and I just couldn't keep up with it.  Whew! Money was flowing. (laughs)
Speaker 1: How much money do you think you were making back then, Sir?  Was it--?
Speaker 2: Well the magazines called it "Mail Order Millions".  They didn't see it all. (laughs)
Speaker 1: So now--.
Speaker 2: Rose Morgan knows about it, Rose knows about it.
Speaker 1: No, no she said, "You got to interview Will Hudgins," that's what she said.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, but--so during this time what I'm trying to figure out--you actually--she, wasn't she set up shop at that point in time?  Had she set up shop?
Speaker 2: No, not at that time.
Speaker 1: No, not yet.  Not yet, okay that's right, '50s [1950s], all right.
Speaker 2: Well you see I, I became involved in all these different businesses because I wasn't satisfied.  I was, I was doing well but I wasn't satisfied.  I wanted to do better than well.  That's my personality and so I, I did.  I did.  And when I, when my contract with the people in China ran out--five-years contract, I gave the hair business up.  I didn't want to deal with that competition because it was nothing, it would be nothing like what I was accustomed to so I wanted to make, I wanted to do well.
Story_ID: 8587
Speaker 1: How did you find out about the China connection?  That's what--I mean I know you said that the hair was being made there.  I just you know, here's, here's a man here in Harlem [New York, New York] and then there's China over there.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And I'm just trying to--.
Speaker 2: The Jewish men I told you about processing, dying hair, they told me about it.  Told me, told me that the hair came from China that other people were getting and there was a Jewish company in Harlem that would buy, buy small quantities of hair.  But when I offered them a five-year contract he cut in my--and all of it came to me and I didn't have any competition, well that spoiled me.  When my contract went I just didn't want to deal with it anymore so I did other things.
Speaker 1: So did you actually go to China to--?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to China and took my lawyer with me.  I--.
Speaker 1: And who was your lawyer sir?
Speaker 2: Joe Dyer.  Joseph Dyer.
Speaker 1: Spell that.
Speaker 2: And--.
Speaker 1: D-Y-E-R?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a friend and my attorney so that, that went.  After that I got involved in dry cleaning business.
Speaker 1: But I'm sorry, I'm still back in China with you going to China.  So you went there, you didn't speak the language, you didn't--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how did you do business?  I mean I'm just--.
Speaker 2: There was an Interpreter.
Speaker 1: Interpreter, okay.
Speaker 2: Interpreter.
Speaker 1: So you just got interpreter, you went over there--?
Speaker 2: Over there.  There were, there were interpreters around and some Chinese spoke English so I didn't have trouble in communication.
Speaker 1: Did you find that there were different, I mean everything went smoothly?  You had no problems even them delivering things on time?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Not, no problem?
Speaker 2: I had no competition.  They had to buy from me otherwise they didn't, didn't get it.  In America it was an exclusive.  Doesn't sound natural does it?  It's the truth.
Speaker 1: Not for a black man, not at that time.
Speaker 2: It's the truth.  It's the truth.  And well they, they interviewed me.  They came and took pictures of, of--I think you have some right there.
Story_ID: 8588
Speaker 1: What is this period like because you, you've really reached the place that you wanted to be.  Remember you were saying that you saw this Mr.--the one who owned the grocery store and the hotel in your--?
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Mr. Thornton.  Remember you were saying that Mr. Thornton was your inspiration, that you were--?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, that's when I was a child.  I was a child.
Speaker 1: That's right as a child.  But here you have reached and exceeded Mr. Thornton at this time.
Speaker 2: Oh sure.
Speaker 1: And you are, you also are a hit in Harlem [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So how do you feel during this period?  This is--are you wanting always to do other things?  Are you, you know--?
Speaker 2: When the thing succeeded then I wanted to reach for something else.  I was, I don't know what you would call that but I was never satisfied.  As long as there was an opportunity to do more I wanted to seize that opportunity.  That's my personality.
Speaker 1: And was your partner Robert Bell was he, did he have the same personality as you?
Speaker 2: No.  No 'cause when I went into--he and I were partners [at Best Yet Hair Products Company] when I went into the banking business and he said, "Doc," he called me Doc, he said "Doc you, you're not going in the banking business.  Why?  You're doing all right here."  And--well I wasn't thinking about me so much then.  I wanted to help organize a bank because the bank in Harlem needed a bank because people who were less enterprising than myself didn't qualify to go into a white bank and get loans, absolutely no.  And I wanted people to be able to get help if they deserved help and that's why I got into the banking business and that was later down the line.
Speaker 1: But let's take you back.  So you, your five year ends, you know, and you say "Well I can't, I don't want to be, since I can't be the only game in town I, I'm finished with the hair, the wig, the hair manufacture and the wig business."
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The people were still wearing wigs at the same--?
Speaker 2: It wasn't as popular.
Speaker 1: Okay, now why was that?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Styles change you know and--but it wasn't, it wasn't sufficiently popular for me to get in that competitive race and I didn't, I just didn't want to do it.  I opened up a chain of dry cleaning stores, chain of three dry cleaning stores and they did all right.
Speaker 1: Now, and, and dry cleaning stores were there Chinese the ones who mainly had the dry cleaning stores in New York or was there any ethnic group that owned them at that time in New York?
Speaker 2: Not particularly no, just people.
Speaker 1: Just people?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And--.
Speaker 1: Now did you find that business differed from the other businesses?
Speaker 2: What?  What?
Speaker 1: The dry cleaning business?
Speaker 2: Well I knew it because I had done it before when I was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and so--in New York steaming the velvet you know.  I learned the business.  I learned, physically learned the business and, and got into it.  And I sold the stores after five, six, seven years.  I sold them to my brother-in-law and he bellied up, my wife [Martina Fitzgerald Hudgins], my first wife's brother.  He knew, knew how to do it but he just was, he didn't have the same dream I had so, I can't explain it.
Story_ID: 8589
Speaker 1: Now when did you buy your first piece of real estate?
Speaker 2: When?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: My first piece of real estate was 412 West 154th Street [New York, New York] and my son [Alvin C. Hudgins] at that time was a teenager.  He was about thirteen or fourteen years old.  I remember that.  He, he would be out playing ball.  He and I were like this, that boy you see there, we were like this.  And he, and want me to tell you something?  He did exceedingly well in business.  He's a millionaire, my son.  And he would be playing ball in the block, stick ball they called it in, in the block, broom handles and he'd look and see me coming up the street.  Man, he'd drop everything, run down there and jump up on me until he got so big that he couldn't jump up on me anymore.  I wouldn't let him 'cause he'd knock me down.  But our friendship was something until today.  He's seventy-two years old, yeah.  But anyway that's my answer back to the dry cleaning and about the hair business.  I didn't tell you about the liquor business.
Speaker 1: No you didn't tell me about the liquor business.  And you didn't--you know, I want to go back to real estate just a little bit.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now the buildings you, you know the first building you said that you owned, was that a, a multi--was it residential--?
Speaker 2: It was a brownstone.  Most of my property were brownstones.  They were quite popular in New York.  And it had, my family occupied from--it was five stories--the basement floor--not the cellar, the basement floor and the first floor, my wife [Martina Fitzgerald Hudgins] and son and I occupied that.  And the rest of it were rented out into rooms, and some of the people took the whole floor and they rented out.  There were three rentable floors in it and most of them I did buildings.  I only had one big apartment building.  I didn't keep that very long, I don't know why but I didn't keep it very long.  And well--.
Speaker 1: And you said at one time you owned--at what point were you owning twenty buildings?  You said you know at one point I owned up to twenty buildings.
Speaker 2: That was the tail end of the hair business.  The money that I made in the hair business I invested in real estate, yeah.  And sounds like a fairy tale.  I, yeah I mean now as I relate it, it just--think about it, it's--and then I, as I said I bought this, opened this liquor store in one of my own buildings.  It was a business, commercial building at the corner of Amsterdam [Avenue] and 145th Street.  And that's a nice business neighborhood.  So I bought, bought that building and I had tenants and business people, lawyers and at, at, at one time I had a doctor and a dentist.
Story_ID: 8590
Speaker 1: It was a former rooming house.  I bought the shell for forty-five thousand dollars, gutted it and spent a hundred and twenty-five thousand dollars building a new building is what it was.  The only thing left was the walls, outside walls.  Had new floors, new beams, new roof, new boiler, new everything for a hundred and twenty-five thousand dollars.  That's it.  That's--hundred and twenty-five plus forty-five is what I paid for it.  I've been offered three and a half million for it.  Now I could get that for it, three and a half million but I'm not going to sell it.  I'm gonna give it to my daughter [Jan Hudgins Riley].  She's a lawyer.  My daughter's a lawyer so I'm going to give it to her.  And her office is in the building.  So I guess I'm finished with enterprising now.  But it's, it's a job watching the people who are working for you.
Story_ID: 8591
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your involvement in the liquor business and how that came about.  And you know I'm curious because some of the things that you've done like the wig business, no that was retail, that was mail order.  But which of your business enterprises have you enjoyed the most?
Speaker 2: Naturally the one that paid more money.  The hair business paid more money than anything else.  But factual, I enjoyed the liquor business.  I made good money too.
Speaker 1: Can you talk, now what year was that?  I hate to ask it, but I don't have years in the stuff you said.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But what year was that when you got involved in the liquor business and why did you get involved at that time?  What was--?
Speaker 2: Money, that was the inspiration because at that time, liquor business was much more profitable than it is today.  And people would drink, people drink more wine today and that's you know that, that's all right it's business coming in but it's not heavy like the liquor business.
Speaker 1: So now when did you get involved in the liquor business?  Do you know what year?  Was it in the early '60s [1960s] or was it in the--(unclear)?
Speaker 2: I set up the first store--.
Speaker 1: You weren't in the banking business yet, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, no, no.  So this was, was it in the early '60s [1960s] or late '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: In the liquor business, liquor business, be patient with me.  I'll get it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Liquor business was after the dry cleaners.  All together I was in the liquor business about thirty years.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I opened the store in--how I got into it, a fellow in Queens, in Long Island [New York] whom I knew--.
Speaker 1: What's his name, do you know?  That's okay, doesn't matter. Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, it will come to me.
Speaker 1: It doesn't matter.
Speaker 2: Anyway he, he had a small store in Queens and I--he wanted to borrow some money.  He was in trouble.  He was making enough money to live and everything but he had a bad habit, gambling and women.  So as a result he needed to borrow some money so I gave him a loan and he couldn't pay the loan off so I took his store.  Promised me--to pay me, he didn't pay me, kept his habits going so I took his store.  And I moved the store to Manhattan [New York, New York] near me, that's where I, my operation was.  And I ran that store making a small profit for a few years I guess about seven or eight years.  Then I moved it to my building on Amsterdam Avenue and 145th Street, corner, big corner store and I made a lot of money there.  I joined an organization called Buy-Rite and this organization would do a lot of, would do a lot of buying for you, would buy large quantities and you saved money by buying large quantities.  They'd buy large quantities and sell it to you at a cheaper price than you could buy it from the wholesaler.  So I joined that organization and I was, my store after about three years became the largest--the second largest liquor store in the whole Harlem at that location, good location and good merchandising.  I used to buy these little--you ever seen these little bottles, just one drink size?  I used to buy cases of it and good customers I'd tell my clerk, "Put one in the bag, show it, show it to the customer and put it in the bag."  They liked that.  Build business it can, it can.  So the store was doing good.  I sold that store about eight years ago and it was a good store and the jackass lost it.  You see, you don't take care of your business, your business is not going to take care of you and that's, that's what happens to so many people, they don't take care of business.
Speaker 1: Now when you say take care of business tell me what were some of the keys to your success?  What were some of your--you know, 'cause every businessman has a philosophy and an approach to what they do, you know.  And so I'm just wondering what was some of your philosophy and I want to get you know about how you approached business?
Speaker 2: Give the customer a better deal than your comp-, competitor does, it's simple.  Give your customer and let them know that you appreciate their business and give them--that's why I have them drop that little bottle in there.  They appreciate that--things like that.
Speaker 1: Now do you find when you got into the liquor business, were, was there any group that was really owning that business at the time or was the market wide open, 'cause that was not a business that a lot of black people were involved with right?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  No.  Now what was your question?
Speaker 1: I said when you got involved in the liquor business--?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --was it, was there any particular group that owned that business, sort of you know (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then, you know, and I also said there weren't a lot of black people involved so I'm just wondering, you know, 'cause some, some businesses you got to be careful 'cause sometimes people own them and then they cause you problems you know or--.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --will impact your market share.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no.  The Jewish people, Jewish people.  And I think ethnic group I, of the ethnic groups I think more Jewish people in that business in New York.  And competition--you can beat the competition I don't care who is doing the business.  My motto was "Treat my customers right."  That was my motto.  You can't go wrong.  Sure you take a little less profit on, on a sale by giving them something free.  You're not supposed to do that.  They know you're not supposed to do it, but I did it and it turned, worked out all right.
Speaker 1: But the buying organization, you said the liquor buying organization what was it (unclear) Rite?
Speaker 2: Buy-Rite.
Speaker 1: Buy-Rite.  Was that owned by Jews?
Speaker 2: Yes, that organization was owned by a Jewish man.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so did you--he treated you the same way that he treated his other stores?
Speaker 2: Better than some of them, treated me better than some of them because I had a good volume so that was the key to my success.
Speaker 1: Now who was the largest?  You said you were the second largest.  Who was the largest?
Speaker 2: A Jewish family had a store at the next corner.  They, they were on the corner, near the corner of Broadway and I was one block away from them.  And I took a lot of his customers too, 'cause he, he told the salesman "The 'schwartze' up the street there is taking my business."  I knew he was hurting but he's still there.  He's still in the business.  But I sold mine.  I, I got tired of retailing.  That was retail, the hair was retail, beauty parlor was retail, dry cleaners was retail.  I got tired of retail.
Story_ID: 8592
Speaker 1: One question I have for you because in the retail business you have to be concerned, I mean there are a lot of employees so you know you have issues like customer service.  But those are all cash, you know you had a lot of cash businesses and I'm just wondering how you protected your interest you know with cash businesses and whether you know, did you--I'm just, that's what I'm just wondering because you know all of those were businesses where people are paying cash and I'm just, you know I'm wondering how you protected yourself because a lot of times people get stole, you know stolen from blind.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.  Um-hmm.  I was aware of that and I'm sure that they're, in some instances I was taken but not too much, not too much 'cause I watched the books.  My accountant would come in and I'd look at what I sold and what I bought and I, I stayed on top of it you know.
Speaker 1: Now who are your key advisors?  You had a good lawyer.  You had a good accountant.  Who were they and how did you come to know them and did you, you know did--I just want to have some idea of you know some things that happened that were positive and some things that were not positive.  I'd just like you to you know tell some stories.
Speaker 2: John Pierce had a school.  He was a realtor and he had a school and I was his next door neighbor when I lived Up, Uptown [New York, New York].  And we struck up a friendship.  He was a much older man than I.  He could have been my father.  And he was wise and he was my mentor.  He was good.  He was successful, but I became more successful than he.  But it was because, it had a lot to do with the training I got from him.  It's in my thing there.  Pierce, John Pierce Institute I think it was called.  You, if you haven't read it, you'll read it and you'll see.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And he, he counseled me a lot and it's important.  But academy--and I don't come with big degrees and whatnot.  I don't have that.  I just hard rock hustle and got my businesses going.
Speaker 1: But what are the things he taught you that were important?
Speaker 2: Well values in real estate, he taught me that and merchandising.  His school, he had a school and we were friends and whenever I felt that I needed some him I would call on him or call on Joe Dyer my lawyer.  I, I didn't have it all, I didn't do it all by myself I had some help from friends and they were compensated for what they did for me.
Speaker 1: Did Pierce or Dyer ever think you were moving too fast?
Speaker 2: Dyer did, not Pierce but Dyer did, the lawyer.  He--"Bill how you going to handle all this?"  You know, that kind of stuff. But it didn't stop me.  I kept on going.  And he in later, later years he realized that I was, I was right in my attitude and my reaching out for things.
Story_ID: 8593
Speaker 1: Let's talk about Carver [Federal Savings] Bank and how that came about--,
Speaker 2: Well--.
Speaker 1: --'cause you said that you know I was--that was around the time--but see you were still in the hair business.
Speaker 2: 1948.
Speaker 1: I'm getting--.
Speaker 2: 1948.
Speaker 1: '48 [1948] right--,
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --was when you and several business people got together and organized it.  And you said--.
Speaker 2: Carver Bank.
Speaker 1: Right, at Carver Bank, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you said that you--so I just want--you said you were really motivated because you wanted to teach--.
Speaker 2: People get a better deal.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Black folks get a better deal.  And they weren't getting a fair deal and I, I could become a part of making it possible for them to get a better--not all of them were worthy.  A lot of them were not worthy of the treatment they were getting but a whole lot of them were and were successful.
Speaker 1: But can we talk about what was actually happening you know because banking, that's not an area that blacks had, you know--there were some black banks.
Speaker 2: Not in New York.
Speaker 1: Not in New York.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But there were some around the country and what I'm wondering is--so that's an industry that blacks were not really in?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so but I want you to describe what was actually happening in New York.  You know I mean what people had to do to get money, where there were opportunities.  I'm just trying to--for you to paint the picture that existed.
Speaker 2: Well I had to do a lot of educating people.  For instance their credit, they had to protect that.  You can't borrow money if you have a poor credit history and we, we taught that.  Matter of fact we had classes on Thursday night.  That was our policy--it wasn't just banking, we had classes on Thursday night.  People were invited to come and maybe have a piece of cake, cup of coffee and something like--just a little refreshment and as a result people began to buy houses.  White, white banks wouldn't loan them money to buy houses.  We knew that the real estate business is good.  Not always, but you got--that's what you got to fend them yourself.  I remember in Carver Bank, there was a liquor store that a man had and his father was a high ranking officer in the police department and--I just threw that in.  But this man had a good liquor store about two blocks away from the bank and--but he was--business was going down, he was losing his business.  So we had him to come to the classes and we found out that his, that his problem was women, buying fur coats and all that stuff for women other than his wife.  His wife was a school teacher and the money she made had to go into their living and whatnot.  So I asked him to come in and bring his wife.  I learned, I learned this about his wife working, helping to support the needs of the family.  And she, we had a meeting with her and I asked her how did she feel about him getting a loan?  She said, "Mr. Hudgins, I don't think he can pay a loan off and keep on doing the things he's doing."  That's what she said.  I said, "Well, I will give him the loan.  I will have the board to approve a loan."  I couldn't give him the loan.  I had him--credit board.  "I'll have the board to give him a loan if you will sign on the paper."  She said, "Oh no, no!"  Two weeks later she called me up said, "Mr. Hudgins that offer you made, I'll take it."  I said, "Well come on in, sign the papers."  She came in, the credit manager worked with her and so forth and she stayed on top of him to be sure that he didn't buy anymore fur coats and he didn't buy anymore anything unless it was going into his home.  And that's what we had to do and we a loan and she saw to it, but he paid that loan off.  It was an ed-, not just banking but we had to do an education job too and that was, that's what we did.  That was our policy and that bank is moving, thriving.  It's thriving now.
Story_ID: 8594
Speaker 1: Whose the president of the bank now?
Speaker 2: Of Carver [Federal Savings Bank]?
Speaker 1: Yeah it's a--.
Speaker 2: A lady.
Speaker 1: Yes, it's a lady [Deborah C. Wright].  She went to Harvard [University] Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I can't remember her name.  But--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, her name is--I just talked with her two weeks ago.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, getting old and I'm forgetful.
Speaker 1: Okay, well I shouldn't be forgetting.  But anyway 'cause she was two, I think two or three years I went to the law school there and I think she was two or three years behind--.
Speaker 2: She's doing an excellent job.
Speaker 1: Right, that's what I hear.
Speaker 2: She's doing an excellent job.
Speaker 1: That's what I hear.  Now who were the seven people who organized Carver Bank along with you?
Speaker 2: The picture is on the wall in the back now.  Let's see.  There was Dr. [Charles] Petioni, Dr. [A. George] Daley, Hawthorne [E.] Lee an insurance broker, Joe Davis who was really the CEO [chief executive officer]--was a good man, and Mabel [E.] Beau'Huy, a real estate woman and myself, that was it.
Speaker 1: And this was historic that you would come together this group.  It was a mixed group of people.  Dr. [Muriel] Petioni, we've interviewed her.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Actually yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, her father.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Her father, right.
Speaker 2: Her father.
Speaker 1: Oh it was her father who did it?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. Sure, sure okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, and well the bank came along did very well, real well.  And now it's sailing.  Good Wall, good Wall Street reports on that bank.
Story_ID: 8595
Speaker 1: Can you remember the day that you opened the doors to the [Carver Federal Savings] bank and how you felt, how all of your felt?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh God, whew, just could float on the lightest air.  That was a wonderful feeling and the people came in and then the next day, the next week, the next month more and more people coming into the bank.  Small amounts of money but just keep on coming, the money will get bigger later.  And that was our attitude and we did it, did it, did it.  But we didn't get to Freedom National Bank.
Speaker 1: No, no I want to get to that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you know you, the one thing I want to ask you was Mr. [Walter A.] Miller you said was the first president and then he passed away.
Speaker 2: He passed away.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then you took over.
Speaker 2: His picture is in there.
Speaker 1: Right.  You took over as president right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so how was that whole experience being a bank president 'cause you were president for a long time?
Speaker 2: Eighteen years, yeah.  How was what?
Speaker 1: How was the experience?  What did you learn or what things did you do or you know what, what things occurred there that you were, are proud of?
Speaker 2: I was proud of the fact that ministers invited me to come into their church on Sunday and I, that was like throwing a rabbit in a rye patch.  To come to their church and talk about the Freedom, I mean the Carver Bank and I did it and I did it well.  I was quite a golfer before that but once I became involved in the bank my golf game went to pot.  So I was no competition for Tiger [Woods].  So anyway it was great.  It's a wonderful feeling like you're floating on air to see that you are part of this thing that is so meaningful and helpful to the people.  Incidentally the Bowery Bank which is a big bank downtown, the Bowery Bank started opening up, started opening up and eventually I got a call from the chairman of the board and wanted to know if we would object to them opening a, a bank in Harlem [New York, New York].  I told them, "No, we wouldn't object.  Come on, more the merrier."  And they came and opened a big bank, built a big business right on the corner of St. Nicholas Avenue and 145th Street and the bank did all right and it's still doing all right.  But had--it didn't stop us from growing, we still grew.
Speaker 1: Now were there any challenges like with accreditation and things like that that occurred during that eighteen year period you know with, with Carver Bank, any challenges that you experienced?
Speaker 2: No I can't think of anything.
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: I can't think of anything.  That were negative?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: No.  There was something brewing.  I, I don't want you to put this in the thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Something was brewing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: West Indians and, and American blacks beginning to (pauses), yeah right.
Speaker 1: Compete?
Speaker 2: In, more you know, negative, real negative.
Speaker 1: Negative huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now why wouldn't you want to put that in there?  Because that, that I mean I've always asked people of--you know Dr. [Charles] Petioni he was of West Indian descent.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, you know, I've often whenever I've been interviewing people, because a lot of times West Indians, even their messaging at home you know by--were that they were different from blacks and better.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And, and they were always very aggressive probably, those are probably people you know as aggressive as you, they were very aggressive about business and going into business.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, competing.
Speaker 1: Competing.
Speaker 2: Yeah and very, very well.  And that's, I don't see that as anything negative really as long as you're not knocking what I'm doing and I don't think we got that, not really.  Because as a matter of fact the Board of Directors--there was one more West Indian on the board than Americans and they, they voted me, not one of them, voted me President of the bank because they felt that I would be better for the bank.  And so that was not negative but there are some instances that that negativism--but that's human I guess.
Speaker 1: Now when you--why did you resign from Carver Bank?
Speaker 2: I gave up the position as President.  Joe Davis the CEO [chief executive officer] became President and I became Chairman of the Board.  Well I was Chairman of the Board for about two years and the Chairman about two years. (pauses) Then it was, I received a call (unclear) people who had the idea of getting Freedom National Bank going and they felt that they needed me.  So I joined with them and we organized Freedom National Bank, so that's my move from Carver.  Carver didn't need me anymore and here was a new group who wanted to organize a bank who needed me so I moved to it.
Story_ID: 8596
Speaker 1: A group of people came, came together so, and you chose--were there any whites involved with Freedom National [Bank, New York, New York]?  Were there any whites on that board cause that's how you got to Blum-, you know--.
Speaker 2: With [Jack] Blumstein.
Speaker 1: --stein.  He was with Carver [Federal Savings Bank].
Speaker 2: Carver.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  But were--that's how I thought maybe that when you were thinking about who served that there was maybe someone else who may have been white on the Freedom National board.
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: No.  Okay.  So talk about, so this is, so there's this opportunity to start this second bank and you guys get together and start it.  And you were starting to say how you were at the bank one day and Jackie Robinson said (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh yes, right.  Jackie Robinson came in and he wanted to talk to me about something so I invited him to my office and we talked.  And what it was about is a man on the street approached him--see Jackie was a great athlete but he wasn't no businessman, you know.  And this guy said to him that he'd made an application for a loan in Freedom Bank and I turned him down.  And I'm making loans to my friends and family and stuff like that.  So I told Jackie, I said, "Jackie I'm gonna get the facts for you."  So I called the, the credit manager downstairs and told him to bring up this man's file and the chairman wants to see it.  Okay, brought it up and he read it.  He offered to--I, I said, "No you read it," so he read it. And this guy, the reports came back that he owed everybody who was alive and hadn't paid anybody.  And he, he was complaining about me not, not approving a loan for him.  So it was, it was really funny you know, it was funny in a way.  So Jackie became a little more cautious after that 'cause he was, he was really ready to come down hard on me when he told him that I was making loans to my friends and my family, nothing--I didn't need it.  I didn't need a loan from him.  If I needed a loan I could get it from any bank I wanted to get it from.  So that was the case there.  I just happen to think of it you know (unclear).
Speaker 1: But he--but you guys, did you have a falling out eventually or--'cause there's this whole thing about ousting, the ousting, you know, it says Jackie Robinson--.
Speaker 2: Ousting?
Speaker 1: --tells of ousting Bill Hudgins?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Do you see this?
Speaker 2: No.  Jackie Robinson tells the bank--well he's, he's not alive now so I can't, I can't do a thing about that.
Speaker 1: Do you see that?  Did you see that?
Speaker 2: No, I never saw that.
Speaker 1: You sure?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: 'Cause it says that he you know in his--"The two-hundred and eighty-seven page book dedicated to his wife [Rachel Robinson] he tells--fifteen pages tells how within a few years he became, he began to feel uneasy about things at Freedom Bank."
Story_ID: 8597
Speaker 1: "The Truth About [the] Freedom National Bank" right here.
Speaker 2: And that there were too many bad loans made with the bank.
Speaker 1: Bad loans.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Bad loans.
Speaker 2: Okay, but who was responsible for that?
Speaker 1: The credit department, the credit department and the president.  But I wasn't president.
Speaker 2: Now who was the president at the time?  At that time it was [Dunbar S.] McLaurin?  No, no, no.  McLaurin was--.
Speaker 1: McLaurin.
Speaker 2: McLaurin right?
Speaker 1: No, McLaurin was never president.
Speaker 2: Oh wait a minute.
Speaker 1: That was before we opened we had trouble with McLaurin.
Speaker 2: (Pauses) Was he part of the organization?
Speaker 1: He was the, he was one of the members of organization and we kicked him off.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So he--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) He was not a part of the, of the bank.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But they said that he incurred a lot of expenses you know sort of doing fact-finding at the beginning before the bank started.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, he took trips and charged it and--right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So before the bank got the charter he was gone, McLaurin, he was gone before they got the charter.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But tell me was this, this experience that you had with, with--it was different from, Freedom National's experience was different from the experience you had at, at Carver [Federal Savings Bank, New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 8598
Speaker 1: The reason I left the bank, I resigned from Freedom [National Bank, New York, New York] is because my accountant had a meeting with me and he told me that my personal business was being mismanaged.  So I resigned from the bank in order to straighten my--as a matter of fact people who had charged--I put--each phase of my business had a manager--I had the liquor business.  I had the real estate business and I had what else at well at that time.
Speaker 2: You had the dry cleanings and weren't you still--?
Speaker 1: No, I disposed of that.
Speaker 2: But did you have, you did--the hair business, you had--no, no, no.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: The hair business wasn't around either.
Speaker 1: Was gone, yeah.  Anyway I had--It'll come to me--three businesses going and they told me that my business was being mismanaged.  As a matter of fact I owed income tax that they had not paid and I was so wrapped up in, in the bank that I assumed that they were doing, my people were doing the right thing but they weren't.  They weren't, they weren't stealing anything that I know but they might have, but they hadn't paid certain bills, income tax was one.  And I, I made an arrangement with the income tax people to pay it off in two years.  I paid it off in one year.  Some investments I sold to raise money to pay it off.  And that's, and from then on Freedom down hill--Boyd, Boyd was the President.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Boyd, and he was a friend of Jackie Robinson.  He was a football player.
Speaker 2: But you know what I find very interesting, was it because of their celebrity that they were chosen?  I mean you know with Freedom National why would, why was Jackie Robinson chosen and--?
Speaker 1: Because he--.
Speaker 2: A celebrity.
Speaker 1: He was a celebrity.
Speaker 2: Okay, and he, and his name association would bring a lot of people to the bank?
Speaker 1: That's, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And then but a lot of times people are not, you know he's not, well he was a big thing in the black community.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: Jackie Robinson was a big thing, that's right.
Speaker 1: I'll tell you what happened and, and Jackie, where Jackie--Jackie formerly worked in a capacity, capacity, leadership capacity for Chock full o' Nuts, Chock full o' Nuts.  So I called--I forget the president's name but I called him up one day and told him I said, "You have a thriving store on the corner of 7th Avenue and 125th Street and that's just a half a block away from Freedom Bank, but you didn't put no money in the back and all black folks would support your business."  He said, "Mr. Hudgins, let me tell you what--," he said "If, as long as Jackie Robinson is on the board of the bank I will not be a depositor there."  Well, we were unhappy about that.  But (laughs) some point I wanted to make there--.
Speaker 2: Well you were saying that (pauses), well you were saying he was with Chock full o' Nuts.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then the head of Chock full o' Nuts you called--.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and he says, "As long as he--," what was he, he was not impressed you're saying--I thought you were starting to say that he was, Jackie Robinson was, he was working, he was employed by Chock full o' Nuts.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then you talked to--?
Speaker 1: I think in PR [public relations].
Speaker 2: Oh, okay right, right.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).  Yeah, and he, he's no longer working for him, for Chock full o' Nuts.  And, but Jackie had been--oh, I know.  Jackie led a strike against Chock full o' Nuts in favor of the employees.  That's what that break up was about.  He, he led a strike--well you don't work for a company and, and hope to stay in their good graces and lead a strike against them too.  That's why I said, one of the reasons why I said Jackie wasn't a businessman.  You know he was good athlete but that was it.
Story_ID: 8599
Speaker 1: One of these articles also said that Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], but he, you know had deposited, there was one thing that says you know that he even deposited money.
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: That Dr. King?
Speaker 2: Dr. King?
Speaker 1: Depositor at Freedom National [Bank, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And who said, and what?
Speaker 1: It just said, that just, you know that's just a headline.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah he deposited.
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.  It wasn't a lot of money though.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It was his Nobel Prize I think.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: It was symbolic.
Speaker 2: That's right and he had something in the window there for a while, yeah.  Public relations it was good.
Story_ID: 8600
Speaker 1: There's been this whole discussion recently about Freedom--the Freeman's Bank.
Speaker 2: Freeman, Freeman.
Speaker 1: Freeman's Bank [sic, Freedman's Bank] and you know--.
Speaker 2: Who is that, where is that?
Speaker 1: --that was formed after, it was a bank formed actually in New York at the beginning.  It was formed by these New Yorkers, abolitionists.  And it was the bank, it was formed by--for former slave deposits.  And according, I mean I need to do more research on this but the Mormons say that there were a hundred million dollars in deposited--deposits deposited over like a nine-year period and then the bank then supposedly taken over by the Cook brothers and they were crooks but they were out of Washington, D.C.--white--and they sort of traded on things.  And then they found Frederick Douglass to be head of the bank when the bank was going under.  And so the money, everyone's money was lost.  This is back you know right, right after, right during Reconstruction is, is the--.
Speaker 2: What time?
Speaker 1: It was in the eighteen, like 1870 to 1880 you know.
Speaker 2: I don't know anything about it.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  But see that's--okay.  But that, it's something that happened that I don't think a lot of people know about and I'd like to do more research on that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But the Mormons recently came out with a genealogical thing based on the Freeman Bank records so blacks could do more research about their family members.  But this is a story they also told.  But a lot of people don't know about it and I've been just trying to ask anyone, you know, who was in the banking industry to see if they know more.  But anyway, I have been talking to someone at the Schomburg [Center for Research in Black Culture] Library--,
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --and they're the ones who told me year by year of the deposits that were supposedly made in this bank.
Speaker 2: That bank back in the 1800s?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Never heard anything about them.
Story_ID: 8601
Speaker 1: You got started in let's see, 1948 with Carver [Federal Savings Bank, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And at that time what other banks existed you know black banks existed in the country, not in New York but in the country?
Speaker 2: Oh in the country?  Well I had, I have that, I had it, I don't know where it is now.  But there were a few.  There were a few.
Speaker 1: Maybe about five or six?
Speaker 2: Something like that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  And--.
Speaker 2: There was one, excuse me, there was one in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  There was one in Detroit [Michigan].  There was one in Chicago [Illinois].  I, I can't remember.
Speaker 1: Maybe one in the South, okay.
Speaker 2: Insurance company in North Carolina.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Insurance companies right, insurance companies, well.  Now, when you think about you know the feeling you had that day starting up and all of that and you look at where black banking industry is now, what are your thoughts about it because you know Carver like you say is doing well.  And in, you know Chicago we have mainly Seaway [National Bank] now.  I'm not sure if we have, you know we have Jacoby [Dickens] at Seaway.
Speaker 2: I think we have a couple there.
Speaker 1: We have a couple but, yeah we have Independence [Bank of Chicago, later ShoreBank Corporation].  We have Independence Bank and we have Seaway.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I think Bos-, well anyway every place has a few.  But my question is when you look back at the growth are you happy with what you see now days in terms of the black banking industry or did you think that there would be more progress?
Speaker 2: I think there should be more progress 'cause Freedom [National Bank, New York, New York] never should have been closed.  They made undeserving loans and some purposely too, I know that, that they were not loans that were so to speak 'kosher'.  But all that crap happened after I left.  I have no responsibility for it.
Story_ID: 8602
Speaker 1: As a black businessman or a black entrepreneur because at the time you came along entrepreneur was not a word that was necessarily used with you know someone being in business.  But that's a, a term that's being used quite a bit.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, you know, you have in terms of black community you came along in business you know 'cause you came along at a time at business, in business where there was a big push for us to get you know whether it was the right to vote or to the right to you know--.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --to live certain places you know and all those other rights.  So a lot of times people weren't necessarily looking at the business market.  And you have now people like Rev. [Jesse] Jackson you know saying, you know establishing Wall Street [financial district in New York, New York], you know the [Rainbow/Push] Wall Street Project and things like that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But when you look at the, you know at blacks and businesses, period, now and you say you know my son [Alvin C. Hudgins] also was an entrepreneur and you know is an entrepreneur and you know made millions, are you happy with the progress that you see happening or do you think that we're doing as much as we can?
Speaker 2: I'm not, I'm not satisfied.  I'm happy that they're doing what they're doing but I'm not satisfied because I think they can do much better.  That's my answer to that.  No I'm not, I'm not happy.  I'm not--I'm happy rather but I'm not satisfied cause more could and should be done.  But I see with the rising of the sun, I see it.  It's, it's getting better all the time.  You read Earl Grave's magazine ['Black Enterprise'], comes out once a month I know you have that, and you've interviewed Earl, yeah, and Earl is doing an excellent job.  Years before he started we didn't have that and there are many other businesses that look in, look in that magazine and you'll see a lot of businesses that are doing well, growing and some are not doing so well, but that's history.  I mean that's life.  That's life.  That happens in all phases of businesses, enterprise, lot of big companies in Wall Street are bellying up, yeah.  So who are we that we don't belly up?  The more you try, the more belly ups you're going to have, but just keep on trying.
Speaker 1: Sir, what do you think makes a good businessman?
Speaker 2: Hmm?
Speaker 1: What makes a person a good businessman?
Speaker 2: Industry for one thing.  When we're willing to leave the chair, get up and do, that's one thing.  That's, that's really major because you can do better.  Our people can do a heck of a lot better than they're doing.  I'm not satisfied with what they're doing.  I'm happy however with what's happening.  I get a lot of inspiration when I read 'Black Enterprise'.  It's a good, good paper, good magazine.  And really it's doing an excellent job.  He's doing a lot for Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] too.  I, a young lady I know in Florida, her home is Florida but she's in New York now.  And I asked one of the officers of Macy's [department] store, that's one of the biggest store in the country, Macy--one of the biggest, not the biggest but one of the biggest.  And she said--she's white.  She said, "Well let me meet this young lady.  Send her to me.  Let me meet her."  And that's, oh God as well as I know this woman.  She's in one of these pictures, she's white.  It will come to my mind now.  But I asked her to take a look at this young lady and she did and they hired her, gave her a good, good position, good position.  Just, just in passing I, I mention that.
Speaker 1: But sir in speaking of that who are some of the people that you helped along the way?  You've helped an awful lot of people in organizations but can you talk about that a little bit? (pauses)  'Cause just as you've had people help you.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  A lot of people, lot of people who I've helped and some who have helped me, I just can't recall them.
Story_ID: 8603
Speaker 1: If you were going into business today what business do you think you would get involved with?
Speaker 2: Real estate, it's good.  Real estate is good if you go about it right.  My daughter [Jan Hudgins Riley] is successful in law but she, she's tired of it.  She's tired.  After you give the service you got to collect your fees and that's part of it that bothers her.  So she's--I would like for her to stay in law but if she's not then I'd like to see her get involved in real estate.  So I wrote away for a course in real estate, tapes and so forth just to get her started thinking and I expect to get it in about ten days.  But she's in Belize now.  She's, she went down there.  Her husband wants to set up a cattle-raising business down there and I think that's the most foolish thing that could happen.  He, he is a white guy.  She married a white guy and he's from a farming family up in Indiana and that, that's not, that's not the thing to do.  But she's doing it.  That's besides what we're doing here now.  And but I think I've convinced her that New York is where it is.  I think I've convinced her so we'll see.
Story_ID: 8604
Speaker 1: You were also very active civically in New York you know with different organizations and things like that.  Will you talk a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm one of the organizers of One Hundred Black Men [of New York, Inc.] and I'm, I'm pleased with what's happening.  They're coming along very well.  I don't have time to get involved in the day-to-day work but I'm one of the organizers and I--.
Speaker 1: Now I'm wanted to ask you about that.  Didn't--what I heard about the story with a Hundred Black Men [of America, Inc.] was that it started in New York, originally.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Right.  Wasn't it, I thought it was (unclear) guy, was it [J.] Bruce Llewellyn?  I had heard--no?  Because--.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I think Bruce was on the board.  He was--.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --one of the organizers.
Speaker 1: He was one of the organizers.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 8605
Speaker 1: Your second wife's name was Myrtle?
Speaker 2: Myrtle.
Speaker 1: And you were married how long to her?
Speaker 2: On twenty-some years.
Speaker 1: See you've lived a long life so (laughs) in most cases that's a long time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Twenty five the first year, twenty, twenty the second.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And how long have you been married to you said--?
Speaker 2: Twenty-something.
Speaker 1: My goodness.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: That's truly--.
Speaker 2: Been a busy fellow.
Speaker 1: Right, now but you've been, I mean twenty-five years is a long time in today's world.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah today.
Speaker 1: To be married to anyone.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is.  I tell her she cooks good.
Speaker 1: So now you have how many children total 'cause that's--?
Speaker 2: Only two.
Speaker 1: Two, so just the, your son and your daughter.  Your daughter is (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: She's a lawyer.
Speaker 1: Lawyer, but her name is?
Speaker 2: Myrtle.
Speaker 1: Myrtle.
Speaker 2: Myrtle is my second wife.
Speaker 1: No, no but your daughter's name.
Speaker 2: My daughter's name is Jan.  Jan Hudgins Riley.  My son's name is Alvin C. Hudgins and he's a good boy, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now let's talk about, because you know when you talked earlier what was so touching was the tremendous love you had for your son.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know 'cause remember you were saying how he would come and he would be running down the street--.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and grab on to you and then you know--and I want you to talk a little bit about you know how you counseled him.  You know because it seemed even up closer your, your father [William Hudgins] that you grew up with seemed to you know he counseled you, but still he had this, this woman [Hattie Hudgins] he had married--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, your stepmother and so he had to balance so he was torn.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Story_ID: 8606
Speaker 1: You had tremendous impact on your son [Alvin C. Hudgins] and I'm wondering did your son work in all your businesses or you know growing up and--?
Speaker 2: He worked in the liquor business and wound up with one of the biggest stores in Harlem [New York, New York].  He sold that.  As a matter of fact, he bought the building on 125th Street and that's valuable property on 125th Street where his liquor store was.  And there were other businesses in the building too.  He sold his liquor store, no closed his liquor store and leased the liquor store to Footjoy, not Footjoy.  One of the, one of the country--companies that does a big job in sneakers.  You ought to know it (unclear).
Speaker 1: Nike?  No.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: In sneakers, it would be--,
Speaker 2: Reebok, Addidas.
Speaker 1: --Reebok, Addidas?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Reebok, Addidas, Nike--?
Speaker 2: Foot Locker.
Speaker 1: Foot Locker.  Foot Locker.
Speaker 2: That's it.  That's it.  That's it--that's his tenant in the space and, and you pay big money for a store on 125th Street.  So that is a good source of his income.  And he owns real estate and he has good investments in bonds and funds and so forth.  He, like myself, we don't fool with stock.  Stock is risky and I don't fool with stock.  I have municipals, municipal bonds and funds like city funds, government funds, state funds and all that stuff.  You don't make as much nor do you lose as much so I decided to take that route so my money is invested in funds and he--and his is too.  This boy got a part of me.  If my footprint came out here, his footprint goes, his foot goes in that print.  That's how close we were.  And he learned and he--he was in all of the, not all of the, but some of the businesses--real estate he's in, liquor he's in.  Well he's in those two businesses.
Speaker 1: He was probably too young for the hair [business], right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was young.
Speaker 2: He was in college then.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was he involved at all in the banking industry?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He was Secretary of the Board at Freedom National [Bank].  Yeah.  So--you're gonna give me a copy of that, you're gonna send me a copy--?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --of that stuff?
Speaker 1: Right, I am.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Sir, I want to ask you this.  Now with your daughter [Jan Hudgins Riley], were you, did you encourage her to go to law school 'cause she went to Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] undergrad right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And where did she go to law school at?
Speaker 2: Columbia [University, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Columbia, okay.
Speaker 2: In the city, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she also did--.
Speaker 2: She went to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], she went to Yale for a couple of years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were you the one who encouraged her to go to law school and why wouldn't she have gone into business as well?
Speaker 2: I, I thought law was good.  I thought law was good and she--it has been good to her.  But she's got, got this guy who wants to farm, wants to raise cattle.  Yeah, but she, she--I think I've convinced her that that's the wrong thing to do.  She's a lady, not a farmer's wife. (laughs)
Speaker 1: Now you don't know she might end up making a lot of money as a cattle farmer in Belize.
Speaker 2: Yeah in Belize.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughs).
Speaker 2: She, she was thinking about import/export from there.  People there don't have any money.  They don't have any money.  "Go where the money is, New York."  That's what I tell her.
Speaker 1: So sir, so your son is he retired or is he still active?
Speaker 2: He is, he watches investments but he's not working.  He's not working as much as I am.  He, when he first came out of college he said, "I want to retire at forty." (laughs) He came close to it.  Yeah, he's been quite successful, quite successful.
Story_ID: 8607
Speaker 1: You know what is impressive, 'cause a lot of times in the black community it's not, that sometimes wealth does not pass from one hand, you know, one generation to the other--,
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and so it seems in your family what you've been able to do is that it passed you know it passed--,
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --And there's a sense of tradition.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I'm wondering when you look at that because we can point to a bunch of other situations where institutions, you know people have not been able to pass on and grow from that--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know the family (company?).
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I'm just--I make that as a statement.  I'm wondering if you have a comment about you know sort of missed opportunities or thing that we need to do to make sure that it passes?  One thing Earl Graves is doing is that his sons are in the business and running the business [at 'Black Enterprise' magazine].
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes that's good.  He's a good family man, Earl is.  I have a lot of respect for him, yeah.  But I--your point is well made.  I think your point is well made.  Many people just don't give their children the inspiration to pursue what they're doing.  And I say to my, my grand--I have two grandsons, three grandsons, they're men.  One is forty-eight, forty-nine and so on and those guys are making money.  They are really making money.  They're not making history but they're making money.  They're in Wall Street [financial district in New York, New York].  They're, they--one came out of Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and one came out of Columbia [University, New York, New York] and they went to Wall Street and worked in brokerage houses down there for three years and then quit and opened their own brokerage firm.  But--and they're doing good.  I mean they are making money.  They know their skills, they're conservative.  Business just runs in our family, started with me and it just runs--and each generation is doing better than the other and I'm so happy about that.
Story_ID: 8608
Speaker 1: The other thing I wanted to ask you politically are you, are you a Democrat or Conservative or Independent?
Speaker 2: [U.S. President] Bill Clinton.  He was the best black president we ever had. (laughs) Bill Clinton is my man.  He made a couple of mistakes.  We all make them.  We all make mistakes but he's done a hell of a lot, excuse me, for our people, done a lot for our people and I've given him a lot of support.  He's building a library in, something down South in where, Tennessee or some place and my name is on it.  I contributed to it.  He, he bears the honor but I, I just think that we owe it to him 'cause he took a lot of, lot of tongue lashing from white folks doing what he has done for us and he's done a lot for us, done a lot.  So I'm a Democrat to answer your question.
Speaker 1: And do you have any views on black Republicans?
Speaker 2: No.  I think every man has the right to do what he wants to do, do it his way as long as he keeps his ears open and take a little advice and gives recognition to those who have befriended us.  And I, I think, that's, that's all I would think about that.
Story_ID: 8609
Speaker 1: Anyone else that you would say that you've admired and they've contributed greatly to society?
Speaker 2: [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], everybody knows that, that he, what he has done.  Really I feel that way about Earl Graves, he's done an excellent job.  And when I first met Earl he was just Earl Graves who finished Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] but he's done, he's done an excellent job.  I admire him much.  I can't think of anymore.
Speaker 1: Adam Clayton--.
Speaker 2: Adam Clayton Powell?
Speaker 1: Oh yes.  Oh yes, Adam Clayton Powell.  Adam Clayton Powell could conceivably had been the first black president if he had stuck to it.  I think he could have, um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Do you have a favorite story relating to Adam Clayton Powell, any stories that you'd like to share?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No?
Speaker 1: Uh-uh.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I wouldn't share it.
Speaker 2: On camera anyway.  Okay, 'cause he was a very--did you see the movie ['Keep the Faith, Baby, 2002] that came out on him recently?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: It was a movie yeah, his son [Adam Clayton Powell, IV] worked on that movie.
Speaker 1: Oh really?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm, not Adam, Jr., but the other son.  I can't remember his name now.  But what about--do you have any views about Charlie Rangel?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yeah, Charlie is a hard worker.  He's good, he's, and his--carry his weight.  Yeah I like Charlie.
Speaker 2: Do you think New York will see another black mayor?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  It will be a long time.  I'm afraid it's gonna be a long time.  He was a personal friend of mine.  We're frat brothers, yeah.  Dave [Dinkins], um-hmm.  Have you interviewed him?
Speaker 2: Yes, we started our interview.  We have to finish it with him.
Story_ID: 8610
Speaker 1: When you look at that community what hopes or what, and what concerns do you have?
Speaker 2: I am optimistic particularly optimistic where blacks are concerned because they're making progress today and that's what I meant when I said Earl Graves's magazine ['Black Enterprise'].  You read that magazine and you'll see month after month after month people who are stepping up, stepping up, stepping up.  And I'm, I'm not satisfied but I'm happy about what I see.  I think black folks are coming along.  I really think so.  You see more interracial situations and they're not that, it's not because they're not respected, it's because the white community, the white community is getting to better understand and relate.  I'm not happy--I'm not satisfied rather, but I'm happy.  I, I, I see they're going up.  I see the black people rising.  You got plenty of them who are not, but you used to have more, used to have fewer who, who are.  I, I, I would like to, I would like to be able to see fifty years from today what stands.  I think he's going to be good.  I won't be here but I think it's going to be good.  You leave a heritage.  We do our job and more and more are going to college and more and more black graduates from college and higher education.  And everybody without education don't do as well as Bill Hudgins did.  I don't have all that education.  I wonder how far I would have gone if I had the education that many of the people you interview have.  I think I've done a heck of a lot better.  So you see I'm not satisfied, all right?
Speaker 1: And sir what about the people who say that the black community has lost, that you know there was a time that you know the negro baseball league player, play, you know teams that we could fill a whole stadium and that we owned our own businesses and the money kept in the community, what about those people who say we were better off before integration?
Speaker 2: I don't think we've ever been better off than we are now.  I don't agree with that.  I think we're better off now than we've ever been.  We have more successful professional people, more successful business people, more, more, more successful educators, we have all that much more than we did in the past.  I can look back long time and I like what I see now.  And with this organization coming along, your organization, it's going to play a strong role in the solidifying of black folks.  I think so.  That's what my view is.
Story_ID: 8611
Speaker 1: I have a question about your foster sister, the one you said--she seemed to have played a large role in your life.
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: The one, your foster sister, one of the--one who I think she went to Hampton you said.
Speaker 2: Virginia (unclear).
Speaker 1: Virginia Union.  Was it Virginia Union [sic, Virginia State College, later Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Virginia, your older, your foster sister.
Speaker 1: In Virginia, this is going back.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes.  Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: I'm going back, I'm sorry.  And you said that she even helped you find your first wife [Martina Fitzgerald Hudgins] or had some role to play in that.
Speaker 2: She introduced me to her.
Speaker 1: And I'm wondering did she play, did she sort of you know help play the role that your mother [Agnes Moody Hudgins] who passed away you know did she sort of fit in your shoes in some respects and help guide you and play a mentor role?
Speaker 2: She, she did, she did.  She was in college and she was about two years older than I, but she, she liked me and she gave me a lot of encouragement.  She did a lot of encourag-, that's my foster sister and she was good.  I don't know if that answers your question or not.
Speaker 1: Okay, I (unclear).
Speaker 2: She was, she was in, went into education.  She taught, I think she taught, think she taught for a couple of years at Virginia State.  I think she did.
Story_ID: 8612
Speaker 1: What do you want people to say about Bill Hudgins?
Speaker 2: That's not fair. (laughs)
Speaker 1: That's not a fair question?
Speaker 2: That's not a fair question.
Speaker 1: Okay well then--okay.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I'm just kidding.  I, I'd be happy if people recognized the benefits that they have enjoyed from some of my efforts, like the bank, like contributions that I've made that I can't even think of now.  It's a difficult question.
Speaker 1: Well sir, what do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: What I'm doing now, organizing those banks [Carver Federal Savings Bank and Freedom National Bank], more that because it benefited other people.  I want to be remembered for that, not these lies.
Speaker 1: We hit a sore point.  I shouldn't even have mentioned that article, huh?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  You didn't create it.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: But I would like to have a copy of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, well we can give it to you.
Speaker 2: I can't sue anybody now.
Speaker 1: No it's all over.
Speaker 2: It's all over and--.
Speaker 1: And no one--.
Speaker 2: --Jackie [Robinson] is gone.
Speaker 1: Probably a lot of people are gone, they're gone.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I'd like to be remembered as having been here and recognized the needs of my people and tend to serve them. (pauses) Did you know Dorothy Maynor?
Speaker 1: No sir.
Speaker 2: You know of her?
Speaker 1: I don't.  Uh-oh I'm in trouble.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Okay, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Dorothy Maynor.
Speaker 1: M-A-Y-N-O [sic, M-A-Y-N-O-R]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She was, she was a singer, an organizer of entertainment features and so forth, Dorothy Maynor.  And she was the wife of a pastor of my church.  Now why am I talking about her?  Did you ask a question--?
Speaker 1: No, I was asking about your legacy and you, you know what you wanted to be remembered for.  And you were saying that you wanted to be remembered as someone who helped people and provided opportunities.  And I can't remember--and then you said did, do you know Dorothy Maynor so there must have been something?
Speaker 2: Well I was just, I was just thinking I was on the board of her organization [Harlem School of the Arts] and that was a pre, pre-effort of the Harlem choir, boy's choir and I think she was instrumental in the beginning of that.  That's all I can think of.
Speaker 1: Sir, you had talked earlier about you know feeling like you had a guardian looking out for you, a guardian angel during your life and I'm just wondering if you would comment about that a little bit more?  'Cause you know here for all intents and purposes here you know you were born to a mother who was fourteen years old who you never saw and yet you know you rise up you know.  You've risen up to such great heights and it really didn't take you very long to do that.  Once you hit New York it seemed that you were on the way.  So I'm just wondering you know your comment about that?
Speaker 2: A pretty hard one, that's a hard one.  I, anything I would say would be generalizing you know.  And it just--.
Speaker 1: But there must have been things that happened along the way sir that you felt that you know someone was looking out for you and that's all I'm--I mean even if you would take one or two of those times.
Speaker 2: I'm thankful that God blessed me with the energy and desire to work and everything that I've acquired has come through my efforts or work.  And other than John Pierce I, I can't think of anybody else who was that, that strong in my growing up and development.  I rather think I did it with grit and sure didn't do it because I was smarter than anybody else, I did it because I worked harder than most people I think.  That's it.  I'm sorry I can't say some of the things that you'd like to hear but that's the way I feel.
Speaker 1: And why were you driven, just one last question, why were you driven to work so hard sir?
Speaker 2: Because I had a desire to be respected and that I would be, that people would recognize my efforts, unselfish efforts to help others.  That's it.  That's it.  And I did it without a lot of equipment that most people who succeed had.  I didn't have that equipment, didn't have that education but I did it and I don't like people telling lies on me. (laughs)
Speaker 1: This is horrible.  We're not going go end on that note, okay (unclear).
Speaker 2: No, no just delete that.
Speaker 1: (Laughs) Okay, but money, the accumulation of wealth is a good thing because--?
Speaker 2: Because?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm asking.  Finish that statement, the accumulation of money is a good thing because--?
Speaker 2: It enables you to do for yourself and to do for others.  Now your organization has received some handsome contributions, donations, if you say, because you and your people are doing something to help people who needs to be helped.  And that's what I think it's all about.  If you have enjoyed the blessings of whatever you have enjoyed give thanks to God and help to your people.  I come back the old-fashioned way.  I don't leave God out of the things that I've been successful in doing because he did not have to--today I was trying to find this place and I, I, I kept getting the feeling that God is going to help me to find that place.
