Story_ID: 536550
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My name is John Henry Heidelberg [HistoryMaker John Heidelberg].  John Henry, pretty standard there, and Heidelberg is H-E-I-D-E-L-B-E-R-G.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind the John Henry?
Speaker 2: Yes, as a matter of fact, there is.  My mom [Lillian Bounds] told me when I was born that my uncle, who recently passed away.  My uncle saw me and he said I looked like John Henry, the steel driving man.  And I, I should be named John Henry.  So, actually, it came from my uncle.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay.  February 19th, 1944, and I was born in Shubuta, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Now, how do you spell that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Shubuta?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: S-H-U-B-U-T-A
Speaker 1: Shubuta, Mississippi.  Now, is there a story behind that name?  Now, is that an Indian [Native American] name, or--
Speaker 2: Mississippi has a lot of Indian names, and a lot of small towns that are named after Indian tribes.  So, yeah, that's, that's one of the names.
Speaker 1: Was it Choctaw or Cherokee (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, I couldn't, I couldn't tell you who exactly it was.
Speaker 1: I thought I'd ask.  I thought I'd ask anyway.  But okay.  And, now sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I guess I'm self-employed.  I own WVOL Radio, and I also own John Henry's Restaurant and Showcase [Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Broadcaster, I guess, and a restaurateur.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is today's date?
Speaker 2: What is today's date?  Is it two--03/15/2007 [March 15, 2007], I believe it is.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're at my radio station, WVOL Radio, in Nashville, Tennessee.
Story_ID: 536551
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight, People magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask by--management compels me to ask these and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They're kind of a warm up.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Do I have a favorite food?  Meat.  Just about any kind of meat.  I'm a meat eater.  I guess, right off the top of my head, probably would be steak.  Fish would be a close second.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I've been to Hawaii, and I was in the [U.S.] military, so I got to travel a lot.  Overseas, probably would be Paris, France.  For the United States, probably Hawaii.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My kids could tell you, I have a lot of favorite phrases or sayings.  I can't think of one right off the top of my head.  I've got so many, I can't think of any particular one that I'd use.
Story_ID: 536552
Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family, and then your father's [K.P. Heidelberg] side.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Her name is Lillian Bounds, B-O-U-N-D-S.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is her date of birth, and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mom, she was born in Shubuta [Mississippi], and it's September 12th.  And I can't tell you what year, but she's just turned, I think she's sixty-nine. Sixty-nine or seventy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: Well, I can go back to her grandmother, you know, which lived--she lived in a neighborhood that we lived in.  And, of course, all the old folks are deceased, but I can go back to her grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did her grandmother talk about what life was like when she was raised up, or who some of her ancestors were?
Speaker 2: Well, I pretty much knew what life was like for them because we all lived out in the country, and most of those people were farmers as were my parents that raised me.  So everybody knew about cotton, and corn, and all of those crops that you raised.  So pretty much everybody was farmers, or they were, what do you call it when they worked in the, in the--with the, with what cutting wood, paper wood, and that kind of thing.  Cut the trees and all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  With the mills and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know what that occupation is called.  But they haul pulp wood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's what those people did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Annie Carter [ph.].  That was my mom's grandmother.  Velma Bounds [Velma Bounds Pryor] was my mom's mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your mother's grandmother was Annie Carter.
Speaker 2: My mother's mother was Velma Bounds.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Annie Carter was?
Speaker 2: Her mother.
Speaker 1: Her--okay.
Speaker 2: My mom's grandmother.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So that's your great-grandmother.  That's your great-grandmother.
Speaker 2: Great-grandmother, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  That's your great, that is your great--
Speaker 2: That's my great-grandmother on my mom's side.
Speaker 1: Yeah, great-grandmother.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Maternal grandmother.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay.  Any stories from that side of the family about Shubuta, Mississippi and what it was like?  As far as you know, is the family, does the history stop there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Most of the people are deceased, now, but it was just regular country people that you grew up with.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and lived day to day and ate off the land, and lived off the land, and did what kind of jobs that were available.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause you gotta remember, this was the South and--Deep South.  Not a whole lot of industry here or jobs to be had other than farming, those type of things.
Story_ID: 536553
Speaker 1: Any stories about, about slavery, or when freedom came, or any of that?
Speaker 2: Well, on my dad's [K.P. Heidelberg] side, my great-great-grandmother, her name was Julie Ann [ph.], and she was a former slave.  And she lived to be 115 years old, and I got to see her.  And one of her words were, I think I was a child, and I remember my great-grandmother [Lecrecia Lyons] taking me to see her.  And she said to my great-grandmother, "This child is going to be something one day."  You know, but that's--I can just kind of remember that, and she was gravely ill at the time, but I remember that as a child (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, was she your grandmother too?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She was my great--
Speaker 1: Great?
Speaker 2: Great-great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was on my dad's great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Great-great-grandmother.  She lived to be a hundred--
Speaker 2: She lived to be 115.  And believe it or not, my grandmother's--that was my grandfather, my great-grandfather's mother.  And on his wife, my great-grandmother, her father, and his name was Alf [ph.].  And he lived to be 115, so I have two, what?  I wouldn't call them what? Cent, cent--
Speaker 1: Centenarians?
Speaker 2: Centenarians?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: When they go over a hundred, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they are.
Story_ID: 536554
Speaker 1: Back to your mother's [Lillian Bounds] side for a minute, now.  Did your mother talk about growing up and what it was like when she grew up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she, she talked about when she was a little girl, and how she used to go out into the fields and do fieldwork and she was just young, very young when I was born, as a matter of fact.  And how she'd work out in the fields and pick cotton, and go to church on Sunday, and those kind of things.  There's not a lot to do out in the country.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, these were, we know that these times were--
Speaker 2: Oh, they were very tough times.
Speaker 1: Tough times, yeah.  Especially for these people down south.
Speaker 2: Well, this was in the '40s [1940s], so--
Speaker 1: So were they sharecroppers?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They owned their own--
Speaker 2: They owned their own property, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a story about how they came to own their own land?
Speaker 2: That I don't know.  I'd have to go back and ask my mom and some other people.  But there was, like her uncles and her great-grandfather, and I think there was all the people buying into the property, so they got to own their own property.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So did your mother go to school there in Shubuta [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I believe she went to--I don't know what grade it was.  I believe she went to about sixth, sixth grade or so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause most of the time people worked in the fields.  They didn't have time to go to school.
Speaker 1: Right.  Did you remember the name of the school?
Speaker 2: They went to, probably, went to school in the church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So what they would do was they'd use the church as their school house.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--okay.  And what was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Sweet Pilgrim [ph.], I believe it was.
Speaker 1: Is this a Baptist church?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 536555
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Okay.  His name is K.P., the letters K-P, Heidelberg [K.P. Heidelberg].  H-E-I-D-E-L-B-E-R-G.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Now my dad, I think, is seventy-one.  He was born just outside Shubuta [Mississippi].  He was born in Wayne County [Mississippi], I believe it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Wayne County.  Okay.  And what year did you say?
Speaker 2: Gee whiz.  My dad is seventy-one, or seventy-two, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  I see.  Let's see, that was, 1930s--
Speaker 2: It had to be way back there then, yeah.  See, I wasn't raised up with my dad.  I was raised up by my dad's grandmother.
Speaker 1: So okay.  So he's seventy-one now, you said?
Speaker 2: He's seventy--I think he's seventy-one.  He just turned seventy-one, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, yeah, that would, okay.  Well, you told us something about the ancestors on your father's side already.  Were they always from around there?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Basically, a few miles apart from where we were.  Where we stayed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what about your father's family?  How did they earn a living? The same way?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Same.  In my father's family, yeah, he had, I think that's what they did.  They hauled pulped wood, and they did farming, and that kind of thing.  They more or less lived off the land.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your father have a chance to go to school there?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I don't know what grade my father went through.  I don't know if he graduated or not.  I do know that he went through into the Navy.  He was in the Navy for a while.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he went in the U.S. Navy?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did he go overseas?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know if he did or not.  I'm sure he did back then, because that was during war time. Forty--
Speaker 1: During World War II [WWII]?
Speaker 2: World War, yeah, World War II was at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, yeah.  All right.  So I guess your father was born in the '20s [1920s] or teens [1910s]?  Teens [1910s] or '20s [1920s], I guess.
Speaker 2: I'd have to go back and try and figure it out.
Speaker 1: He'd be older than seventy-one though, if he was.
Speaker 2: He's either--well, he'd be a lot older than that.
Speaker 1: My dad was born in 1918, he's seventy-one.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I beg your pardon.  Maybe he's eighty-one.  I apologize.  I got my dates--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what was confusing me.
Speaker 2: So that's right, my mom [Lillian Bounds] is seventy-nine.  I'm sorry, seventy-nine.  She's about seventy-nine, I think she's seventy-nine.  So he would be eighty-one, I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That makes sense.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's eighty-one.  I think he's eighty-one.  I apologize.  I got my dates all wrong here.  It's been a long day (laughter).
Speaker 1: He would have been a young man, pretty young man in the war.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a very young man.  He's, he's eighty-one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Matter of fact, my uncle, his brother and I, were just talking a little while, a couple of days ago about--he was asking about some of the old people in the neighborhood.  And he says not too many eighty year olds are still around.  That's how old he was.  He was eighty--I think eighty-one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I apologize for that.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, but he stayed stateside during the war.  He didn't go overseas?
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm not sure, you know.  I know my uncle and some others did, but I couldn't tell you if my dad did.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, that was a big deal for people in those days.  To go someplace outside of--
Speaker 2: He probably, he probably did.  He may have gone to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He would talk about it if he did.  You know, I was thinking, if somebody was in the Navy during the war--
Speaker 2: You know, if you go places like India, or some places like that in World War II?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but usually people do a lot of talking about the war, because that's like a big impression on people.  I don't know.  So he never talked about where he went?
Speaker 2: No, nobody ever said anything.  Now he, he, I wasn't--he wasn't there when I was growing up.  As I told you, I was raised by my [paternal] great-grandparents [Lecrecia Lyons and John Lyons].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  So are you in connection with him now?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We're in contact, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's probably a story to dig up.
Speaker 2: I could--I'll have to ask him about this.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Because all the World War II vets, they can tell you every day almost what they did.  It's just such a big thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 536556
Speaker 1: So is, is there a story about--that your parents [Lillian Bounds and K.P. Heidelberg] tell you about how they met?
Speaker 2: Gee whiz.  They don't talk about that much, you know?  I guess, when you're in the country, you're just country people and maybe you met at church or someplace, and it started from there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: That's where most people met anyway, was in the church.
Speaker 1: So he went into the [U.S.] Navy.  Was that after you were born?
Speaker 2: I believe so, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell us, now did you have a stepfather or something around?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were raised by your--
Speaker 2: I was raised by my great-grandparents from infancy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Raised by great-grandparents.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: His grandmother.  My dad's grandmother raised me, and grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well, give us their names and what were they like?
Speaker 2: Oh, they're wonderful people.  And as a matter of fact, on the other side as well.  My great-grandfather was a--he wasn't a full time minister, but he was a minister.  We--he was a Methodist minister, and he was a farmer.  And so there was like a church on our property, the graveyard was on our property.  And he always felt that it was wrong to be the minister of a church since it was kind of situated on our property and all.  So he never would take a full-time job as a minister in it.  And there were incidents where they ask him to be the full-time minister at other churches.  I don't think he wanted to do that.  He was just more or less guest, he would be the guest minister at different churches and whatnot.  He was a very religious man.  And my grandmother [sic. great-grandmother], she also was very religious.  Very--taught me well as a child, you know.  Made sure I followed the straight and narrow.  Made sure I got an education, you know?  Made sure I finished high school [Riverview High School, Waynesboro, Mississippi].  Well, I left in my last year, but made sure I got to that point.  And then, I think when I was in the twelfth grade, I left school and joined the [U.S.] Air Force.
Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute.  We're going way faster than we needed to.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: But I want to get your grandfather's name.  What was his name?
Speaker 2: John Lyons.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Lecrecia Lyons.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: L-E-C-R-E-C-I-A.
Speaker 1: These are your dad's great-grandparents?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  These are my dad's grandparents.
Speaker 1: Grandparents, yes.  All right.  Your great-grandparents.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  His mom [Lillie Lyons] died in childbirth, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --my--she raised him, and she also raised me.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Spring Hill [Spring Hill United Methodist Church, Shubuta, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Spring Hill.  Was it in an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] or C.M.E. [Colored Methodist Episcopal; Christian Methodist Episcopal], or just--
Speaker 2: No.  Just a regular--
Speaker 1: Just Methodist (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Methodist church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 536557
Speaker 1: When you look back at their personalities, and I guess, and the personalities of your parents and what you know, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think I take a little bit from all of them, but I think my grandmother, my [paternal] great-grandmother [Lecrecia Lyons], was most instrumental in what I am today.  Because she was one of those people that's a stickler for education.  I think she had about a sixth grade education, and she did well with what she had.  And she insisted that I go to school and get an education.  My grandfather [Heidelberg's paternal great-grandfather, John Lyons] was kind of like on that spiritual level where he gave you the rights, the wrongs, and that kind of thing.  But he left a lot of it up to my grandmother [Heidelberg's paternal great-grandmother], 'cause she, she was kind of the disciplinarian, the person that saw that everything was--you know, not that my grandfather didn't take care of everything, but she saw that everything was--she was the glue of the family.  And she made sure that everything was taken care of.  So I got a lot from her.  I have a--I think my personality, I got that from my mom [Lillian Bounds].  And also my dad [K.P. Heidelberg] is a very ambitious person, so I got that driving ambition, I think from him.  So I got a little--I got some from my natural mother and father, and a lot from my grandmother, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Great-grandmother.
Story_ID: 536558
Speaker 1: Do you have any brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My dad [K.P. Heidelberg] has a lot of kids.  And my mom [Lillian Bounds] has, let's see, my mom has three--no she has two daughters and three sons other than myself.  And my dad has--he had a couple of marriages--so he has, let's see, two daughters, three daughters, he has about five daughters and two sons other than myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, are you the oldest, or--
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest of each, either one of them has.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, did any of the rest of them live in your household when you were growing up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.  My dad and mother were not married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you basically, it was you and your [paternal] great-grandparents [Lecrecia Lyons and John Lyons]?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My great-grandparents, yeah.
Story_ID: 536559
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh, I can go way back.  And, yeah, when, when I was being taught by my [paternal] great-grandmother [Lecrecia Lyons] about things; about life in general.  I remember we lived on the farm and she would kind of instruct me as to--again, going back to what life was all about.  You want to be something in life, you want to strive for this, or you want to strive for that.  When I wanted to give up on something, she'd always be there to tell me how to, you know, you gotta keep going.  I remember we lived on a farm.  And, you know, most people don't know what it's--you say you're poor, but you don't know what it's like to be poor, 'cause you live off the land.  You know, you've got your vegetables, you've got all those things that you should eat anyway.  And I remember we had--we plowed mules and things like that, and we gathered, we picked cotton, and we did all the things that you do on a farm.  And we lived kind of way out outside of town.  We lived kind of out in the woods for a while and, and you went to church on Sunday, and did those other things during the week.  And every now and then, you went to town on Saturday or what have you.  And you went to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they were a stickler about, you know, they wanted you to go to church.  You know, very religious people.
Story_ID: 536560
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up [in Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Gee whiz.  You heard the birds, you heard the animals.  You were always very close to the animals.  And I, even today, I was looking out my door last night and happened to see about five deer, just outside my front, front door, my front steps.  And I stood there and watched them for about thirty minutes.  But being around the animals, I love animals.  The fresh smell of spring.  Even when you're plowing, I mean, just the smell of the soil as it's being tilled.  You're working around the barn and you've got barn smells.  And, you know, the chickens, you get to know all of that and then you got all of the fruit trees that you have around.  We even had a pomegranate tree, and then you got mulberry trees, and all the fruits, the apples, and the pears and those kind of things.  So you remember what those things smell like.  Then when you slaughtered your hogs, you know, those smells.  And today, I can probably tell you anything if I were to see it, what, what was going on there.  So it was just the basic farm things that you do, you know?
Story_ID: 536561
Speaker 1: What kind of things did you like to do out on the farm the most?
Speaker 2: You know what, believe it or not, I liked plowing.  I used to love to see the soil tilled, and you know, just couldn't wait for plowing time.  I think the worst thing I hated to do is--we lived on a farm where you had to go and get the water from this spring and do those kind of things.  I hated those kind of chores.  Or you'd have to go and pull grass for the mule or something (laughter) of that nature.  And, and picking cotton out in the hot sun, or chopping cotton.  Those kind of things.  I, I didn't like those things too much.  I always tried to get out of those.  But you didn't have a lot of, there weren't a lot of jobs available, so you--in order to get money, you had to do those things.  Take what was available to you.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mules have names?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my uncle had a, had a--yes.  My uncle had a mule named Jim [ph.], and that was my granddad's brother.  They lived close together and Jim was a one eyed mule.  And he'd gotten so old, you know, that he couldn't plow that much.  But he would--my uncle's got a bowleg--and he'd walk, and that mule would just, when he would take him out to the barn, he'd take him up and let him go.  He didn't even have to put a bridle on him.  The mule'd just sit there with his head in the back of my uncle (laughter).  And I think we had a, we had a, my granddad [Heidelberg's paternal great-grandfather, John Lyons (ph.)] bought this mare that wasn't foaled.  And she had a colt.  We called that colt Trigger [ph.].  You know, I used to try and ride him and got thrown and stuff.  And my uncle had a big, beautiful horse that he bought.  And I used to try to ride her and get thrown, and so, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you had a chance to ride around, ride horses?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  We'd ride horses and those kind of things.  Milked, I milked cows.  We had cows.
Speaker 1: Any good stories about the farm you can tell us?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, the good stories are about at the end of the year, when you, I think I tried to, when I got in school, I tried to raise some cotton on my own.  And back then, they only allowed you to raise so much cotton.  Then when the government got involved, and they started putting restraints and restrictions on everything.  But I tried to raise some cotton, and I didn't do too well.  But, anyway, if you, what little cotton you did have, when you took it to the gin, and you got a few dollars in your pocket, you're all right (laughter).  You're fine.  So those are, those memories were then.
Story_ID: 536562
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember radio growing up [in Mississippi]?  What it was like?
Speaker 2: Yes, as a matter of fact, I be- I started loving radio at a very young age.  And I remember we used to have the old battery operated radios, and you had these big square batteries that looked kind of like your auto batteries, but they were rectangular, rather than the square battery.
Speaker 1: Okay, now.  That was because there was no electricity out there?
Speaker 2: Right.  We didn't have electricity.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you had no running water, and you had no indoor toilets or anything.
Speaker 1: So you were saying before, you had to get the water from the spring?
Speaker 2: You had to go to the spring to get the water and then--
Speaker 1: Could you drink it out of the spring?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  You could drink right there at the--that's the best kind of water.  It's very--I mean, very cold, very nice, and a lot of its artesian wells, I think that pulls it, but you, yeah, the water was very good.  And then we got, my uncle got a pump, I think, and we would get it from there.  But for the most part, we went to the spring to get it.  But back to that, you see, I lost my train of thought.
Speaker 1: The radio and batteries (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, the radio.
Speaker 1: You were talking about no electricity, I think, weren't you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  No electricity, and at a very early age, I used to sit there and listen to radio.  And I loved to read.  My uncle used to get a lot of comic books, and he'd buy these comic books and before I learned to read, I'd just make up words as I went, and he finally got tired of me doing that and taught me how to read.  But listening to radio, I started listening to John Richbourg in Nashville, Tennessee on WLAC [WLAC Radio].  And during the day, I would listen to WSM [WSM Radio, Nashville, Tennessee], you know.  So I could, most of your local stations were country, country stations.
Speaker 1: Was that a country station?  WS--
Speaker 2: Yes, it was a country station.
Speaker 1: WSM?
Speaker 2: WSM.
Speaker 1: WSM.
Speaker 2: And I used to listen to the 'Grand Ole Opry,' and I got to know people like Minnie Pearl, Roy Acuff, and Grandpa Jones, and, you know, a lot of the other old stars.  You know, Lonzo and Oscar, and all those people.
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember, there was a special on public television not long ago about a black man who played the harmonica.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  DeFord Bailey.
Speaker 1: Yeah, DeFord Bailey.  Was he on when you were coming along?
Speaker 2: I believe I did hear him.  I did hear him.  He has family here in Nashville, and they did, yeah.  He has family here in Nashville.  His, I believe, it was his grandson used to--he was a singer here in town who played in my club once, once or twice.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There was a story about him, mostly people didn't know he was black, you know, when he went to the--
Speaker 2: Oh, he knew how to play that harmonica.  Yeah.  And you could hear those things, and I was telling people, I knew a lot about country music when I got into radio, I knew a lot about the artists.  And then at night, we would listen to John Richbourg, about nine, I guess nine or ten o'clock at night, because that was the only way you'd hear what they call, what would they call it?  It was, it was like black music, I guess, what they call it.
Speaker 1: At one time I think they called it race music.
Speaker 2: Race, race music.  Yeah.  That is what they used to call it.  But that was the only time you could hear people like Joe Simon, or James Brown, or some of those artists.
Speaker 1: Were those, were they on when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah! Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You were, you would have been about ten years old back in '54 [1954]?  That's the early James Brown--
Speaker 2: Early James Brown, Little Willie John and all of those guys, and a lot of the older artists.
Speaker 1: Bo Diddley out there in the--
Speaker 2: Oh, Bo Diddley, yeah.
Speaker 1: And maybe--
Speaker 2: Ray Charles came out, and let's see, some of the others.  I used to listen to that music.
Speaker 1: Chuck Berry?
Speaker 2: Chuck Berry, of course.  Yeah, Chuck Berry.
Speaker 1: Fats Domino.
Speaker 2: Fats Domino, I remember, I remember all of those, those songs, yeah.  We still play them here on WVOL [WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee], believe it or not.
Speaker 1: So they were all on the show?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they would all be on at night.
Speaker 1: John Richbourg show?
Speaker 2: John Richbourg show and they'd have, they'd have different shows, different sponsors.  And a job would come on and maybe do 'Ernie's' ['Ernie's Record Parade'], or a guy would do another--something sponsored by baby chicks, and they'd sell those chicks and those kind of things.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was the record mart's name in the--
Speaker 2: Ernie's Record Mart [Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Ernie's Record Mart, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In Gallatin, Tennessee [sic.].
Speaker 2: In Gallatin, Tennessee.  Down south in Dixie (laughter).  Yeah, I remember that.  I grew up listening to it.  And so when, you know, you lived out in the country, and you'd make do.  You'd have to improvise, 'cause a lot of things you couldn't get.  You had to find something to make it work.  And so what I'd do with the battery, was when my folks weren't looking, I'd put baking soda in those little plugs, 'cause you plugged it into the battery.  And I'd put it into the doggone oven and bake it for a while.  I'm lucky it didn't explode.  But it would, it would work for a while.  Or you'd go and get yourself one of those--
Speaker 1: And that would charge your battery up?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And then you'd go and get an Irish potato, and put it in there.  Those kind of things.  You found something that would work.  Believe it or not, some of those things did work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that would hold you on until you could get enough money--because most farmers, they had to wait until the fall, you know.  Until you cultivated your crops to get some money for something 'cause you didn't have money, you know, in the early part of the year.
Story_ID: 536563
Speaker 1: Okay.  We were talking about WLAC [WLAC Radio, Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The John Richbourg show.  And you were talking about--oh, Ernie's Record Mart [Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: We were talking about the ba- (laughter) Ernest Record Mart. Yeah. And we were talking about how you get the reception from the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the potato.
Speaker 2: --the Irish potatoes, is what we called them.  The white potatoes.  You'd just take the prongs from the radio itself, plug them into the potato and you'd get a reception sometimes.
Speaker 1: Plug them into the potato?
Speaker 2: Plug them into the potato.  Use the potato as a battery.
Speaker 1: So you just put one prong on?
Speaker 2: No, you'd stick--
Speaker 1: Oh, both of them? Both of them.
Speaker 2: --however many there'd be, four or five prongs, or whatever it was coming out of that unit that went into the battery.  Just plug that into--just push it into the potato.
Speaker 1: And you could get a reception?
Speaker 2: You could get a reception sometimes.
Speaker 1: It wasn't real loud was it?  I mean, you couldn't get too much power, or could you?
Speaker 2: You could hear it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Pretty good?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  It wouldn't last for too long, but I mean, you could actually hear it.  And you, as I said, you improvised.  You made do when you live in the country.
Speaker 1: All right.  That's good to know.  Now, I know in case something happens, but yeah.  Okay.  So, yeah.  Ernie's Record Mart [sic. 'Ernie's Record Parade'] was, I mean, that show was heard all over the Midwest.  I don't know if you were aware then, I guess people all over the South and the Midwest were listening to it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was on clear channel, WLAC was one of the clear channel stations.  Although, I didn't know what clear channel was at the time.  But they went out several hundred miles.
Speaker 1: Did--were you aware of the scope, I mean, the breadth of the broadcast in those days?  Did you know it went all over the place, or?
Speaker 2: No.  I was just more interested in it coming down to Mississippi where I lived.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: And I knew the people down there, everybody pretty much listened to it.  I remember telling--as I said, I met John.  I came up here to go to radio school, and I hope I'm not getting ahead.  But I came up here to go to radio school, and one of the instructors told me--I told him I grew up listening to John Richbourg.  So he says, "Well, we're gonna take a tour up there, and I'll let you meet John."  So I go up, and I tell John, I said, "Mr. Richbourg, my name is [HistoryMaker] John Heidelberg, and I'm from Laurel, Mississippi.  And all these years, I thought you were a black man."  He said, "Come here, baby."  He says, "Where you from?"  And I said, "Laurel, Mississippi."  And he said, "Tell your folks back down home, hello."  I mean, to get behind the microphone of WLAC, and that was the thrill of my life.  One of the greatest thrills of my life.  And then he says, "Okay.  Just goes to show you baby, you don't have to be black to have soul." (Laughter) I can remember those words like they were yesterday.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that was, that was in- yeah.  That was one of the great moments in radio.
Story_ID: 536564
Speaker 1: Where did you go to school in--?
Speaker 2: I went to--I--when I first started school, I went to a school in a church, Spring Hill Church [Spring Hill United Methodist Church, Shubuta, Mississippi].  And I left there and went to a school--
Speaker 1: Now, that's right on your property.
Speaker 2: Yeah. On our property, yeah.  Went to the--
Speaker 1: Spring Hill Church.
Speaker 2: Most people went to the--
Speaker 1: Who was the teacher?
Speaker 2: Oh, I can't think of the teacher's name.  The teacher would teach several classes, and that way you could learn a lot.  Because once she started teaching, maybe the second grade, the first grade, second grade, third grade, all the way up to the fifth, I think.  And she would go to this class, and she'd go to that class, she would teach all of us.  So if you were pretty good in the grade that you were in, you could learn from the other grades.  So I could do that.
Speaker 1: This is something that we ought to think about.  I mean, you know, savor for a minute.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That, here we are, the great State of Mississippi, do they provide a state school anywhere close to where you could reasonably get to?
Speaker 2: No, there were schools.  But you had, you had separate but equal, separate but equal doctrine that they had enforced.  And Mississippi was one of the staunchest segregationist states and that.  And they didn't make any bones about it.  I mean, it was just out in the open.  We segregate, we don't integrate.  And we used to--when I went to high school [Riverview High School, Waynesboro, Mississippi], we had blacks and whites living in the same neighborhood, but we rode different buses.  We didn't go to school together.  And there were times that I would have to catch two buses to get to the black school, and I'd go past two white schools just to get to the black school.  So it was really, economically, it was horrible.  Socially and in any other way, it was demoralizing, really.  But you--that was the way it was.  It was separate.  And they made sure the law stayed that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it sounds like your schools were far and few in between.
Speaker 2: Yeah, far and few in between.
Speaker 1: Public schools, because there were state schools provided by the State of Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, the state was paying for it.  Well, in the church early on, but there were other, yeah.  They had state schools, but we went to the church.
Speaker 1: Did the state pay for the school in the church?
Speaker 2: Paid for the teacher.
Speaker 1: For the teacher?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And, of course, you got, during that time, you got books, but you got books that had been used by other students.  And they were substandard books, and you had to use what they gave you.  But they did pay the teachers.
Speaker 1: They were old, old books.
Speaker 2: Right.  But the teacher didn't make that much, but she got paid.
Speaker 1: From what I understand, the teacher was, black teachers were paid less than white teachers in a white school.
Speaker 2: Sure.  For a long time, even in high school.  You didn't make the same money.
Speaker 1: And this is a state where, at least at one time, and it's still true today, that there are more blacks in Mississippi than whites.
Speaker 2: I don't know what the population is, because I came here in 1968, and so I couldn't tell you what the population is.
Speaker 1: Well, it was then and it's true in South Carolina too, that there are more blacks in the state than whites.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So in Mississippi, you have fewer black schools, lower budget for the schools--I'm just trying to set the stage in this.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: And so you actually, have to go to school in the church.
Speaker 2: Yeah, church.
Speaker 1: Which isn't necessarily bad, but you didn't have a school gym--
Speaker 2: No, you had none of that.  You were sitting on their benches that you had, pews, that you had in the church.  And you had the--we were separated by grades, and this school went to the fifth grade.  And after the fifth grade we went to, there was a public school.  'Cause this was in Wayne County [Mississippi], and I was transferred to Clarke County [Mississippi] to a public school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was that school called?
Speaker 2: Shubuta.
Speaker 1: Shubuta?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Shubuta School [Shubuta, Mississippi] and this other school was at Spring Hill.
Speaker 1: Was the Shubuta School called, Shubuta Colored School?  Or Shubuta--
Speaker 2: It was just Shubuta School.
Speaker 1: School.
Speaker 2: But you knew it was colored, because only colored went there.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you went there in the sixth grade, or fifth?
Speaker 2: I was promoted, yeah.  I was, yeah, the sixth grade I believe it was.  Or was it--no, fifth grade.  Fifth and sixth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we only went to four grades there.  And then for the fifth grade, I went to Shubuta. Fifth and sixth grade, I went to Shubuta.
Story_ID: 536565
Speaker 1: How'd you like school?
Speaker 2: I loved school, you know.  I loved school until sometimes my grandmother [Heidelberg's paternal great-grandmother, Lecrecia Lyons] would tell me, I'd say, "I don't want to go to school today."  And she says, "Well, if you don't go to school, you're getting out of here."  And sometimes I'd be the only boy in school.  I mean, I mean in the class.  And sometimes, several classes.  They were mostly girls.  And I'd have to sit there--today, I'd probably love that, (laughter) but as a young kid, you don't want to be the only boy in school.  But I went to--my grandmother made sure I went to school.  So there were a lot of times.
Speaker 1: So she was really dedicated to you--
Speaker 2: She was very dedicated (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to you receiving an education?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She was a stickler that I get an education.  And her favorite phrases were, is comes to mind, they can't take that away from you.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the attitude of the other young men that--your peers that, when they just didn't think it was any use to go to school?
Speaker 2: There were a lot of other families.  They would go and drop out of school, and do whatever, and maybe try and make some money.  Because they didn't, they didn't see what I saw.  Maybe they didn't see the future.  Whether it was going to be any different or anything.  A lot of people, you know, when things are real bad, sometimes people just give up, you know?  You throw your hands up and say, "Why," you know, "why bother?"  And my grandmother wouldn't let me think that way.  "You're getting out of here."  And you do sometimes, you'd think, why am I going to school?  I'm not gonna get a job.  I see people around me, they aren't getting jobs.  And you'd have to leave the South to get a job or a decent job.  And, of course, you'd, you know, there was a great deal of racism.  I mean, it was very overt.  And it was out, and nobody did anything about it, you know?  And you kind of felt like your life was in danger, anytime.  Because anybody could come up and say anything about you, throw you in jail.  And a lot of times, the people that were sheriff's, they were undercover Ku Klux Klan [KKK] and everything, you know?  And we'd--you'd have family members that'd come up with babies that weren't black, but you couldn't say anything about it.  In other words, you were almost property.  You had been freed from slavery, but you still weren't free because you had separate, so called separate, which is an oxymoron.  Separate but equal.  It never existed, you know. You were just separate.  You were like a nation within a nation, and you had a place, and you stayed in it.  If people, whites and blacks, lived in the same--sometimes, you'd live, you'd never live side by side, but one would live on one side of the road, and you'd live on the other side of the road.  The bus would come and pick up the white kids and take them to the white school, bus would come pick up the black kids and take them to black school.  We were like two separate nations in one.
Story_ID: 536566
Speaker 1: What would happen when you'd go into town?  Did you ever go into Shubuta [Mississippi] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.  Early on, when my grandmother [Heidelberg's paternal great-grandmother Lecrecia Lyons] used to teach me, and one of the things she'd say is, "When you go to town, you make sure you say, 'Yes sir' and 'No sir.'  I don't care if he's a child, if he's white, you say, 'Yes sir' and 'No sir.'  And if a white woman ever says anything to you, you hold your head down and you don't say a word.  Not one word."  And they had to do that to protect you.  So if anybody said anything, you almost had to act like you were stupid.  That's how you saved your life.  And I think that's permeated a lot of our race today.  We're still holding on to some of that, and you did that just to survive.  You knew you had to do that.  And, again, if anybody said you said anything, like Emmett Till, he was supposedly whistled at somebody, and you see what happened to him.
Speaker 1: And I was down in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I was very aware of what happened to Emmett Till.  I remember when that happened.
Speaker 1: Now, was Money close by?
Speaker 2: Money, Mississippi was a, you know, we were farther down south.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, and I heard about kids.  Kids jumping up, you know, go into the river and swimming, and all of a sudden, you don't hear about them anymore, and stuff like that.  I knew some kids.  You know?
Speaker 1: Really?  Kids that you knew just--
Speaker 2: I knew a kid and one of them got killed, and they said they--it was brothers, twins I think.  And they were swimming.  And one jumped off the river, and jumped, I mean, they said, I didn't see it, this is what the rumor was.  He actually jumped off the bank and jumped into the river, and they were naked.  Some people came by, and one of them came up dead.  I remember when I was in fifth grade, I think it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did older people talk about lynching and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: People would--they'd be very careful about what they said, because if anything got out, they could have been killed.  So blacks were always aware.  I guess like being in Iraq or Vietnam.  Like Iraq is today, you don't know what's gonna happen.  You go outside, and you don't know if you're gonna live through the day or not.  So blacks knew, as long as I keep my place, and I act like I'm, I'm retarded or something, or I'm very docile, those kind of things, they'd say, "Oh, that So and So is stupid.  Leave him alone."  And you got left alone.  And I used to ask--and I remember once asking my grandfather, great-grandfather, and they would always refer to him as Uncle.  Uncle Lyons [John Lyons] so and so, and so I asked my grandfather.  "Why do they call you Uncle?  You're not their uncle."  And I was an inquisitive kid.  And they would shut me up, and like, I mean, you know, they'd let you know.  That's stuff you don't talk about.  Don't even bother with that, you know?  And as a young child, I was.  I'd always ask questions (laughter) and it was, it was rough growing up there, 'cause I must have given them a lot of headaches.  'Cause this child gonna go out there and get hung, or he's gonna hang us too because he's too inquisitive.  You know, but I did.  I asked questions.
Speaker 1: Now, you were about the same age as Emmett Till, right?
Speaker 2: I don't remember what his age, probably yeah.
Speaker 1: You were close.  I remember 1950, he was thirteen, I think in 1955, '54 [1954] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When he came down to--I don't--I remember when it happened, I can't tell you the exact year.
Speaker 1: You were close to it.  You seem like you were within two or three years of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Anyway.
Speaker 2: He was about my age, yeah.
Speaker 1: What did, what did you hear?  I mean, when did you hear then, where did you get your news from?
Speaker 2: It was, you could hear it on the, you could hear it on the radio.  Back then, I believe in '50 [1950], I think they had television back then at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and you could hear it on the news.  And, no, I think I got it in Jet magazine.  'Cause Jet would come out and show you those things that were happening.  And they talked about how this young black kid had gone down, and he had whistled at a white woman [Carolyn Bryant], and then came up dead.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I just wondered what the news sources were 'cause I imagine there was no television down there before the electricity got there. So that'd be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  It was--I believe it was Jet magazine.
Story_ID: 536567
Speaker 1: Did you get any of the papers, black papers down there, or?
Speaker 2: No.  There's something that used to happen.  My grandfather [Heidelberg's paternal great-grandfather, John Lyons] joined, I think, it was a Mason or something and he subscribed to this magazine.  And there was a white lady that used to intercept all his magazines and cut the, because his daughter worked for her, and she would take the magazines and cut the things out she didn't want him to see, and give it back to the mailman and he'd deliver it.  So when he got his magazine, stuff that--I mean, she did her own censoring.  And we knew she--
Speaker 1: This was a white woman at the post office?
Speaker 2: No.  She was just a regular person then that my grandfather's daughter worked for.  My aunt.
Speaker 1: So his mail would come to them first, or something?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Then she'd work for her, and she saw it.  And she would take scissors, or whatever, and cut articles out she didn't want him to see.  So she censored his mail.  But you couldn't say anything about it, because you'd end up in jail, somebody'd break in and beat you, and those kind of things happened.  I mean you--people may not talk about it, but I'm one of those people, I don't believe in holding things back.  Just tell the truth.  And put it out there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well these are the ugly details.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was very ugly.  And we knew, we knew it was her, the lady that was doing it, because, as I said, my grandfather's, great-grandfather's daughter, my aunt, worked for the lady and she saw it.  And saw her do it.
Speaker 1: What a world.
Speaker 2: So you had to be careful about everything.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What you said, where you went.
Story_ID: 536568
Speaker 1: Was there ever a time when you, when you thought you might be in trouble?
Speaker 2: Well, my mouth sometimes. (Laughter) 'Cause I'd say things.  And I had to be very careful.  And, yes, I was down in Shubuta [Mississippi] one time, and we used to have separate drinking fountains.  And you could, you had to drink out of certain fountains.  And I didn't understand that.  If I want some water, why can't I just go ahead and drink out of one of the fountains?  And I remember a white gentleman took his dog and held the dog up and let the dog drink out of the fountain.
Speaker 1: Out of the black fountain?
Speaker 2: No, the other fountain.  Let me know that I couldn't drink out of that, but his dog could.  I remember seeing that.  And sometimes you'd walk on the other side of the street, when a white person walked on one side of the street, you walked on the other side.  'Cause you didn't want to get in trouble.  You didn't want anything going off.  You know, this is like nitroglycerine.  You don't want to shake it.
Speaker 1: That's a--during that same period of time, I mean, people worked for white people in their homes--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: --helped them on the farms, all kinds of--what were those relationships like?
Speaker 2: You were a servant.  'Cause my grandmother [Heidelberg's paternal great-grandmother, Lecrecia Lyons] used to walk miles to wash clothes so that we'd have enough lunch money.  She made--I ate lunch every day.  I knew other kids who went there, even I was in the junior high, and high school [Riverview High School, Waynesboro, Mississippi].  My grandmother worked--walked sometimes ten miles one way and ten miles back, and washed clothes in a wash pot.  Make a dollar, two dollars a day because my, you know, she raised me as well as some of her other grandkids and all.  She just, she would go get kids and raise them.  You know, I heard a story here just the other day, today as a matter of fact.  This lady saying how she's a grandmother, how she's raising fifteen kids, I believe it was.  And my grandmother was like that.  She just raised--she raised my dad [K.P. Heidelberg], she--after my dad's mom [Lillie Lyons] died, she raised all of them.  And she'd raise--I had cousins, and uncles, and you know.  A lot of, you know, relatives that lived under our roof.  And she would just raise them all, take care of them.
Story_ID: 536569
Speaker 1: Now, we were, we were talking about school.  Now, where did you go after the sixth grade?
Speaker 2: After the sixth grade, I went to McGill junior high school [McGill School, Shubuta, Mississippi], and it was just outside Wayne [Wayne County, Mississippi].  That was in, what'd they--place they called Altal.  A-L-T-A-L, I think.  We always called it Altal.
Speaker 1: A-T--
Speaker 2: A-L-T-A-L.  Altal.
Speaker 1: A-L-T-A-L.  Altal, okay.  All right.  So this was the county junior high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a--yes.  And it was two grades.  It was sixth and seventh.  I mean, seventh and eighth, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay, seventh and eighth, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  And then from there we went to a school called Riverview High School in Waynesboro, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: How far away was that from your home?
Speaker 2: Gee whiz.  You're looking at about thirty miles.
Speaker 1: And a bus would have to--you'd have to take a bus to--
Speaker 2: I'd have to catch two buses.  I'd take one bus from my home and go down to this Altal school, McGill.  It was called McGill junior high.  McGill School.  And I'd leave, I'd catch another bus at McGill and go to Riverview in Waynesboro.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I'd come back and do the same thing on the way back.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you had a lot of riding on the bus, I guess.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Those old dusty buses, and go right past the white school.
Story_ID: 536570
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I loved history.  I love history, you know.
Speaker 1: What part of history?  Or what about history fascinated you?
Speaker 2: Learning about myself.  Learning about the country.  There wasn't a whole lot about black people.  I mean, when I was growing up, all you heard about was Booker T. Washington.  How he took peanuts and made so many things.  Not, not Booker T., George Washington Carver (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) George Washington Carver.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.  How he took a peanut and made so many things.  And then you learned about Booker T. Washington, how he made a famous statement one time about we can be like the hand--
Speaker 1: Separate as the fingers?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Separate as the fingers social something he had.  And you didn't hear anything about W.E.B [W.E.B Du Bois], the boy that was up here against what Booker T. Washington was teaching, but those were the two blacks that you heard about.  And as far as your books, you never heard about any other blacks.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  But was there any other part of the history that you liked?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I loved reading about the Revolutionary War, and I loved reading about America, how it had evolved from when, you know, from the thirteen colonies and that kind of thing.  And then I, and I loved reading about--
Story_ID: 536571
Speaker 1: My folks [Heidelberg's paternal great-grandparents, Lecrecia Lyons and John Lyons] were--that's another thing about them.  They were very political.  Very political.  Even though they couldn't vote, they could tell you who the president was, and they could tell you about the makeup of the government.  You know, the three branches of the government and those kind of things, and I kept very close watch on the presidency.  And they were very concerned because I was born during the--in 1944, when you're looking at World War II [WWII], and when they came out with the, what was it?  The atomic bomb, everybody was scared out of their wits that we were looking at World War III and Armageddon and that kind of thing.  So people were very scared about that.  So I heard a lot of that.  And I heard, 'cause my cousin had gone in the [U.S.] Army, my dad's [K.P. Heidelberg] brother had gone in the Army, and so, everybody thought, well, you know, that was gonna be a thing.  My dad's other brother was in the [U.S.] Air Force.  We all felt like we should go to the [U.S.] military.  And that was a way out.  That was a job.  That was an education, you could get out of the United States and visit other countries, so that was kind of a--what's the word I'm looking for?  That was an escape from being out there in the woods in the country all your life.  You'd get to go someplace and see other things.
Story_ID: 536572
Speaker 1: History taught me about politics, you know.  And it, and it gave me a better view of what the country was about.  And I knew it wasn't all about just, you know, blacks being in that position of servitude.  And I saw what other people were doing.  And I'd ask questions.  "Why can't we all--we're all Americans, why can't we do these thing?"
Speaker 2: Now was there any talk on--I guess you would have been about twelve or thirteen when the Montgomery Bus Boycott reached the news?  Did you all know about that?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  We knew about that.  As a matter of fact, there was something strange, and we had, I was in, I think, was it ninth or tenth grade?  Maybe it was tenth grade, and we were all voting.  And my folks [Heidelberg's paternal great-grandparents, Lecrecia Lyons and John Lyons] were, you know, ever since [President] Abraham Lincoln, everybody was a Republican.  You know, just the opposite of what it is.  They just changed parties, changed the names and switched parties.  They were Republicans and one of the things they said, one of the reasons they always voted for Republicans was Democrats always started wars.  And nobody wanted a war.  So I felt like I as a Republican.  I remember we had this, and I believe it was in tenth grade, and it was in my history teacher's class, and she and I was very close.  She was a very sweet lady.  And Mrs. Ulmer was her name.
Speaker 2: Can you spell that?
Speaker 1: U-L-M-E-R.
Speaker 2: U-L--
Speaker 1: M-E-R.  Mrs. Ulmer.  And she was an inspiration in my life, as well.  She taught my uncles and some other people, and she'd been a principal at that McGill School [Shubuta, Mississippi].  So anyway, she, she knew a lot of my family members.  But anyway, we had this mock vote, that you vote for who wants to be president.  And John Kennedy [John Fitzgerald Kennedy], understand, was running against Richard Nixon [Richard Milhous Nixon].  And so I was the--we all turned in the votes, and asked each person how did they vote?  And they all voted for John Kennedy.  I voted for Richard Nixon.  And I--oh man, did I catch it.  "What do you mean you voted for Richard Nixon?"  And she says, "Wait a minute, wait a minute.  He has the right to vote for whomever he please, you know, in this mock vote."  She says, "But please, tell us why you did that."  And I told her, I said, "Well, because Democrats always start wars."  You know?  And so I voted for the Republican, and Richard Nixon was a Republican.  And so they began to explain things to me about John Kennedy and all of that and how he had, I think he had visited Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in jail [sic.] and the things that were going down.  Now, they were more, you know, more astute than I was, they were more knowledgeable about the candidates.  And so that made me even, you know, more determined to learn history as I did.  And so, yeah.  I remember the, the race between Kennedy and Nixon.  And I also remember the race with Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower], 'cause my folks, if they could have voted, they would have voted for Eisenhower.  And before him, you know, Franklin Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt].  We knew about Franklin Roosevelt and what he had done with the--Mrs. Roosevelt [Eleanor Roosevelt] with the airmen down in--what was the school?
Speaker 2: At Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Tuskegee, yes.  And Mrs. Roosevelt going up in the plane and all that, so we knew about those things, you know?  We, there were ways that you could find out things.  So you didn't have to read it in a book.  You could find it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Not like the slaves.  They communicated.  They couldn't read and all of that, they knew how to communicate.  So people got, got word of mouth.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So this was 1960, I guess you were a sophomore in high school [Riverview High School, Waynesboro, Mississippi]?
Speaker 1: I'm--well, yeah I believe it was. 'Cause I left, I left and joined the [U.S.] Air Force in 1962.  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --it would have been, yeah, '60 [1960].
Story_ID: 536573
Speaker 1: Did you participate in things like student government, or did you have that, or--what kind of things--did you have sports teams?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  They had sports, and at McGill [McGill School, Shubuta, Mississippi], I used to try to play basketball, and so I wasn't very good at it so they made me the coach.  So I would organize basket- you know, I formed a basketball team.
Speaker 1: So they made you the coach?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I formed the basketball team.
Speaker 1: As a student?  You're the, you're the--
Speaker 2: I was the coach.  Because, we didn't, you know, we didn't have organized sports at school.  So I organized at McGill junior high school, I organized a basketball team and so I would call these other schools that I'd--you know, the Shubuta [Shubuta School, Shubuta, Mississippi] where I'd gone.  And we would go play them.  Even though we were, you know, we were like a high school playing college.  We would go play games, and we even played to the Waynesboro [Waynesboro Vocational High School], which became Riverview [Riverview High School, Waynesboro, Mississippi] when I attended.  But yeah, we went on the road and played games, and then there was a superintendent and she came over and organized some games, but yeah.  I was very instrumental in that.  When I got to Riverview, I wanted to play football.  I fell in love with football.  And, but I only weighed about 118 pounds.  And so the coach would always tell me, "Well, why don't you try out for the basketball team?"  And then after that, "Why don't you try out for the football team?"  And I remember going out for the football team, and somebody knocked me, I don't know where, and the shoes I was wearing.  They had old dilapidated equipment that I was trying to practice in, cut my foot, and I says, "Enough of that."  And he says, "Well why don't," you know, "join the band."  And I was already in the band.  But yeah, I played in the band.  I was very good.
Speaker 1: What did you play?
Speaker 2: Tenor saxophone.
Speaker 1: Tenor saxophone?
Speaker 2: I was very good.  I used to rock them in the stands.  As a matter of fact, the first year I went, my freshman year, and I'd never seen a saxophone other than a picture.  And I picked up a saxophone, and the next day I came back playing it.
Speaker 1: Well, that's an aptitude.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I loved it.  I loved it.
Speaker 1: It wasn't hard to play the reed or anything?
Speaker 2: No.  I took it home--I saw it, took it home, brought it back the next day, and all the songs that I could hear on the radio at that time, I would get up in the stands when people would come to play basketball, and I'd play all by myself.
Speaker 1: Did you play like, well, was it mostly march music, or popular music?
Speaker 2: No, it's like the R&B type stuff they had, you know.  Yeah, 'Red River Rock' and all those songs, and anything that I heard, you know, I could just play it.  And I was reading music.  I was in the band.  But I would just play it from ear.  Actually, joined a band and played for a while.  Couldn't sing, but I--
Speaker 1: So you played in a local band?
Speaker 2: Yeah, local band.  I actually played sax.
Speaker 1: Teenagers?
Speaker 2: No, there was some--yeah, there were some other people that were, there were some that were older than me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were there very many clubs or joints around where people could play?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had those places back out in the woods where you could drink the moonshine and all that other stuff. (Laughter) Yeah, you'd go to those places.  People would come out and buy whatever.  The juke joints out in the woods, you'd get high, and, you know, and listen to the music.  And we'd have a band, a guy with a guitar, a lead guitar, a bass guitar, drums, and I'd have the saxophone.  And then we'd play.  Didn't make any money, but we'd play.
Story_ID: 536574
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-two [1962], you're a senior in high school [Riverview High School, Waynesboro, Mississippi].
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yes.
Speaker 1: And, now--
Speaker 2: That was to be my, that was to be my senior year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you made it to be a senior, so I assume you're doing pre- you're doing well?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was doing--as a matter of fact, I only needed a few, what do you call it, points to graduate, you know?  Credits, I guess is what I'm looking for the word.  And my, as a matter of fact, after I went into the [U.S.] Air Force, and my history teacher, when I came back on leave, she says, "Why don't you take your thirty days and finish up your education?  You know, you only need a few credits."  I was, "No, I don't think I want to go to school." (Laughter) I just got out of, you know. I just came from overseas, I'm out of basic training and all that.  And I'm like, I want to rest for these thirty days.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your cousin showed you, you know, sent you postcards--
Speaker 2: My uncle.  My uncle was in the Air Force (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and materials.  Oh, your uncle.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was talking about how great it was, and I wanted to wear that uniform.  I won't lie to you.  I wanted to--he came home and I saw that, and you know, and, and girls like you when you wear it.  Back then, girls like you if you had a uniform.  Another thing, if you're in the [U.S.] military, you had a dollar or two.  And you could get the girls, and there was a lot of pride.  I mean, those guys stood out and your chest was all reared--stuck out and your head all reared back.  And I wanted to do that.  But I didn't, I didn't see it for what it really was.  See, the Air Force was a job.  I thought it was all fun and games.  And once you get in there, it's like eight to five, eight to five [o'clock], you know, job that you had.  You have to work when you're in the Air Force.  It's not all fun and games.
Story_ID: 536575
Speaker 1: So how far into your senior year [at Riverview High School, Waynesboro, Mississippi] were you when you left?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'd been promoted to the twelfth grade.  And I, I left after my, my junior year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you didn't even get to the senior (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't even attend the last year. But I had --
Speaker 1: But you just had a couple of credits to go?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had credits, and a few more credits, and I could have graduated.
Speaker 1: So, so did you join up that summer?
Speaker 2: I believe it was, as soon as we got out of school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: It was in April, I believe it was, April.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So the spring.
Speaker 1: So where were you stationed first?
Speaker 2: You know, you go to basic training in San Antonio [Texas].  I got a chance to go to Turkey.  We was Incirlik Air Base in Turkey, and I left there and went to, I believe it was Kaneda [sic. Kadena Air Base, Japan]--Nahaia [sic. Naha Air Base] base in Okinawa [Japan].  While I was there, I went down to Vietnam, volunteered to go down there for a while.  And came back, and, yeah, those were my bases.
Speaker 1: Vietnam in those days, they were just moving to the--
Speaker 2: It was hot.
Speaker 1: The war stage, yeah.
Speaker 2: I was, I was stationed in Saigon [Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam] during the war [Vietnam War].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: And this was strictly volunteer.
Speaker 1: 'Cause before, I know they were calling the U.S. presence observers and so forth, but I think by '62 [1962] they were really--
Speaker 2: Now this was '60 [1960]--no this wasn't '62 [1962], this was '65 [1965].  This was about '64 [1964], yeah.  Believe me, the war was going on.  I was there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was really--now what did you--how long were you in Saigon?
Speaker 2: Two months.  It was, it was strictly volunteer, and I went on temporary tour of duty, and so I was there for two months.
Speaker 1: Any, any stories from that tour of duty?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, when we went down, I had a white friend of mine, Buddy [ph.] and we were very close.  We went everywhere together, we were like twins.  And we would go downtown to Saigon and hang out, and drink (laughter) and get sloppy drunk sometimes.  And we'd have guys, some Vietnamese, drive by and snatch our money out of--there was a club downtown that we used to go to.  And they'd drive by and snatch our money out of our hands on motorcycles.  I don't know if you've seen that or not, where the guy comes down on a motorcycle and takes somebody's camera?  'Full Metal Jacket' is an idea of that.  When I see that, and I love watching war pictures, and when I see that, I remember, you know, when I was down there, and how they came back and snatched the money out of our hand and gave us the finger while they were going down an alley (laughter).  Those kind of things, but then he wanted, we--after we had volunteered together, we could have stayed down some extra time.  And I told him I was gonna stay.  And while, while he was not with me, I went and told them, "No, I think I want to go back."  This is, this is war down here.  I didn't know what I was getting into, you know.  So, when he got back to Okinawa, he said, "Man, you lied to me."  He said, "I thought you were gonna stay with me."  But anyway, that was, that just, those brought back memories.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So where did you go after Saigon?
Speaker 2: Back to Okinawa.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you finish your tour in Okinawa?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. I finished the tour there.
Speaker 1: All right.  So were you in two years?
Speaker 2: No, I was in, what?  Almost four years in the [U.S.] Air Force.
Speaker 1: So you got out in '66 [1966] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I got out early.  I spent some extra time in Turkey when I was over there, and so, and I got--my grandfather [Heidelberg's paternal great-grandfather, John Lyons] died and I came back and it used up some time, so I guess if it's a convenience to the government, they let you out early if you don't have enough time to stay in.
Story_ID: 536576
Speaker 1: Did you get out [of the U.S. Air Force] in '66 [1966], was that it?
Speaker 2: I believe it was in sixty--yeah, the early part of '66 [1966], I believe it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what happened when you, when you got out?
Speaker 2: That (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you have a plan to--
Speaker 2: No.  Know what?  I just kind of drifted around and--
Speaker 1: Did you come back to Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  No, I actually went to Mobile, Alabama, where my uncle lived.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And I was hanging around there trying to make up my mind as to what I wanted to do, and it's very strange.  After you've gone overseas, and you've gotten a taste of freedom, you see what life can be like and then you come back to Mississippi and everything, you're right back in that same pot that you were in before.  And now I've got to decide, you know, do I want to stay here? What do I want to do with my life, and pretty much all over.  I mean, unless you--jobs were hard to come by.  And I'd go out and apply for certain jobs, and they'd turn you down for whatever reason, you know.  And I was kind of, I only weighed about 160 pounds, so you couldn't do that heavy lifting on some of the jobs that you would get that paid you good money.  And I'd go down and apply for jobs for auto salesmen, and they'd turn you down real nicely.  And so, and then I left and went to Albany, New York for a little while, for a couple of months, and stayed with some relatives up there.  And then I saw that it wasn't much different up there unless you had skills or unless you had something, and the guy told me to come back and go to school and whatnot.  So I came back, and then went to Laurel [Mississippi].  I left Mobile and went to Laurel.  And while I was there, you know, I wasn't doing anything reliable.  Trying to play in the band, there was no money being made there, and I was just kind of--and my life was just slipping away.  And so I went down into Pascagoula, Mississippi and started--went to school to become a ship fitter, or a boilermaker.
Speaker 1: Now, what school was this?
Speaker 2: This was, this is a school that they--I can't think of the name of the school.  But you went to, I believe it was Jackson County Junior College [Gautier, Mississippi], you know, to learn skills better.  And so they taught you how to, you know, be a ship fitter.  So I learned how to weld and burn and I became a hatch specialist at Ingalls shipyard [Ingalls Shipbuilding] in Pascagoula, Mississippi.  And while there, you know, in the wintertime, it was really cold out there on those ships.  I mean, you're on top of that steel and whatnot.  Or when it was hot, you were down in the hatches and that kind of thing.  It was a good job, it paid good.  But I wanted something different, I always had that love--people told me that I talked so much, and I talked pretty good, I should be a disc jockey.  So one night at--my uncle and I and my ex-wife, we went out to this club and this guy was sitting there.  He worked at a local radio station and he was there playing music.  And my uncle told me how much he was doing.  He was doing what you call a record hop, where you spin the music for people to dance.  And he told me how much this guy made, and I said, "My goodness.  I need to make this money."  So one night I was lying there, we were boarding with this old lady.  And I was lying there, and it was hot, the air conditioning had gone out, and John Richbourg was on WLAC [WLAC Radio] talking about this radio school in Nashville [Tennessee].  That was air conditioned and how they would teach you how to become a disc jockey and find you a job.  Even find you a place to live while you were up here going to school.  And I thought, that is for me.  So I hopped the bus, and left my family down there, hopped a bus and came to Nashville until I could get myself situated, and brought my family up.
Story_ID: 536577
Speaker 1: Were you married by this time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you skipped that part.
Speaker 2: I skipped a part, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: When did you meet your wife?
Speaker 2: I believe it was '67 [1967].  Well, no it was sixty--as soon as I got out of the [U.S. military] service.  It was '67 [1967], I think it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was she from Mobile [Alabama], or--
Speaker 2: No.  She was from Laurel [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So by this time you had some children too?
Speaker 2: She was pregnant with my oldest son [Roderick Heidelberg].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So it was the three of you then?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you went to, you went to see about this position at--
Speaker 2: Yeah. I called them and--
Speaker 1: --the radio school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and asked them about, for some literature and what not, and then I talked to the guy and I says, "You know what, I want to go to, I want to go to this radio school."  And I went to Chicago [Illinois], you know, I wanted to see and I went up and talked to my mom [Lillian Bounds] for a while.  And I didn't like Chicago, it was too cold.  And I'm not used to this and it was--the city was too big for me.  'Cause I'm a small town boy.  And so I stopped back, and I went back home, then I came back and I said, "Well, I'm going to Nashville [Tennessee]."  So I came to Nashville to go to radio school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did they take the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] money or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And that was a good thing.  That even helped me through college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was this the time when you met John Richbourg?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was going to radio school.
Speaker 1: He let you holler back to--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Yeah.  I talked to my wife, and kids, and all those other people.  Then all of the people, and that was a thrill.  I can't tell you how thrilling that was.
Speaker 1: Did they hear you that night?
Speaker 2: I think one or two people may have heard me, you know, and talked about it.  But most people listened at night.  I don't think my family did, but it was great.  It was great to sit there and talk to those people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how was radio school?  Was it what you thought it was gonna be, or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  It pretty much was.  We had this guy named Mr. Baird [ph.], and he had this--he's still around.  And he had this deep voice.  And we would come to radio school and we basically did a lot of enunciating and reading, and voice control and those kind of things.  And it basically was, and then I wanted--everybody wants to get behind the microphone.  You want to be that super deejay behind the microphone.  But you have to learn the basics of radio, so we learned those things that we should do, and learned how to read a commercial, and again, the basics of radio.
Story_ID: 536578
Speaker 1: Did you have to change your voice much to--?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My voice has pretty much been this way.  My voice was like this because when I was a child, I remember when my uncle, my granddad's, [paternal] great-granddad's brother, they got a television.  And they had the only television in the neighborhood.  And we kids, we'd go out there and they'd have to run us home at night.  And I remember seeing this Western, and I don't know if it was 'Gunsmoke' or what it was, but it was a Western.  And this old drunk would come to town, and you'd see him in the, in the saloon.  And he was almost Shakespearean.  And just perfect grammar, and great enunciation, and he was, he was a bum.  And he wore this big stovetop, top hat that he would have on.  And they were just buying him liquor, they were just buying him drinks.  And at night, he'd get drunk and stagger outside and in the Old West, they had these, you know, these high walkways that you had to step down on the steps to get to the ground.  He'd crawl under the steps and sleep.  Now, the next morning, the next day, he'd get up, dust himself off, go right back into the saloon, and they'd buy him a new crop of--cowboys or whatever, and would come in and buy him drinks.  And, and the lesson was learned then people judge you by the way you speak.  It was all because of the way he spoke.  That resonated with me, and that stayed with me.  And I told myself it doesn't matter how--if you could be the stupidest person in the world, but if you can put together a great sentence and you can enunciate and you can, and you're articulate, then people tend to think that you're a very intelligent person.  That may or may not be the case.  So that stuck with me.
Story_ID: 536579
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I was determined that I was gonna use that. So I started at that very time wanting, learning how to enunciate certain words, and I wanted to make sure that I used proper grammar and I got teased for it.  Because while all the other kids in the neighborhood spoke Ebonics for the most part, and even other people around.  And I was, I was teased (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I know what they said. They said you're trying to be proper.
Speaker 1: You're trying to be proper and you're trying to be white.  I got teased a lot, a whole lot.  But I never gave it away.  I never gave up on it.
Speaker 2: And how that comes to be an insult is amazing.  You're trying to be proper.  I've heard people from Mississippi say that.  It is.  You're trying to be proper.
Speaker 1: You're trying to be proper, you're trying to be white.
Speaker 2: You're getting sadity.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you're sadity.  What's wrong with you?  And even when I got out of the [U.S. military] service and I came back and applied for unemployment, I went up to the lady there, and she was a southern white lady.  She was behind the counter, and she says, "So and So," and she couldn't believe that she heard this black guy speaking this way.  And she would call the people, "Come here, listen to this Yankee.  Say something for me."  It was like I was a parrot, and I was supposed (laughter)--it very strange.  So anyway, I caught it from both sides.  And I actually went to Laurel [Mississippi], I was here [Nashville, Tennessee] in radio school.  That was another story.  And I went to Laurel to, you know, see my wife and kid [Roderick Heidelberg].  And while I was there, you know, I says, "Well, you know what?  I'm gonna apply for a job at this radio station while I'm here."  So I call up the local radio station and ask him if they had any vacancies, and the guy says, "Oh yes.  I have a vacancy.  I got a part time job."  And I told him I was going to radio school and how I knew Roy Ac- you know, Roy Acuff and Dolly Parton and all those people.  And so he says, "Yes, come on up."  So he has this radio station in a trailer.  So I put on my pinstriped suit, and I go up and knock on the trailer door and this young white female comes to the door.  And she just stands there with her mouth open.  So it took her about, I guess, thirty seconds before she got her composure.  And I says, "I'm [HistoryMaker] John Heidelberg.  I came up to see Mr. So and So about the job."  I knew I wasn't gonna get it.  But I wanted to see what happened.  So finally, she went in and she stayed in there for about, I guess, about five minutes, and finally she came out, and she sat down, she was smiling.  And he came out, "Hello John.  How you doing?  Tell us so and so."  And he proceeded to tell me about how he couldn't hire me because the good old boys would blow up his place, and it didn't matter if they blowed his place up, he just didn't want me getting killed and he already, and you know.  The long story about why he couldn't hire me and that there was this black station down in Mobile [Alabama] or someplace.  And I says, "Well, I'm still in radio school."  But he had no idea I was black.
Speaker 2: Now, did this, this--it seems to me that this would creep up over and over again, with a name like John Heidelberg.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Most people wouldn't, probably wouldn't guess that you're black unless they saw you.
Speaker 1: I was working on an FM station, it was a big station here in town, and we had to go through that FCC [Federal Communications Commission] process.  And one of the guys that were trying to get a station, a black guy, told him that I was black.  'Cause a name like Heidelberg, because he heard my voice.  And he swore that I was some white guy until he saw me.  And then he says, "I told you the guy was black."  But a lot of people didn't.  A lot of people don't know that.  And that's been--it's been a plus in some instances, and it's been a negative because when I took over, when I bought VOL [WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee], even though I was a jockey [disc jockey] at one time, most people didn't know I was black.  And some people out there still don't know I'm black.
Speaker 2: So in the black community, there are some confusion, they actually think you're white.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  There's still some blacks that still don't know I'm a black guy.
Speaker 2: That's interesting, I can see them at a community meeting saying, white man owns the--
Speaker 1: But see, the strange thing is, and they were saying some white guy owns this station, so a lot of people were--I don't know what the deal was.  But it was, you know.  A white guy owned it.  That's who I bought it from, a white guy (laughter).  So people are very strange, you know.  People go through a lot of changes.  You know, it's like, what difference does it make?  Just because she's trying using the King James English, what's wrong with that?  And I'm a stickler for that.  I'm kind of like Cosby [Bill Cosby], you know.  I think one of the main things that we should do as the black race is learn to use the English language.  And again, people judge us by the way we speak.  And when we go out there with Ebonics, we lose.  We lose because of our own, you know, own fault.  Let's learn the, let's learn to speak the English language.
Speaker 2: Now, you can understand Ebonics, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: So you're bilingual in that regard.
Speaker 1: Every now and then I'll slip up, I'll slip back into Ebonics. (Laughter) Because if you do it for a long time, I mean, you'll, you'll have those traits.  And sometimes when I'm in a personal setting, but I have to make sure that I get back on that track, and then it becomes a part of you, you know, you speak the English language.
Speaker 2: So it's not like you're throwing that part away--
Speaker 1: No, no, no.
Speaker 2: --but you just know when to use the other part, which is another language in a lot of ways (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, it's a whole, whole new language.  But even, even in personal settings, you know, personal settings, I speak this way all the time.  And I started this as a child.  I got ribbed about it when I was in basic training and when I was in service, you know?  But people, a lot of whites felt comfortable with me because I could communicate to them the way they were communicating with each other.  So they didn't feel uncomfortable with me a lot of times. And--oh, stomach's growling. But that was, and that was a good thing.  I thought it was a very good thing.
Story_ID: 536580
Speaker 1: Well, what happened in the--now how long were you in radio school and what direction did that ta- process take you?
Speaker 2: I think I was in there about ten months, and I used to come out here just about all the time.  'Cause by the end, my ex-wife at the time, my wife at the time was up here, and anytime they had an opening, I would leave the job and come out here even if it was just for one day.  And I'd leave that job--you guys can take this job--and I had a family.  I wanted to get in radio that much.  And eventually they had a part time opening.  And I came out, and the guy, actually the guy told me that I was too good to be part time.  They didn't want to hire me at first, because he said, "You're too good to be part time."  And, but, they had to follow the rules, because they didn't own the station [WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee], they was holding on to their jobs. And what happened was, I filled in.  I started here in 1969 filling in on the weekends making two dollars an hour.  And eventually, they had some guy that was supposed to come in, that they did a big promotion on.  And I think they had a strike or something that was going on here and they fired some people, and then some guy was supposed to come in and they found out he had a bad background or something, and they had an opening.  And guess who was here.  Every time I look around this guy is here.  I wanted the job.  So they gave me a full-time job.
Speaker 1: About what year was it when you started full time?
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969]?  Okay.
Speaker 2: April, I believe it was, m- no it was May of 1969.  I started part time in May of 1969, so it wasn't that long.  Maybe six months later.
Story_ID: 536581
Speaker 1: Now, what did you do on--did you host a show [on WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee] or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I was a deejay for, I think from ten 'til three.  Yeah, ten AM 'til three PM, midday.  Midday shift.
Speaker 1: What kind of music were you playing?
Speaker 2: R&B.
Speaker 1: R&B, okay.  Did you have favorite artists?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I used to love, I used to love very much, Stevie Wonder.  I like James Brown.  James was good, Stevie Wonder, Gladys Knight and the Pips, I loved that music, The O'Jays.  My, my favorite kind of music was the kind of music that made the hair stand up on your back.  I liked that--what you call soul music that just grabs you and took hold of you, you know.  It was kind of like the old gospels that would make you want to shout.  And I like that kind of music.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you weren't the Quiet Storm guy?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't the Quiet Storm type guy.  And I used to wonder why these guys play all these slow songs and all that other stuff.  I just don't hear anything in it.  And people would say, "Well, I just listen to the lyrics."  You know?  And some of the artists, I listen to now, I have a different opinion of them.  But during the time that I was playing the music, I wanted to hear, I wanted to hear Ray Charles, I wanted to hear The O'Jays or Aretha Franklin.  I always did good songs, you know?  And then when The Jackson 5 came out, it was, it was just powerful music.
Speaker 1: Well, they came out that year, '69 [1969], Jackson 5, Stevie was big.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: James Brown was doing 'Say it Loud' ['Say it Loud, I'm Black and I'm Proud'].
Speaker 2: I actually got the interview with James, got to meet his son, Teddy [Teddy Brown], before he passed away.  Interviewed Michael [Michael Jackson] when he was a young, when The Jackson 5 came here and Michael was a young boy.
Speaker 1: So you'd have interviews on the show too?
Speaker 2: No, they'd come here and do--yeah.  And they'd call in, and we'd interview them over the, over the air.  And James was in the studio, so I got to interview James.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you have a certain way you opened your show?   Can you demonstrate how you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. (Laughter) The first day I went on the air, I think I--some people told me I must have said my name a thousand times.  'Cause every time I opened the microphone, I was saying "[HistoryMaker] John Heidelberg."  And one of the things I learned from Bill Perkins, who was the program director, the guy that hired me, was why do you use all these--what do you call it?  AKA's also known as your radio name.  I wanted to use my real name.  And people would say, "What was your radio name?"  John Heidelberg, I always used John Heidelberg, because I was proud of John Heidelberg.  Why shouldn't I use it?  And he--his name was Bill Perkins and some of all the other jocks [disc jockey].  The ones that spoke very well used their real names.  The ones that didn't speak very well, had some, whatever they--(laughter) grab a name over here--
Story_ID: 536582
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were some of the names that were on the radio in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh (unclear), we had a guy named Seventh Son, we had a guy named Knight Snow--
Speaker 1: Knight Snow?
Speaker 2: Knight Snow, yeah.  I gotta story about Knight.  His real name is Reginald Utley [Reggie Utley].  Nice guy.  He lives--he's, he's a--I would listen to him today.  I mean he's, he's the kind of jock [disc jockey] that, like I said, that speaks very well. Bless you.  And he's in California.  And he was here not too long ago and I put him on the microphones and did that.  But you had all kinds of names there, you know?  And then some of them would use maybe their first initial, and their last names, or whatever.  It was kind of--he got the name Knight Snow because we had a guy who came here, it was a white guy.  He was a sales manager and he wanted to put on this great promotion.  And so he told people he was gonna make it snow in the summertime.  It was summer.  And people were saying, "You're gonna make it snow?"  He says, "Yeah, come on out to VOL [WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee] and we're make it snow."  So what they did was they got this guy, he was up on top of the roof at a certain time and he was standing up there with a white suit on and he started throwing all this snow down and it was just a promotional thing.  And he got to be Knight Snow.  And a guy named Soulfinger, and who else?  Some great--all kinds of names.
Story_ID: 536583
Speaker 1: So how would you open your show [on WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee]?  What did you, what did you do?  Did you have a special tune you'd play?
Speaker 2: No, there, there got to a point that I would do that.  There was a song called 'Way Back Home,' and what I would do is I had this thing called roll call.
Speaker 1: Junior Walker, yeah.  Junior Walker [Junior Walker and The All Stars] used to sing (singing) 'Way Back Home.'
Speaker 2: Was it Junior Walker or was it the others (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Singing) Doo doo, doo doo.
Speaker 2: Doo doo doo. I can't think of the name of the group.
Speaker 1: (Singing) Way back home. Doo, doo, doo doo doo. Yeah, that's Junior Walker.
Speaker 2: Could have been.  I thought it was another group.  But we would, I would have these people to, I had a club, I called it To Get it Together Club [ph.].  And they would send in, and I'd take their names and send them a card with my picture on it.  And they would become members, and what I'd do is I'd read these--list of names every day.  I'd do roll call, and the background music would be this 'Way Back Home.' And people used to love that, you know?  And so, and people would have theme songs, but I wanted, one of the things I wanted to do as I got into it, I wanted to get away from that, because I wanted--I didn't care for what black radio was doing, because guys would sit there and play a record and talk all the way through the record.  And when the record would stop, they didn't have a thing to say and you had dead air.  You'd listen to a white station, they were going from one song right into the next, and right into the next.  Sometimes they'd play the song.  They never would talk over the song, they would stop.  And at the end of that record and come in--and especially country, they'd come in, but your middle of the road and some of the other stations, where they'd come in and start the other record and started talking.  And I said, you know, that's great.  Why should you stop the music?  And if you can find a way, if you know the song, you know how long the intro is going to be, just talk over the musical portion of it.  And I never talked over a record.  I didn't want to shove it down and talk, and then let it break and bring it back up.  But that was black radio.  And guys were very good at doing that, and people loved it.  And when I came in, I was an odd ball because I didn't do that kind of thing.  I wanted to change radio.  I wanted black radio to sound like white radio, only we're playing black music.  So I'd been kind of a person that didn't follow the--I marched to a different drummer.  And when I saw things that I thought should be changed, I went after it.
Story_ID: 536584
Speaker 1: How long did you, did you do that ten to three show?
Speaker 2: Well, I did ten to three for a while, and I worked at just about every shift, and then I went to afternoons, three to seven.  Then I went to mornings, six to ten.  I didn't like mornings.  It was too early, six to ten.  And then I did a stint from seven to midnight, seven to midnight at one time.  And I didn't like that either, you know?  And then I had various jobs where I got to be acting music director, and music director, and acting program director, and program director.  And there's so much politics involved in those kind of things, you know.  And I didn't like the politics of it all.  And so eventually, and it got so political, you know, that I eventually left WVOL [WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee].  But during the time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What do you mean political in terms of--
Speaker 2: Well, when you got people in power that don't see things the way you see them, or when you get popular, there are people that don't like your popularity.  I mean, you're stepping on somebody's toes and let's just put it this way, sometimes people would rather see you out of the way than see you--they see you as in their way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is in the same offices, the same station?
Speaker 2: Yeah, here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, I was here for seven years.  And during that time, discovered a young lady named Oprah Winfrey.
Story_ID: 536585
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned a strange name, Oprah Winfrey; what kind of name is that for a person, and where did--
Speaker 2: Oprah said that they spelled it wrong.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) They were meant to say it some other way, but they spelled it wrong.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you met her?
Speaker 2: I discovered her (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, she was a student at what, Tennessee State [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: No, she was a--she was a student in East High School [East Nashville High School; East Nashville Magnet High School, Nashville, Tennessee] when I first met her.
Speaker 1: East High School?  Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I gave Oprah her start.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about it; what happened?
Speaker 2: Are we on now?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, what first happened was Oprah came here [WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee], I believe it was in 1971, and she and a couple of other people, and she was looking for someone to sponsor her in the March of Dimes walkathon.  And I had been out.  I don't know if I was--had gone to lunch or whatever, but I came back and she was just getting ready to leave when the receptionist says, "Here's the guy.  Here's [HistoryMaker] John Heidelberg, and he'll help you."  And so and I spoke with her and she says, "Well, look, here's what I want, and if you will help me.  I'm, I'm--I've entered into the March of Dimes walkathon. And, and we pay--," I don't know how many cents it was, maybe a dime a mile or whatever it was.  "And however many miles I walk, you pay me a dime a mile for that and this goes to the March of Dimes."  And I says, "Okay.  I'll do that."  And so I was getting ready for my shift, afternoon shift and so she left and a few--about a month or so later she came back and said I owed her about eighteen, nineteen dollars or whatever it was. (Laughter) And I was married making about a hundred dollars a week, so eighteen dollars, that was a lot of money for me, you know, but I had promised to give it to her, so I gave it to her.  So while she was here, I started talking with her and she said--and, and she was very articulate.  I mean, this, this young lady's just, just talented, just--and, and her, and her dad [Vernon Winfrey] had done a wonderful job of molding her and, and her stepmom [Barbara Winfrey] and, and, and they made her read books and so you could, you could tell that she was well read.  And I was very impressed with her, and I started asking her about herself.  And she said she was from Mississippi.  And I says, "Well, so am I."  And so talking to her further, I says--I asked her had she ever been interested in getting into radio and she says no.  And her favorite thing was at home watching 'Leave It to Beaver.'  And so I said, "You know what, I think you'd be very good in radio, and I think you'd make a very good newsperson."  And her father was a very strict man, so she told me I'd have to ask her father to let her do that.  And so I came in and, and spoke with Noble Blackwell, who was the general manager at the time, and I asked--I told him that we've got a very talented young lady out here and I think she'd make a very good newsperson.  And like I said, I blaze trails, I knocked down doors that weren't open.  And he says--and Noble, in his own gentle way said, "Well, you handle it.  You take care of it."  So I went into the newsroom and, and some had followed me and, and, and we had UP--what is it, UPI [United Press International]?  Whatever was teletype, and I got some copy and asked her to read the stuff.  And then I asked some other people, you know, "Hey, listen to this young lady.  This--she is so talented."  Everybody came in just to hear her read, and she did very well.  And so I started talking to Noble, I started talking to Mr. Blackwell's secretary [Ollie Pearson (ph.)]. She was a sweet white lady in the back and she said, "Well, John, you know, let's just get in touch and, and talk with her dad and see if we can get her out here."  And so after about a couple weeks, we talked him into letting her come out and she would, you know, after school 'cause she was a senior in high school.  And she would come out and fill in and, and do stories and whatnot; and then eventually, she got to be the, the anchor.  She started doing newscasts, and she was very good and we would work with her, I would work with her a lot.  And, and during that--
Speaker 1: This is while she was still in school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so eventually, you know, when she got of age, I think they let her come--they--she was eighteen at the time when they had to hire--when they hired her.  And so there was some times that people didn't want her doing that because people felt like they had paid their dues.  I've been in this business a long time and it's a male, you know, bastion, it's a male field and we just don't let women come off the street and get a job in here; we don't do that, you know.  And so she would come to me sometimes and I'd tell her, "Don't worry about it.  I'll take the heat; you just do the job."  And I did it, I took the heat.  And there was always something said or somebody's doing something or maybe a memo was written or something and I says, "Don't you worry about it, I'll take the heat," and I took the heat.
Story_ID: 536586
Speaker 1: I imagine she was one of the only women on the air?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, doing that kind of thing.  We had women, I think, would--there was a lady named Dana Davidson, a very sweet lady and a la- she's deceased now, but she's partially responsible for my, you know, leaving here [WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee] and going to another station [WSM Radio, Nashville, Tennessee] and coming back and owning the station; I give her credit for that.
Speaker 1: She was a disc jockey?
Speaker 2: Oh, she--no, she was, she was the copywriter, but she was a very sweet lady, very sweet.  I owe her a lot.  She would say, "Well, John [HistoryMaker John Heidelberg], do this or do that," and, and, of course, Ollie Pearson [ph.], who was Mr. Blackwell's [Noble Blackwell] secretary, personal secretary back there, she worked very diligent with us.  So when, when things would get rough, we'd, we'd talk to her or we'd talk to them and find out, you know, where do we go from here?  How do we deal with this?  And that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But in terms of on air personnel, this was--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  And--
Speaker 1: Was she the only on air personnel (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Her name was Lottie Sweat [ph.] and, and radio name was Dana Davidson, she did--she would do a show, but it was like gospel, but as far as just doing news, Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] was the first person to just sit there and do news like that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it--most men were doing it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was Dana Davidson's on air name?
Speaker 2: That was her on air name, Dana Davidson--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but her real name was Lottie Sweat.
Story_ID: 536587
Speaker 1: So did she continue after high school [East Nashville High School; East Nashville Magnet High School, Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and she started college at Tennessee State [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], and she worked here while she was going to Tennessee State.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she had a regular job here while she was going to school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, while she was going to school.
Speaker 1: That was a good deal.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was a good deal, yeah.  And her--you know, as I told people, I was the catalyst, you know.  I, I opened the doors, I made sure she got in and got that opportunity [at WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee] and, you know, whatever I could--support I could offer her and, and that.  But she didn't need a whole lot 'cause she can read very well, she was very articulate and she had on air presence, so she could just jump in there and, and just take over and, and do it if she didn't have any pressure from outside or anybody bothering her, and that's what she did; I made sure of that (laughter). She had that opportunity.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories about Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey] stay here that--
Speaker 2: No.  What, what most I think I've told--a lot of people have been here to interview me.  I told people what they don't understand about Oprah is Oprah has a sense of humor and she can tell some jokes. (Laughter) Some jokes sometimes were very funny.  But no, it was just--I, I think the thing was what happened was when, when Oprah--she got a, she got a call from Channel 5 [WLAC-TV; WTVF-TV, Nashville, Tennessee], and I think Bill Perkins, at the time, was working at Channel 5 as a public service director and he knew Chris Clark over at Channel 5.  And at the time, they were beginning to integrate and they were looking for blacks to integrate all media, you know, television and radio, as well as other media.  And word was that she came to me and she says, "John [HistoryMaker John Heidelberg], I need to talk to you."  And she says--and I says, "Okay.  Talk to me."  She said, "Well, can we get in the--can we get in the car?  Let's, let's ride up to the capitol."  So I had a car, a Stingray convertible [Chevrolet Corvette Stingray] at the time, I says, "Okay."  So we get in my convertible, let the top down and we drive up to the state capitol 'cause I thinks she worked up there as a page.  And I said, "Well, what is it?  What's going on?"  And she says, "Well, I just got a call from Chris Clark, and he wants me to come to Channel 5 to be a reporter."  I says, "Really?"  And she says, "Yeah."  And she says, "I--you know, you've done so much for me, and I don't want to leave."  And I says, "What did I tell you when you came here?  I told you to use this as a steppingstone," and I had told her that, "and whenever an opportunity comes along," 'cause I knew she was gonna move on, "you take advantage of it."  And so she was crying and, "I don't want to go."  I said, "No.  No.  No.  No.  No.  No.  You don't owe me anything.  Go and take this job.  You had better take this job."  And I think she had talked--spoken with somebody at Tennessee State 'cause she was at State at the time.  And so they told her pretty much the same thing, take advantage of this, don't let this opportunity go.  But she wanted me to know if I didn't want her to go, she wasn't going.  "Yes, you had better take this."  And she asked me to give her--well, I think at, at the time, I had gotten to be active program director, so she says, "Well, will you give my boyfriend my job?  You know, have my boyfriend come in and, and do the job?"  And I knew her boyfriend didn't, you know, didn't have the talent that she had.  And I says, "Well, can he do the job?"  She says, "Yes, he can do the job.  Let my boyfriend come in and try out for this job."  And so I did.  I gave him an opportunity to come in and he did okay but, you know, after Oprah, who, who can follow Oprah with the talent she has.
Speaker 1: It's a tough act, yeah.
Speaker 2: A tough act to follow.
Speaker 1: Tough act to follow.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So she went to Channel 5 in Nashville [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Yes, and became an anchor.  She was the first female anchor in Nashville.
Speaker 1: Was she the first black--
Speaker 2: First anchor--female anchor, if I'm--my memory serves me correct, she was the first female anchor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Female anchor.  Okay.  And was she the first black--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --at the station too?
Speaker 2: As, you know, on air personality, as far as I know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is a time period, I guess we're talking about 1970?
Speaker 2: Seventy--I think this was '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972].
Story_ID: 536588
Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972] or '73 [1973], when this was happening.
Speaker 2: Things were starting to really change in the South (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, things were changing, you know.
Speaker 2: --radically, you know.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: They were coming down here in the early '70s [1970s] and going to a Burger King or something--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and they said, "May I help you, sir?"
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know, this is white people behind the counter--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I said, "Well, this isn't the South I thought it was gonna be."
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: But things were changing--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --a lot.
Speaker 1: I remember the first time I heard someone, I think they were the, the forerunners of the Jehovah Witnesses [Jehovah's Witnesses].  I remember them calling my [paternal] great-grandfather Mister [John Lyons], and I never heard that before and that was early on in my childhood.  But yeah, to, to come someplace and, and see these things happening.  And see, I was in the [U.S.] military during the '60s [1960s], from '62 [1962] up until about '65 [1965], '66 [1966], so I would imagine if I had been out here, I'd got my head busted like some of the other people 'cause I was one of those radicals.  I, I would've pushed a button, you know. Okay, let's see what's gonna happen.
Speaker 2: Well, as far as you know, did SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] or any of the other organizations try to organize--
Speaker 1: I didn't--I didn't know anything about--
Speaker 2: --in Laurel [Mississippi] or any of the towns that you--
Speaker 1: No.  In the military, I was kind of--you know, 'cause when I was in Turkey, I didn't hear a lot about that.  You know, I kept up with fights, Muhammad Ali's fights and stuff like that, but I wasn't, I wasn't into, you know, some of the groups or anything.  The only thing I did when I was in Okinawa [Japan], I did see the Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] march and we got that after it happened, you know, 'cause it was late getting things over there.
Speaker 2: Well, when you were in high school [Riverview High School, Waynesboro, Mississippi], going back, were you aware of the big voter registration campaign of SNCC in '64 [1964]?
Speaker 1: No, I was mostly interested in old history at that time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then I finally got into new history.  As I say, we got a lot of old books.  We--I remember when I was in the tenth grade, we were reading eighth grade books, you know, from some of the other schools that had dropped down, you know.  We got hand me down books, but I, I love to read.  I would read, man, just anything I could get my hands on, I would read it.
Story_ID: 536589
Speaker 1: So '72 [1972], now you're assistant program director you said?
Speaker 2: I came in.  I was like acting program director--
Speaker 1: Acting program--
Speaker 2: --but I--then I got to be hopefully, was program director, yeah.  They'd always give you that job acting so they can snatch you out, if they, (laughter) if they didn't like what you're doing.  You know, back then people were kind of afraid, you know, 'cause if you were a black person, this is probably the only job you--a lot of people couldn't--probably felt like they couldn't go anyplace else, but you know what I told myself?  Why am I in this business if I can't go to another radio station?  I just felt like I could go, if they would give me the opportunity.  I was as good as anybody else behind the microphone; I always felt like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you ever have to go?
Speaker 2: Where?
Speaker 1: I mean, to another station (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: With the politics, you said the station politics--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, the politics got real bad here, and I left in, in '87 [1987], I believe it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I don't want to get--
Speaker 2: --or seven--seventy--I was here for seven--no, was it seven or eight years?  And--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --went to WSM [WSM Radio, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I don't want to fly by those--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --seven or eight years, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what were some of the highlights of those seven or eight years?
Speaker 2: Well, just being behind the microphone and being able to play the music that I love, you know, playing that R&B music.  Getting to meet people and, and, and the attention that you got.  People treated deejays almost like they were rock stars, but I was married and, and I always told myself don't let yourself get so high that it's gonna hurt you when you fall.  So I kept myself on an even keel, but I loved the music and I loved the way I did radio 'cause I thought I was changing the face of radio.  And I'll tell you something about WSM when I went there too, I think I changed that too.  But I, I changed black radio here 'cause pretty soon people started doing--I would--I told the manager one time, Mr. Hudson, Bob Hudson, he's deceased now, and we were, we were going--we went to Wilberforce, Ohio and I called a football game up there, TSU [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] football game.
Speaker 1: Now, this is in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was, this was--
Speaker 1: This is at--
Speaker 2: When I was, when I was here.
Speaker 1: --VOL [WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is here at VOL.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was--we--when we were writing, and we're talking about--well, we were going--and maybe it wasn't that game, it was--maybe it was another game we were going to, Grambling [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] or someplace and we're all riding in the car and I says, "Well, you know what?  I can do so and so--."  Well, I wasn't trying to take someone's job, but I told them, "This is how radio should sound," and he was, he was a stickler for it because he, he was one of those people that he used the King's English and they, they did good radio.  They weren't the kind that--and these guys got to be managers later on, and that's why they got to be managers because they did good solid radio.  They'd listen to other--the media and they wanted to emulate that, you know.  But I got mine from just wanting to be myself.  You know, being around them, I saw, you know, how they'd accomplish, you know, moving up the ladder.  I didn't want to be a, a deejay all the time, I wanted to own my own so I could do it my way and I--when I came here, I started thinking about owning my own radio station.  At some point, I'm going to own my own radio station, and then I can do it the way I want to do it.  I want to change things, but in the meantime, I want to change things here, I want to show people that this thing, we don't have to do it the old way, we can do it the new way.  We can do radio just--and let people respect us just as much as they respect the other radio stations, and I tried my best to change that.  A lot of times your radical people don't like that.  They don't like change.  People don't like change even if it's good, a lot of times; don't like change.  And so I was a changer.  You know, I believe in rocking the boat and pushing the envelope. And I got in trouble a lot of times then.
Story_ID: 536590
Speaker 1: But anyway, I, I left, I think it was 19--there--was it seventy--anyway, I had been here [WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee] for eight years, so I came in six--now maybe it was '76 [1976].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so I got--Dana Davidson told me she knew I was having problems here, and she told me to go over and--I, I went on vacation and, and when I came back they told me I was no longer a deejay, I was gonna have to go into news.  And I says, "I'm not a newsperson.  I don't want to do news."  I love news.  I read the news every day.  I was in there when the wires (unclear) because I wanted to keep informed of what was going on.  And they said, "Well, you know, you're no longer a jock [disc jockey].  You got a choice, you can either go in news or you can find yourself another job."
Speaker 2: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I says, "Well, give me three days to find another job and I'll find another job."
Speaker 2: Now, now this means, from what you described before, it means kind of a loss of income, right, not being a deejay?
Speaker 1: Right, because I--
Speaker 2: Do record hops--
Speaker 1: --could do record hops and all of that.
Speaker 2: Parties and things.
Speaker 1: I had a new home, a wife with a kid.  I just had a kid, my, my third kid, I had a Corvette with, with, with a note, a house note and all of that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the news guy doesn't drive a Corvette.
Speaker 1: No, he doesn't.
Speaker 2: So that's--
Speaker 1: No.  And I was put in that position, and it was kind of a punishment type thing.  They wanted to punish me for whatever.  And I says, "Well, you know, give me a chance to find another job."  You know, I was about to lose my home, even the car, everything.  I was in debt, and it was rough.  And maybe my performance had fallen off, I don't know; a lot of pressure.  But Dana told me about--Dana Davidson told me about this job at WSM [WSM Radio, Nashville, Tennessee] and she knew the guy that was, I think, the--he was with the Tennessee Association of Broadcasters and he was with WSM, he was general manager, and they were looking for a minority to come over and, and fill in, but they were looking part time.  And she says, "It's part time, but go over there," that was the second day.  So I went over and the guy listened to me and he was very impressed and told me, "Not only are we going to hire you part time, we're gonna give you a full time job.  And we got a credit union down here that you can borrow x amount of dollars just on your signature."  So the good Lord was looking out for me.  I was able to save my home, save my car, got another job, made more money, and I stayed with them for twenty-three years.
Story_ID: 536591
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what did you do at WSM [WSM Radio, Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: I started over there as a fill-in on a weekend.  I worked AM and during the week, I worked FM.  I was a lousy FM jock [disc jockey], (laughter) lousy.  And then I did production work.  And so eventually, I went strictly AM on the weekend.  I was a country jock.
Speaker 1: Okay, country.
Speaker 2: And production and eventually, just went full time production.
Speaker 1: And then full time production?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Full time production.
Speaker 1: By production, you mean producing shows?
Speaker 2: The commercials and, and those kind of things, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So you said you were pretty familiar with country music when you were older, yes?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I, I--
Speaker 1: So that's basically what you--
Speaker 2: I knew all--just about all the country artists and I got to meet a lot of them.  And that was another great thrill of my life while I was at WSM, was to go stand at the Opry--at the Opry house [Grand Ole Opry, Nashville, Tennessee] and stand on the stage.  I had gone downtown to the, the Opry house downtown, but to stand on the stage with all those great people and all those years I had listened to Minnie Pearl and Roy Acuff and Lonzo and Oscar, and Jamup and Honey and all those guys and I knew them; and Little Jimmy Dickens and whatnot.  And to go and meet them in person and then to stand on that opera stage behind the microphone, man, that was just was great, you know.  These are the people that you idolize and you hear on the radio and finally you're meeting them in person.  And they're real--you know, you, you put these people on a high pedestal, but you see they're just people, you know.  And Little, Little Jimmy's still here, and I got to meet Grandpa Jones and got my great--my [paternal] great-grandmother [Lecrecia Lyons] an autograph from him 'cause I used to perform out in the park [Opryland USA, Nashville, Tennessee].  I would, I would be out there--not perform, I used to do an air shift on the--when they had the Opryland [Opryland Hotel; Gaylord Opryland Resort and Convention Center, Nashville, Tennessee] and they had a studio out there and people could peek in the window and see in.  And people would drive--you know, walk by and see this black guy behind the microphone; it was just amazing.  I got to make friends, Canadian friends and other friends, they would come by and sit in just to, just to hear on the, on the radio.
Speaker 1: Now, from the--I guess from that period of time, the mid to late '70s [1970s] up to now, country music has been growing by leaps and bounds.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah.  Country used to, used to be the hottest thing in this town.  I mean, it's still--it's making a rebound but, you know, it's--I think commercialization has taken over a lot of genres of music.  And so you look at music--some--sometimes you listen to music now, there's not, not, not like the old music, let's just put it that way, you know.  And some of the old artists, they're having a hard time trying to, trying to stay in the hunt.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us about some of the people that you met along the way.  Now this, Nashville [Tennessee], I guess, is different in some ways from doing an R&B because Nashville isn't considered a R&B center--
Speaker 2: No, it's--right.
Speaker 1: --so much except for WLAC [WLAC Radio, Nashville, Tennessee]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you're right.
Speaker 1: --back in the old days pumping out all the sounds everywhere, but it is the country music capital.
Speaker 2: It's called the, the--yeah, country music--
Speaker 1: It's the country Hollywood.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It really is. Everybody's here (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Main capital of the world.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's called Music City.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And basically, because of country.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  So the stars are here--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and so what was it like meeting all these stars--
Speaker 2: Oh, man.
Speaker 1: --like those you mentioned, Minnie Pearl--
Speaker 2: Like I said, it was great, you know.
Speaker 1: --Little Jimmy Dickens--
Speaker 2: And I--and George Jones is one of my favorite country artists.  George--I mean, it's just soul; you feel it.  When he sings, you know, 'Who's Gonna Fill Those Shoes' [sic. 'Who's Gonna Fill Their Shoes'] and, and those songs, he, he sings it from his heart and you just--you're latched onto every word.  And so I got pictures of George at, at home, you know, and autographed pictures of George and Reba McEntire and I met people like Ronnie Milsap and--excuse me and let's see who else.  Well, of course, Minnie Pearl and Roy Acuff before they passed away.  And let's see, just, just a lot of great artists.  And some of the newer country artists I got to, I got to meet.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think before we started taping I asked you if you had heard of Aford Bailey.
Speaker 2: Yeah, DeFord Bailey.
Speaker 1: DeFord Bailey.
Speaker 2: DeFord Bailey, yes.
Speaker 1: DeFord Bailey.
Speaker 2: I--I've never met him.  As I said, I met his grandchi- grandson, but I never met him, but I heard him on, on the radio.
Story_ID: 536592
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah there aren't many, I know, there aren't many black artists in country. And I think--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --sometimes the black community figures well this is the music of rednecks or the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] or something, but that's not really true, is it?
Speaker 2: No.  Country music was started by slaves.  What people don't realize is country music is, is a black music form.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Explain this (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, back when the slaves were playing, they used to play the banjoes and all those music; yeah, all of that.  And, and artists like Elvis [Elvis Presley] and all of those, they hung around black people and, and some of the country artists, they learned that crap from blacks.  So when, when you hear people out there trying to knock country music, country music, originally, was a black music form, black genre of music and if you go back and study history, you'll see it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But, I mean, it also has like strains of Scotch, Irish and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --other ethnic groups?
Speaker 2: They've, they've added some different things to it.  You know, you got steel guitar and you got all of that and, and for a long time, country music, it wasn't country unless it had a steel gui- guitar in it that made, you know, it, it'd make you want to cry, you know, when you want to hear it, you know.  But then you had artists like Kenny Rogers and Dolly Parton and, and, of course, I got to meet Porter, Porter Wagoner and, and all those artists and, and, and Porter's still around.  You know, Dolly, of course, moved onto a different style, you know, 'cause it used to be Dolly and Porter doing, doing shows.  But--and The Oak Ridge Boys, and they were doing things like that and so it was, it was just great artists.  But, you know, country music is still there, if you listen to it.  I mean, there are a lot of stories in country music, you know, they tell stories a lot of time.
Speaker 1: Right.  That's right, the songs are--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the songs are about--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know, love, lost love or, or lost something or whatever, there's a lot of it and then, then you get a little commercialization in it and it starts to change.  But you don't hear those kind of songs anymore, you, you pretty much hear what's selling.  And then, of course, you hear great artists like the Dix- Dixie Chicks, they're crossover artists; Dixie Chicks sell a lot of records, even among blacks.
Speaker 1: Right.  And they have a political point of view--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as well.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I like that about them, you know, just don't pull no punches, say what's on your mind.
Speaker 1: Now, I guess the contemporary, the only big black contemporary star in country music, I guess, unless there's--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Charley Pride.
Speaker 1: --somebody else, Charley Pride.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I never met Charley, but Charley--you wouldn't know Charley was black un- unless you saw him, and he actually sounds like it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, his hit was 'Kiss an Angel Good Morning.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, (singing), "Kiss an angel good morning," yeah, Charley.  Now, you've had blacks that go in and try to use southern accents and it's so phony and what they, what they don't realize is nobody wants to buy that phony stuff; nobody wants to hear that.
Speaker 1: So there actually have been attempts of blacks to--
Speaker 2: I, I won't call any names, but I've been around some blacks that--
Speaker 1: That tried to break in.
Speaker 2: --that tried to, tried to sound with, with a drawl and when you got to fake it, it, it's not real.  And George [George Jones] doesn't fake his drawl, that's natural, you know.  And, and the other artists, they don't fake it, it's their natural voice.  And I'll tell you one of my favorite music is bluegrass.  Bill Monroe, when he came out and, you know, played bluegrass--
Speaker 1: That's with the banjo (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Emmylou Harris.  Oh, yeah, I love bluegrass.
Speaker 1: Now, that's another thing a lot of people may not be aware that the banjo is actually an African instrument
Speaker 2: It's an African instrument.  That's what I'm saying.  That's why the slaves played it, and it's part of country music; a lot of the major instruments in country music.
Speaker 1: Oh, Ray Charles--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --was also a big hit in country music.
Speaker 2: And see, Ray didn't try to use a drawl, Ray used his and when Ray and oh, was it, Willie Nelson and they did something, you know, Willie's a great singer too and he sings those, those songs.  But yeah, Ray sings country, but he sings it in his natural voice and people love it, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think they explain.
Speaker 2: 'Born to Lose' and all those songs, man, yeah.  Ray, Ray sing it like it's supposed to be sang; like he's supposed to sing it.
Story_ID: 536593
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any favorite stories from those days?  You said for twenty-six years you worked for WSM [WSM Radio, Nashville, Tennessee] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, twenty-six years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, except for when I used to perform in the park [Opryland USA, Nashville, Tennessee].  I mean, I used to do my air shift out of the park, and then they moved it to the hotel [Opryland Hotel; Gaylord Opryland Resort and Convention Center, Nashville, Tennessee] and I'd have people come in and they'd peek through the window and see it.  It's very strange when people, you know, a black guy in country music, you don't expect that, (laughter) that's one of those things, but--
Speaker 1: There's got to be a good story.  Did you have a good conversation with somebody about that?
Speaker 2: There, there was a--yeah, when I first started out at WSM, I had a white guy that works out, out at the--what is it?  Belle Meade Country Club [Belle Meade, Tennessee] or someplace, and (laughter) he called me--he didn't know I was black, so he was talking to me on the phone and he invited me to come out to Belle Meade and he was gonna do all these other things, to come out there and see.  But later on he found out I was black, so I didn't get an invitation out there.  And then I have people call up and say, "You don't sound country, you got to put a drawl in that voice." (Laughter) And those kind of things.  And when I first started in country, they--I kind of--I changed country.  I think I did change country music working at WSM, because what I would do is I did up tempo music.  And I would take somebody like Kenny Rogers and Dolly Parton, and we had a program director that had left, but he had tried to, to make a change also.  He'd have like The Hues Corporation, The 5th Dimension and that kind of thing, and they were mixing that with the other music and, and that, man, oh goodness, gracious.  I went in at that time, so I did country music, even if it was one of those other songs.  If it was an up tempo song, then I tried to keep it up tempo, like I did R&B.  And I, I'd go and ask my--the manager, one of the people, I says, "How am I doing?"  He says, "It's lively.  It's lively." (Laughter) And I says, "Okay."  Yeah.  But I did and, and then they got a guy that came there later on and his music was--he was doing the same type show that I was doing and that got to be--was--I think the, the show was called 'Black and White' [ph.], and I feel like--I don't know if he intended to do it, if that's just the way he did it, but the, they were sounding just like I sound 'cause I, I took the, the format that, that I did as a, as a R&B jock [disc jockey] and, and used on a country format.  And now when you listen to country, that's what you hear.  You know, in the old days they'd say, "Well now here now is Roy Acuff and so--," and they'd talk real slow and, "That was So and So coming up now, in a minute or two and we're going to have So and So."  And I'm like, "That was Roy Acuff with So and So and So and So.  Okay.  Let's go with--," you know, that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 536594
Speaker 1: Yeah, we're talking about these different crossover things, and I was telling you about Bob Wall in Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the most popular black deejay--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the '80s [1980s] except he was white.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you had--you mentioned to me Wolfman Jack.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I, I--when I worked at WSM [WSM Radio, Nashville, Tennessee], they had a, a truckers program at night.  They went out, I guess, over the--not the Internet at the time, but over the airways, and Wolfman would--a syndicated show.  And Wolfman would come into the studio and do his thing.  And I'd always heard Wolfman--I had heard Wolfman doing that [U.S.] Air Force show, a syndicated show, that--and he'd do, "Wolfman," like this and I thought that guy doesn't talk like that, that's just something--it's phony.  But when he come in, "Yeah, baby, I'm So and So."  And he actually spoke like that.  So I got him to meet with Wolfman and, and feeling like I worked with Wolfman Jack, yeah, that was--yeah.  This is interesting meeting all these people that you have no idea what they look like, but you, you, you present a picture in your mind of what they--they're like and usually, it's nothing like the image that you, you formulate in your mind of them.  And meeting then in person is just a, just a thrill to meet those people.
Speaker 1: What's the--have you ever--what's the most surprised you've ever been at what somebody looked like as opposed to what they actually sounded like?
Speaker 2: Oh, gee, who, who could that be?  I didn't--you know, I can't think of anybody right, right off the bat, you know.
Speaker 1: But I think it's something we all feel--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) if we ever listen to radio--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that we get an image of somebody.
Speaker 2: I, I can tell you something about myself because most people thought I was this tall, dark skinned guy, big heavyset dark skinned guy.  And I would sit--when I was a disc jockey here at WVOL [WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee] in the early years, I would sit at--they had a couch there, we'd set out the horse stool and people would walk in and say, "I want to see [HistoryMaker] John Heidelberg.  Where is John Heidelberg?"  And the receptionist would be sitting behind the desk, and I'd sit there and I says, "Oh, he's, he's in the back there someplace."  And, and they'd want to see John Heidelberg, you know.  And she says, "Oh, no it's not, that's John Heidelberg right there."  So people, "I thought you were," you know, so most people thought I was very tall, very dark and had this big deep voice and I'm this little short light skinned guy that's (laughter)--
Speaker 1: You still got the voice.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  Little guys have big voices sometime.
Story_ID: 536595
Speaker 1: Now did you ever go into sports at all?  I mean, other than that game.  That's--was it--did you--
Speaker 2: No.  When I--you know, I have a picture here.  I used to have it on the website.  When I--when we were here at WVOL [WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee] and I got to be a, a program director, we had a, a team, we used to call it the Air Force [ph.], and we would play other radio stations.  So I would try and play basketball.  I, I was very uncoordinated as a, as a ba- as a athlete, you know.  I can't, I can't dance 'cause my grandfather [Heidelberg's paternal great-grandfather, John Lyons] was a minister and he always thought blues and stuff like that was a sin, so even in high school, we had to get the girls to teach us how to two step just so we could go to the prom, you know.  So I--even dancing, I can't dance.  And I would go and do record hops and sometimes I'd go to--I'd go like a place like Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee] or I'd, I'd go to a doctor's place down in, in Columbia [Tennessee], someplace like that and I'd be the black guy playing the music and most the people there were white and they'd come up and somebody would say, "Dance with me," and I'd say, "I can't dance."  And they'd say, "Oh, come on now, all black people can dance."  And I said (laughter), "Not this one.  I can't dance."  And then I go out there and step on a few toes 'cause I got to count, you know.  I can't even slow drag, I got to count.  I'm not a very good dancer.  So I never did learn, you know--I'm, I'm very uncoordinated when it comes to dancing.  I can play music.  I can read scale and all of that stuff, but I, I couldn't dance.
Story_ID: 536596
Speaker 1: So you never thought about going into sports broadcasting then?
Speaker 2: No.  As I said, I did that one game for Tennessee State [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] when the manager didn't show up (laughter) and somebody had to call the game and so I took over and, and did the play by play.  And my son [Roderick Heidelberg], when I first bought WVOL [WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee] in 2000, I think it's 2001, we went to a high school and got one of the local high schools and we called their games and I did the play by play and he did the color; of course, he played football in high school.  And--but I didn't, I didn't think I'd want to do that 'cause play by play, it moves so fast and you almost got to, you almost got to have a delay system or something because if you try and call football while it's unfolding, you miss the play 'cause sometimes you're, you're fooled.  And so you almost got to call it on the delay system and as one of the managers used to do, he'd miss a play and he'd just make up one and (laughter)--this guy that missed the game, he'd just make up a play to fill in. But those are the good old days.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But no, I don't, I don't think I could do that on a regular basis, and I think being behind the microphone, I don't know if I want to do that anymore.  I want to be on this side of the, the desk now.
Story_ID: 536597
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, when did you--when did that actually start you know moving towards--when did you start moving towards ownership of a station?
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to--when I first came here and became a disc jockey, I, I felt like I could do it better and I had ideas that I thought should be implemented.  And I always thought about owning my own radio station, and I came very close to--actually won a frequency for an FM station in this market, but politics got involved in that, so I got out of that and eventually came over here and bought WVOL [WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee].  But--
Speaker 1: About what year are we talking about when you--
Speaker 2: Well, I started in '83 [1983], and I worked on it for seventeen years and eventually, I mean, I didn't have enough--I'm getting up there in age, I didn't have another seventeen years to, to fight the government on about getting a station, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So basically, you bought this station in 2000?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I left WSM [WSM Radio, Nashville, Tennessee] in 1999, I was out of radio for about a year, and then I came over and bought VOL in 2000, April of 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well, what were the circumstances with the owner?  Was it owned by the same name who owned it when you worked here?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  It was a Jewish gentleman by the name of Robert Rounsaville that had owned this one and several other stations when I worked here.  And when I left, a black gentleman came over named Sam Howard [HistoryMaker Samuel Howard], he bought it, and he owned it for a while and then he sold it to some white guys named Dickey Brothers, Dickey broadcasting company; they owned it for a short period of time and I bought it from them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  From--
Speaker 2: From the Dickey Brothers.
Speaker 1: Dickey Brothers.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Dickey Brothers Broadcasting, I think it was.
Story_ID: 536598
Speaker 1: Well, what is the format here [WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee], and--?
Speaker 2: The current format is, we call it urban or, you know, urban--what would you call it?
Speaker 1: What do they call it, urban contemporary?  That's what one of the--
Speaker 2: Urban oldies, I guess, would be--
Speaker 1: Oh, urban o- okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause they kind of--the format is kind of--Arbitron [Nielsen Audio] is kind of a stickler for whatever--what kind of format you can have, you know, and I'd say urban oldies.  But we do--we, we mix that with talk.  We have a talk show, we call it 'Open Forum,' from twelve noon until three [o'clock] p.m.  And we let the callers call in and, and just vent.  Say what you got to say, whatever's on your mind and, and we intersperse that with--T.J. Graham is the host of the show, we intersperse that with sound effects and sometimes we, we call it we entertain, we educate and a couple of other things that we do, you know.  We inform, and we just all have a great time on radio.  And, and I feel like radio's a theater of the mind and people should--you know, like when you used to listen to radio, LAC [WLAC Radio, Nashville, Tennessee], and you'd hear 'The Shadow' and how guys used to take the, the, the blocks that make the steps and, and all the, all the sound effects that they'd make.  And, and you'd just put yourself there in, in radio and think you in a, a movie theater watching that and, and all it was is guys doing the sound effects and some, some announcer.  I think there's a commercial on TV right now that this guy does and she--for, for--
Speaker 1: The movie announcer that does it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  You know, those kind of things and, and, and that was great radio; that was theater, that was great, you know.  People kind of miss those things.  And I, I--and I'm a stickler for personality radio.  I think people want people behind the microphone that they can call up and say, "Hey, how are you doing?  Would you play so and so for me?"  And they feel like they're part of you and you're part of them and you make their day and I, I think we should keep that.  And I've worked very hard to try and keep, even to my detriment, when I wasn't making any money paying people to be behind the microphone, unless you're getting great ratings and we, (laughter) we had a problem with getting that, but I had live people.
Story_ID: 536599
Speaker 1: Now, that's becoming increasingly rare--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in urban radio.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: FM radio stations across the country, I think I first noticed it in Detroit [Michigan], it seemed like the whole 92.3 [WMXD Radio]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in Detroit, I can't think what they call it.
Speaker 2: It's automated and they got soundtracks--
Speaker 1: Yeah, they've got--
Speaker 2: --I mean, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they've got a disc in there--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --with all the songs.  You hear the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --same songs.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You can almost predict when they're going to come up (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When, when it's going to come up, yeah.
Speaker 1: Tom Joyner and the morning show in the morning.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or now I think they've switched to Steve Harvey ['The Steve Harvey Morning Show'] for some reason, and they're using him instead of Tom, but you can interchange them.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The morning show is broadcast nationwide, 'Tom Joyner Morning Show.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, Tom.
Speaker 1: Steve Harvey's nationwide.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Doug Banks--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the afternoon, nationwide.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Every urban radio station (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's what you hear.
Speaker 1: --in the country from St. Louis [Missouri] to San Jose [California]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --is playing the same opening show and some of the same songs.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The best of hits and oldies and that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but it's becoming so that the local personality is just not there anymore (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They're just not there and, and you can, you can automate it, you can set the machine up.  And I could've saved a lot of money.  I could've done that 'cause like I said, the ratings--they don't rate AM radio stations very well and I, and I feel--well, that's another--that's a topic for another day.  And if you're an urban station, you're minority owned and all of those stuff, you can't afford--and you own one station, you're in the land of the giants, you can't afford to pay Arbitron [Nielsen Audio] the money that, that, you know, other people subscribe to Arbitron.  So, you know, I feel like you aren't gonna get the ratings, you know; I could be wrong.
Speaker 1: So how does that work, I mean, you're explaining the fringe of something that I don't think anybody listening to this would necessarily understand.  So how does Arbitron work--
Speaker 2: What they do--
Speaker 1: --the rating system?
Speaker 2: I believe they send out diaries and people send back the diaries.  And, and, and minorities, a lot of times, don't send back, they have to, you know, stack them one way or the other to try to get diaries from people, but you have to--
Speaker 1: Well, maybe they don't get them either.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.  You know, and, and you ask people a lot of time, "You ever gotten a diary?"  And he says, "No, I've never gotten a diary in my life."  So I, I, I don't know what they do, but I, I know that since I'm on this station, when I first came here, the people that had it before me had pretty good ratings and as soon as I got it, it started to die.  And I, I made sure they knew I--you know, I, I don't subscribe.  They asked me and I says, "No."  I was honest.  I don't subscribe.  So we started to taking a dive, boom, boom, boom, boom.
Speaker 1: So by subscribe, what does the station have to do?
Speaker 2: What you do is you have to have a subscription in order to use the ratings that they do, if you want to use it to sell.  I mean, they rate the station--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you just can't use their--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --it's like a--
Speaker 1: And you use the ratings to sell--
Speaker 2: You can't use their ratings to sell, sell your station; even if you have good ratings, you can't do that.
Speaker 1: It adds to advertising.
Speaker 2: Right, ad- advertising, yes.
Speaker 1: To get ads for--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And a lot of your agencies, they'll look at your ratings and say, "Okay.  That guy stinks over there.  He's down here to point something and here's somebody else up here," you know.  And I'm not saying they're doing that, it just--maybe it's a coincidence, but those kind of things happen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I know.  And most, most of your, your, your minority owned stations, unless they--I don't know, you just don't get the ra- AM stations don't get the ratings that--for the most part, unless you're a major talk in a major market that, that the other stations get.  And it may just be that way.
Speaker 1: So VOL [WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee] is AM?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Standalone AM station.
Speaker 1: Standalone.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I have no other stations other than this one--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you know.  And maybe I'm not doing the promotional stuff.  I just know that for all of a sudden, I, I'm down there in that bottom echelon, and you don't get much higher than that.  And you, you're--ad agencies don't buy you 'cause they, they can use that as a good excuse, "I don't want to buy you because your ratings are not good enough," or, "You don't have twelve plus," or you don't have this.  And so what you do is you do your own in house surveying and you have to sell lifestyles rather than try to sell ratings.  And to be honest with you, I wish they wouldn't even rate the stations at all, you'd be better off not having them rate you.  That's like somebody write up a story about--somebody wrote up a story about my restaurant [John Henry's Restaurant and Showcase, Nashville, Tennessee] and, you know, they compliment you on a couple of things, but they degrade you.  I mean, they talk about something else, all the bad stuff, you'd be better off if they didn't even rate you, you know, or look at you, so in radio.  A lot of stations, I don't know if other stations that are in the same situation that I'm in would feel that way, but--feel that way, but we'd be better off not rating at all and just say, "Hey, this station is not rated."
Story_ID: 536600
Speaker 1: Now, who are your primary advertisers?
Speaker 2: Let me see.  You get mom and pop stores, you know, and wherever you can get it, you know.  If something comes to town, you grab that, but your major advertisers, they aren't--for the most part, they're going after your top ten or your top fifteen.  They don't, they don't gravitate toward anybody unless there's something that they have to do.  You know, maybe the government has to reach out to everybody or there's something that you got to talk to everybody on and then they come to you, but for the ad agencies, they don't, they don't come this way.  You aren't going to get it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the local businesses, black businesses are the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, that's your life blood.
Story_ID: 536601
Speaker 1: AM radio, you mostly got to use talk or you got to use gospel or you got to use sports or something like that.  If you're going out there for the music.  And I can understand a lot of that until it--when digital comes in, they call it high definition radio and, and see, we, we broadcast--I'm one--I'm the only station in Nashville [Tennessee] that broadcasts in stereo, and I broadcast in stereo.  But then you got directional and you got to fight all those other things and all the, the, the coverage areas that were there, you got the asphalt, you got the buildings and you don't even have the signal that you used to have, you know.  So I'm hoping that digital is gonna make a big difference, but who knows when--you know, when they're really going to bring that in, high definition ratings.  I think in television it's supposed to start next year, everybody's supposed to convert to HD, you know.  But as far as radio's concerned, they got the night patents on AM and all of that stuff.  I don't know if they've figured all that out yet and it may be just like AM stereo, they'll make a few and unless you've got certain receivers, you can't receive it and it, and it just kind of died on the vines.  It's, it's like Beta [Betamax] and VHS, I think at one time, they were fighting for which one was gonna be and so you, you, you just hold your breath and, and, and hope that, that something comes to kind of rescue you from that because you are, you're at a disadvantage and I don't blame people.  When you're listening to stereo, you know, and you can hear something in stereo and you got to hear, hear it over here in mono, it's, it's, it's, it's not the same.
Speaker 2: No, that's right.
Speaker 1: And it's not the same.
Story_ID: 536602
Speaker 1: What's your most popular show right now?
Speaker 2: We've got some good shows.  We have what we call 'The BLUES Cafe' that we run on Saturdays and we, we try to do blues all day from si- we were doing it from six A.M. 'til seven P.M. and people love blues.  Believe it or not, they love the blues and as long as you do traditional blues, not the contemporary stuff 'cause a lot of that is--doesn't sound very good, to be honest with you.  But the, you know, Bobby Bland and John Lee Hooker and Johnnie Taylor and all those guys, Z.Z. Hill, those kind of songs and even Ray Charles and all of that, that's good blues.  But some of the other stuff, it's so so, a few songs, good songs, but for the most part, it's, it's not like the old style and I'm a stickler for the old style.
Speaker 1: So you've got a niche there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you got a niche.  So we do the blues things on Saturday and then we have a talk show, as I say, we call it 'Open Forum' from twelve A.M. 'til three P.M. Monday through Friday and we just let the callers call in.  We don't even ask them their name or anything else, you know.  And we make sure that they know, hey, we want you to talk, but you got to keep it clean, you got to protect my license, you got to do all this other stuff, and they call in and talk about different things.  And then, and then this is very popular because we get not only black listeners, but we get white listeners as well, and we even get white males.  Believe it or not, a lot of white males listen and call and so we know we're getting a lot more people that are listening that do not call.  And a lot of people tell us, "I would call, but I--somebody may recognize my voice, so I'd, I'd rather not do that."  And they'll listen.  And sometimes we, we got this, this sound effect where we flush people, yeah.  Oh, yeah, what you're saying is--let's flush that and so he does little things, you know.  And sometimes he'll raise his voice and say something when somebody gets on there and starts talking crazy or whatnot and then--and sometimes he has fun with it and then we have--we get very serious or we may have the, the mayor or anybody else on some serious issue.  And we've been talking about immigration, illegal immigration, those type things.  We talk about politics and, and this is the buckle of the Bible Belt, so you're naturally gonna get religion and everybody's got an opinion about religion in this town.  So we talk about those things.  And the guy [T.J. Graham] that does the show is a minister, he's an ordained minister, so he gets to talk about it and people don't agree and they don't agree with each other, but they listen to the show every day.  That's why we know we should be doing well in the ratings but, you know, it doesn't show, but, but if you were to listen to these people, then we know we got people listening.  And then when we go out and, and when we get a new client, they can play three commercials and they get results.  Those people toll out, our listening audience said, "If we hear your commercial on VOL [WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee], we will patronize your business," and they do.  We've had businesses that weren't doing very well, now they're doing well.  It's just convincing people that--to come to AM.  They just don't believe that AM's gonna reach out there, but we do, you know, we do a good job of getting customers into these businesses, and it's just--well, maybe we just got to do a better job of telling him about it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the power of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --black talk radio is really growing and growing--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the last twenty years or so.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Loyal audience.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, every city's got a--
Speaker 2: We, we, we got people that turn on VOL and don't turn it off.  And we were streaming and people couldn't get on.  You have to pay for all the amount of people that stream.  You know, you're going all over the world, but people are leaving their computers on, so we don't have the computer that kicks them off after a while, they just leave it on all the time.  They go back the next day, people downtown in offices keep it on, you know.  Just about the water company, the electric company, all these places, we know that these people are listening and we're thinking why aren't they getting diaries, you know.  Why aren't they getting diaries?  And you ask them, "Do you ever get a diary?  No."  Well, where are the diaries going is my question.
Speaker 1: It's a good question.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yeah, where are they going?
Story_ID: 536603
Speaker 1: The future of WVOL [WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee] is--do you plan at some point to go satellite with it or something, or?
Speaker 2: No, we just--no, what we're doing now is we're on the Internet, and like I said, you have to pay for your subscribers and the more--if we can get the revenue in, we can, we can go an unlimited amount of--not subscribers, unlimited amount of listeners that can log on at one time.  And when--if high definition radio comes in and ever becomes the standard and they get all the kinks worked out, then that's gonna help us tremendously.  I intend for this station--I intend to hold onto this for a long time and because I, I want a, a voice in the black community and consolidation just ruined everything.  And the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] was here not too long ago, and I got to speak to all the commissioners.  I was on a panel and I told them so and a lot of other people felt the same way as I did.  You don't have, you don't have that community station and people aren't that community minded.  Now, here's another thing that I do, every Sunday I give two full hours of community service that they can talk about anything that they want to.  And I try to keep people from--I--it's a minister [T.J. Graham], he hosts the show ['Open Forum'] and they can, they can talk about all kinds of things.  They can talk about healthcare, they invite doctors in and businesspeople try to take advantage of it to promote their business and politicians try to take advantage of it to promote their political agendas and that kind of thing.  But usually, I, I just--I devote that to the public every Sunday, two full hours, for public service; it doesn't cost them a dime, you know.  And those are the kind of things I do.  I try to serve the community and that's what I feel that VOL has done for, for many, many years and I want to continue to do that.  I want a voice here for black people in case something goes down, they can come out here and talk.  I'll stop programming sometimes.  If something's very important, we'll, we'll, you know, preempt our programming and let them come out and talk about whatever it is they want to talk about.  We'll do that, no other station's gonna do that, they're not gonna allow you to do that.  I don't think they will.
Speaker 1: No, they won't.  They won't even be prepared to do it--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --with nobody in the station (laughter).
Speaker 2: But a person could walk in out there.  And I had people call in and, and they'll say and, and, you know, "I have such and such person died and we don't have any insurance," so one of the things I'll do is say, "Okay.  Give me a death certificate," 'cause I want this to be legit before you go on my airways and tell somebody something.  "Bring that to me and what we will do is we'll go on the air, we'll let you on the air and you'll say what you're telling me.  That you don't have--you, you have a, a loved one that died, you don't have any money to bury them with or whatever.  Send a number--you know, let them, let them know where they can donate money, you know, to the funeral home or to your--a bank or whatever."  And we will run that PSA [public service announcement] that this person needs help, and that's not gonna cost you anything.  So we do those things.
Story_ID: 536604
Speaker 1: Now tell me about the--I don't know if it--well, I don't want to jump the gun, but--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --tell me about the restaurant business and how did you--
Speaker 2: Well, well, some years ago, my, my son [Roderick Heidelberg]--there used to be a place here called Jubilee [Nashville, Tennessee], and it was a very popular restaurant and I think former senator--I mean, former Vice President Al Gore, he was campaigning went there.  And it was up for a while.  It was very popular in the black community, and my son talked me into purchasing this thing.  So I got it at auction and, and we turned it into a restaurant and showcase [John Henry's Restaurant and Showcase, Nashville, Tennessee] where we bring entertainers into town.  We were serving great food and, and I went all out with expensive--I mean, not expensive food, but extravagant food, you know, food they couldn't get anyplace else.  And I'm one of those people that says why can't--you know, it's in a black neighborhood, why can't we have in the black neighborhood what they have in everybody else's neighborhood?  My, my question is, as Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] say, ask why not; why can't we do it?  What says we can't do this?  Push the envelope.  Go and try to do it.  If you fail, you fail.  Put your faith in God and go for it.  Go for it.  So anyway, we put it out there and then--and people weren't use for it--weren't used to it.  It was kind of like the Studebaker, you know, it was ahead of its time.  People just didn't--people walk in and look, I don't belong in there 'cause people like a hole in the wall.  They'll like someplace they all cramped up and want that.
Speaker 1: So you put together, this was a pretty nice place (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, man, we served prime rib, stuffed pork chops, we had crab legs, salmon; all kinds of dishes.  We had great food.  I mean, great--and my first year was a non-profit year because I was selling it probably cheaper (laughter) than it was costing, you know, for less than it was costing me to, to, you know, to purchase it.  You know, and then you learn all this theft and all the other stuff that goes on at a restaurant and all.  I learned all that 'cause I didn't know the restaurant business, but we tried it.  But--and then we had, we had groups like the--Howard Hewett came in and performed.  We had The O'Jays--I mean, not The O'Jays, but the Chi-Lites and we had Ray, Goodman and Brown and we had [HistoryMaker] Russell Simmons was there and [HistoryMaker] Wyclef Jean--we brought, you know, great entertainers in.  We brought comedians and all that kind in.  It's like great, let's, let's--let me show you what you got here.  It's in the black neighborhood and I, I did make a difference 'cause I changed some of the old dilapidated buildings, they started fixing it up.  You know, like you move in a neighborhood and you clean your neighborhood up and your house is looking good and your neighbors want to do likewise.  And I raised the property value over there (laughter) in that neighborhood.
Story_ID: 536605
Speaker 1: But then people just weren't used to it and they wouldn't come and--for whatever reason.  And then we tried buffet type thing, and they still wouldn't come and so we almost closed it [John Henry's Restaurant and Showcase, Nashville, Tennessee] down, so right now we kind of in between as to what we're gonna do with it, you know.  Do you make it a club?  But I thought we could, we could do well as a restaurant, you know.  And you've got big screens up so you can show DVDs and, and let the pe- you know, you can show a concert, you could show a movie, big screen, fifteen foot screens, you know, two of those, twelve foot screen upstairs, a mezzanine station, a bar upstairs where you can sit up and look down on the folks and a walkway.  And, and it's just a beautiful restaurant; it was a concept that you hadn't seen.  And people would come and say, "I've never seen anything like that anywhere near here," but people wouldn't support us.  And I think a lot of whites were a little afraid after dark being in that neighborhood and blacks, for whatever reason (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Where is it located?
Speaker 1: On Jefferson Street.  It's--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you know, used to, used to be the black part of town and Jefferson--
Speaker 2: So Jefferson Street has changed now 'cause I'm not from Nashville [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And from those who aren't from Nashville, now Jefferson, I did hear about Jefferson Street first while watching a Pittsburgh Steelers game.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Jefferson Street, Joe Gilliam [Joe Gilliam, Jr.].
Speaker 2: When Joe Gilliam--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --was quarterback--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I--and they talk about Jefferson Street.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, that's how he got his, his name, Jefferson Street Joe Gilliam because he, he was a star quarterback at Tennessee State [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee].  And we're just down the street from Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and Tennessee State.  We're about four blocks from Fisk and Meharry and maybe ten or twelve blocks from Tennessee State.
Speaker 2: Right.  Okay.  So right in the middle there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we're right there.  And we're not too far from the state capitol, right down the street.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All right.  So this is a familiar part of, black part of town?
Speaker 1: Sure.  That was the hubbub.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the hub of black life over there, black businesses and whatnot over there for a long time.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So right now, you're not sure whether you're gonna--
Speaker 1: I'm not, not sure about it because what do you do, you know?  And older blacks--you get the young black people, they want to fight, you know.  You can't bring--if you bring hip hop in, somebody's gonna start acting a fool and, and get outside and you may have a shooting or you may have anything.  And the older black people say well, I go out once every three months and they feel like oh, I'm doing, I'm doing you a favor.  I came out.  But you can't run a business like that; you can't, you can't survive like that.  You need loyal people that are going to go and, and go out and eat, you know.  And the economy got bad there for a while and, you know, say what do you do?  Do you go out and eat or do you buy gas?  And so restaurants, even now, res- there are a lot of well known restaurants that have gone out of business, and so it's just a rough fate.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So in, in, in business, like anything, you know, you got your ups and downs and, and sometimes you don't expect things.  You're, you're, you're looking at things and it, and it looks bright and all of a sudden you get up to the, to the corner up there and you find out it's like looking at the water and you think it's--you're out in the desert and you think it's water and you get there and you find it's sand, (laughter) so that's kind of way the business has been.  It's sand, it's not water, it's sand.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So--and, and you don't know.  And, and even people that are very skilled at the restaurant business, as I said, are going out of business.
Speaker 2: Okay.  It is a risky--
Speaker 1: Very risky.  You know, if I tell anybody, be very careful about going into the restaurant business.  Make sure, make sure you know what you're doing because a lot of restaurants fail.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And you can lose a lot of money.
Story_ID: 536606
Speaker 1: You ever thought of--well, I don't know, this is probably a dumb idea,  I'm--
Speaker 2: No.  No.
Speaker 1: --you know, talking to some--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of the Tennessee Titans and those guys over there.
Speaker 2: No, because those guys want their own thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, I think Eddie George had a place downtown and--when he was with the Titans and I had, I had athletes that came into John Henry's [John Henry's Restaurant and Showcase, Nashville, Tennessee], Big John Henderson that played at Pearl-Cohn [Pearl-Cohn Comprehensive High School; Pearl-Cohn Entertainment Magnet High School, Nashville, Tennessee], used to come in all the time.  And we had some of the Titans would come in, Pacman [Adam Jones] used to come over and we had some of the basketball players that--professional basketball players, that came over.  What's his name?  He plays with Balt- Baltimore [Baltimore Ravens] now, he was a, a receiver, I believe, and he had his going away party there.  So the place is just beautiful.  We've had wedding receptions, we've had gospel groups in there.  You know, his wife gave him a going--oh, what is his name?  Gave him a going away party.
Speaker 1: Was it Steve McNair?
Speaker 2: No, not Steve, it was before Steve.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can't think of the young man's name, but he--I think he was a receiver for the Titans.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, yeah, he had a great time.  We had film of it and they videoed it with big cake and everything.  I mean, the place is just gorgeous, just, just gorgeous.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But people would come in and it's like okay, what do I do here?  Whatever reason, they didn't want to patronize it.
Story_ID: 536607
Speaker 1: Okay now, we always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community here in Nashville [Tennessee] and the rest of the nation?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  My concerns are is that we're losing generation after generation because of drugs, because of a certain music type that, you know, we've--it promotes denigration of women, our family members.  So many things that we're having to deal with and where do you start?  We've got so many problems, the black community, that we have to deal with.  We got to find someplace to start and this is the buckle of the Bible Belt and one thing I ask is why, why do we have all these problems if we got so many churches in this town?  What's, what's the problem?  Something's wrong with that picture.  We've got to ask ourselves, what am I doing wrong?  And once we are honest with ourselves and decide what we're doing wrong, let's correct it.  We've got to start with the young people.  You know, it's kind of like when the people came out of Egypt and they wandered around in the desert when Moses brought them out there, some of them, some of them had to die, most of them had to die because they needed--they weren't gonna change.  We got a generation that's coming on now, I, I shudder to think when some of these people become adults, what's gonna happen, you know?  Who's gonna raise the kids?  Who's gonna carry on the torches that--of, of the Civil Rights Movement that people fought for so long?  Now, some of these people who are a few, to be honest with you, they're, they're, they're a few generations from slavery again, of their own making, you know.  If no one else slaves you, you enslave yourself because you, you won't be--there's the people dropping out of schools, no education.  You can't all sell dope.  We can't all preach, you know.  We got to find some ways that we can do some things, and there are some people doing some positive things, but so many people are trying to find a shortcut.  It's like when you're doing a book report and you, you go over to that page that kind of gives you a summary and you want to do the book report of the summary, you got, you got to do the work.  You got to put in the time it takes to get things done.  And to, to make a, a long story short is we have to find out what the problems are, and I think we know and we have to solve them.  And we can't all wait on the revolution or somebody else to do it for us, you know.  We have a problem.  We all want to ride the bus, but we don't want to pay the fare, we want somebody else to do it for us.  This radio station, people--well, would you do this?  And every so while, why don't you look in your representative.  You may say something your state representative, "Well, how do I find him or my senator?"  "Look in the telephone book."  "Well, how do I know the--?"  "It's in the blue pages."  "Well, will you give me that number?"  "No, look it up yourself.  You can read."  Stop asking somebody to do for you all the time.  You know, welfare maybe did that to people a long time ago.  Now, the positive side of that is I think the times are going to make us and we're, we're--when we lose all of those people, it's gonna make us do the right thing.  It's gonna make us make a change in our lives.  We're gonna stop using excuses, and we're gonna have to step out there.  We're gonna have to take that chance.  We got to be like that and we got to stop being the little turtle and stick that neck out there and go do what you have to do.  We got to stop thinking in negative terms.  We got to learn the English language and we got to stop thinking I'm trying to be white or I don't want to learn because that makes me white.  That's the world, that's not white, that's just commonsense.  That's just you going out there doing what everybody else is doing.  One of the things that white people do is they start their kids off and make sure they get a good, good education.  And whites may be poor, but they save money to make sure that that child goes to college and gets a great education because they want that child to be prepared for what society's gonna, gonna, you know, bring for them.  Whereas, we, we, a lot of us, we live from day to day, we don't worry about it 'cause we're scared, what's tomorrow gonna do?  I don't have anything, mama don't have anything, nobody else has anything, why should I worry?  So we got to stop thinking like that, and we got to stop trying to be racist in our, in our attitudes about progress.  Let's, let's progress and, and then you're seeing some of that in a positive nature right now, but we got to, we got to do it on a broad scale.  We got to instill in, in our society that education is the key.  We've got to educate all of our kids, and we got to make sure that those people down there that don't want to, you know, help push the wagon, they got to carry their load.  As Bill Cosby said, some of, some of those people out there aren't carrying their load.  I guess I'm paraphrasing him.  You got to carry that load, and we got to impress upon you how important it is that you pitch in no matter how poor or how depressed you are, you got to come out of that funk and you've got to pitch in; if not, we're gonna be a lost race of people and a lost society and we ain't got nothing to look forward to.  And I, and I think at some point, as I said, society's gonna make us do that.  We got no choice 'cause when we see other people come into this country starting their own businesses, getting their own neighborhoods, living the life, the American dream, and we've been here all these hundreds of years and we got problems.  A lot of our problems are our own making.  So we're gonna be forced to step out there and take that chance and, and make life better.
Story_ID: 536608
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently, if you could do it again?
Speaker 2: Let me think.  Yes, I think as, as, as, as far as this radio's concerned, I wasted a lot of money.  When I came out here, I thought I could do things.  It's like taking this AM radio station, I used to have blimps that I spent money on, and I'd have those what, sixteen, seventeen foot blimps waving out there on I-65 [Interstate 65] and people could see WVOL [WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee] and that kind of thing, that--with another radio station, that would've been great, but you got to figure out who is your audience?  Who's likely to hear, you know, your programming?  And once you figure out who your audience is and how you're gonna go about it, I probably would've done a different marketing scheme.  In, in, in hiring people when I first came here, I didn't want to get people that already had their opinions or were already molded, you know, is, is--you want to get a good young athlete and train that athlete.  You don't want to get somebody who's already opinionated and they're stubborn and they don't want to change.  I thought I could train everybody.  I wanted to bring somebody in traffic and I wanted to bring somebody here and, and I overestimated my abilities to, to train.  I'm, I'm a good trainer, but I didn't know enough about all of the positions and these people were, were amateurs, I mean, they knew nothing about radio and I brought a lot of people in didn't know about radio and so we started losing a lot of stuff, you know.  And you can't train them all, you need some professionals to help you.  So I tried to do it all by myself.  I would do that differently.  I would get at least some people that were very skilled in those positions to help me do that.  I used to work for a telemarketing firm and I was, I was so good that they made me the trainer for the telemarketing and, and I thought I could do that with radio, but I overestimated my, you know, you can only do so much and sometimes you get overwhelmed; that, I would do different.  I'm, I'm one of those people, I'm--people think I'm standoffish, I'm not, I'm just a person that likes, you know, like my space.  You know, and, and I'm not one of those people who goes out and hobnob.  I don't believe in phony putting up and smiling and grinning when--that's not me, you know.  I'm real.  And so people tell me, "You own a radio station, you got to get out with the people.  You got to go to these places, you got to do this and you got to shake that other politician, you got to shake the hands and kiss the babies and, and those kind of things."  That's not me.  I got a B.S. degree in political science, but I could not be a politician 'cause I don't lie well and, and I don't want to go through that kind of thing.  But as a businessman, you've got to get out there with the businesspeople and you got to hobnob and you got to do those things, so maybe I'd learn how to do those.  And I used to send my son [Roderick Heidelberg] places, not because I felt like I was better than anybody, it's just I didn't feel comfortable and he had that knack that he could go and, and be with people.  So that may have been a hindrance as well, so I think I would've done that differently.  I would've, you know, when there was an event or something out there, maybe, you know, get a nice young lady to go with me and, and, and attend these functions, but some--sometimes I just feel like they--you know, I, I just--it's phony.  I don't feel comfortable in those kind of settings, but as a businessman, you, you have to do those things.  You really have to do those things.  So that would be some things I'd do differently.
Story_ID: 536609
Speaker 1: As far as my restaurant [John Henry's Restaurant and Showcase, Nashville, Tennessee], when I first started out, I thought I could--you know, you got to realize where your business is located.  Who's likely to be your customers, your clientele?  And restaurants specialize in certain things.  You can't serve a whole lot of anything and I think we spent about sixteen--the guy--I sent a guy over there to set up the restaurant, hire the people, do all those things and he didn't get it done, and I had to step in and start doing things myself.  And we had about sixteen thousand dollars' worth of food, we were selling Spanish food, I mean, you know, all kinds of food and we didn't know what we were.  We didn't know if we were gonna be a club, a restaurant, or when we would rent it out for weddings or those kind--we were not consistent and we didn't have an identity, so those things hurt.  So I would, I would study and plan and do things differently, as far as the restaurant's concerned, you know, 'cause you can't be all things to all people, you got to be one thing.  You know, if you're a burger joint, you serve burgers, you know.  If you some- something else, that's what you do.  If you're a shoe store you sell cheap shoes, you sell cheap shoes; you sell expensive shoes, you do it in a different way.  So that's what we should've done, we should've defined ourselves and, and limited our menu 'cause the menu was much too large and specialized in what we were doing.  And we should've done a lot more research finding out what people like, the area, who would come and how we would get them there, and do a lot better deal of marketing; I thought I could market here, but you got to market on other stations as well.  So I would've done those things differently.
Story_ID: 536610
Speaker 1: And I think what I would've done was I--air personalities, you've got to get people that really, really know what they're doing behind the microphone, but it's hard to get young people to play that old music, you know, they're into hip hop and, and, and a new genre music.  But getting somebody that really--you got to go and get an older person and they're opinionated and they don't want to do what needs to be done, and so it's a catch-22 situation.  So I think I would've spent a little more time trying to interview people, finding out their backgrounds and doing those kind of things.  And, and I still would've kept it live, but I would've, but I would've gotten the right people in the, in the right positions to do that and that, and that hurt us too.  But I'm this nice guy, you know, I believe in giving everybody a chance.
Story_ID: 536611
Speaker 1: By the same token, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, what would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: That [HistoryMaker] John Heidelberg gave everybody an opportunity.  Since I've owned VOL [WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee], I've hired people from eighteen to seventy-two, I believe the gentleman was.  I've hired male, female, black, and white and I haven't discriminated, not once.  I've hired people of, of different bel- or religious persuasions, different sexual preferences and all of that, I didn't discriminate on that.  And I've had people behind my microphone that probably should never have been behind there 'cause they had no talent.  And one lady fell out, she, she played one song and fell out on the, fell out on the floor.  I had one guy, he just got so depressed after he talked on the microphone doing that.  But my legacy would be that I've given everybody an opportunity because I knew what it was like when I was trying to get into radio, you know, they just don't let you in.  You have to have talent, you got to have--they would ask for experience and I'd say, "Well, if you don't give me experience, how am I gonna get experience if nobody gives me an opportunity?"  But I gave those people opportunities, and my legacy would be that I didn't turn anyone away.  I gave people an opportunity.  I got used and abused for doing that, but they can't say I didn't give them an opportunity.
Story_ID: 536612
Speaker 1: Anything else now?  Now, you mentioned a couple times, you think you--some of the things you did change, country music?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Some of the activities of yours changed--
Speaker 2: Right.  It, it--I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) R&B music too over broadcast.
Speaker 2: I, I changed--yeah, as I said, when I came here to WVOL [WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee], I'll listen to white radio and white radio, they didn't--I, I never did understand why a guy could, could talk over a song.  And at the end of the song, they didn't have anything to say because they were already wrapped; best early wrap, I guess.  They would be wrapping all the way through the song.  They'd cut the song down and started talking while the song's playing and I thought, you know, why play the song?  What is this?  I don't like that, so my thing was--and I, I had been in service, I had been in the [U.S.] Air Force and, and I was pretty much in an integrated society and I heard radio in the [U.S.] military, I heard radio in other places and I'm thinking--well, when I came to WVOL and I'm hearing it, say, John Richbourg didn't do that.  John Richburg played the song throughout, he played the whole song, but when I came to WVOL, they, they'd talk--they played a record and they'd talk and they'd cut it down and they'd talk and they'd wrap and they'd let it play a little bit and they'd wrap and I thought, "No, that's not me.  That's not radio."  And I wanted to change that, so I did, I made some changes and eventually, everybody does that now.  I mean, what we would do is, is play the song and put it on charts and we'd put the information.  How long is the intro on that song?  If it's ten seconds, you talk ten seconds and then when the guy starts to sing, when the vocals come in, you let the vocals play.  You can talk over any instrumental at the beginning.  If the end, if it was a, you know, a cold ending or, or, or a cold beginning on the next song, you talk on the ending in that song and then you let the sec--next song come in or you play a jingle or a drop or whatever, you know.  And then people started--and that's--I wanted to treat AM radio like FM.  Once FM came in and started doing what it is was doing, I said why can't we do this with AM radio?  Like I said, I'm, I'm a trailblazer.  I wanted to see--I ask why not?  If it's good.  Let's make this good, you know.  Why should we look at this like it's, you know, it's a low class station or, or, or this is something we want to throw away.  No, let's build this up, you know, let's be proud of what we have here.  And then as I said, when I went to WSM [WSM Radio, Nashville, Tennessee], I knew country music and most of your--country songs are about two minutes and 2:15 or the longest would be about three minutes and you did a lot of talking, right?  So what I do is, is I went tempo.  I don't know what the format was, they kind of--I had kind of free reign, as long as I played the music, so I would select my music and I went tempo.  I was tempo driven.  I'd be, you know, fast, fast, fast and then play a medium song and then drop down on a slow song and I'd go right back because I felt like okay, I can do this.  And then I noticed right after that the guys that played on that station began to do the same thing I was doing.  And now, if you listen to country music, that's the way they do it, like you would do an R&B song and it's up.  And I think--and I'd like to think--I mean, I'd have had that, but I, I--it happened right after I started doing it and I'd like to think I had a little bit to do with that 'cause I'd asked the guy and he says, "It sure is lively." (Laughter) So I think I made a difference.
Story_ID: 536613
Speaker 1: Talk a little bit about--now, you were married at one time, I don't think--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you still are, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No, I'm divorcing--divorced now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you have a son?
Speaker 2: I have three sons.
Speaker 1: Three sons?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  And tell us a little bit about your sons.
Speaker 2: My oldest son [Roderick Heidelberg] works here [WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee], and I have two sons that are incarcerated right now.  And I have a daughter that I found out that I had, that I fathered when I was, I think, eighteen and I think--and she's here in town.  And she has a daughter and I'm a great-grandfather 'cause--and I think my granddaughter had--just had a baby here recently, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I haven't been communicating with them here lately, so I--it--the word got to me that she'd--she'd had a grand- you know, had a little boy, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You said you're in contact with your father [K.P. Heidelberg] now, I think?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My father and I--you know, for a long time my father and I were estranged and for a long time.  And then one day I picked up the phone and, and my uncle would call him and they had talked and he was kind of estranged from the whole family, but then I picked him up and called him on the phone and, and we started talking and I got to see relatives I hadn't even seen.  I had sisters and brothers I, I never seen.  So I've actually gone to visit my sisters and brothers and my father and I got a very good relationship now, yeah.  A great deal of love between us.  We just had some misunderstandings, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Anybody else in your immediate family?  I mean, do you li- are you by yourself at home?  Anybody I'm missing?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  No.  No.  You know, my, my--yeah, my son and I here and my ex-wife, I guess she's still here.  You know, she's remarried and has a couple of kids, I understand.  And I've been divorced now, I think, what, twenty years or whatever it was and yeah, just my son and, and my other sons and, and as I said, my daughter and, and the grandkids.  And, and my aunt, my aunt just--Aunt Willie Belle [Willie Belle Scott] just moved here and I got a first cousin that lives here, he got married, her son.  Yeah, my dad's sister lives here.  She moved from Chicago [Illinois] and she lives in one of the little sub- sub- suburbs outside Nashville [Tennessee]; I think it's Lebanon [Tennessee].  She moved here.  We kind of, kind of talked her into coming here, so I do have some relatives here.
Story_ID: 536614
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't mentioned that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll just mention this, VOL [WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee] has been here since the early '50s [1950s] and I've owned it now for seven years.  It's been a struggle.  It has--I'll tell you, it's been a tremendous struggle.  This is one of those directional stations and you get all the towers and you have to cut back on your power and you start all over and, and it's, it's just--you know, it's hard for, for people and, and minorities, I think, in particular, to go out there and get these, these FM stations and that because we don't have the money.  And if we go the long route, the go through that political process that takes forever and a lot of politics is involved in that.  And when we get these stations, it's hard, you know, with an AM station to compete with the other stations because most of these people, consolidation lets you own I don't know how many FMs and the AMs in the market, you know.  And you're standing out, you're like a little hardware store when they got these mega hardware, you know, stores that you can go buy everything and you're trying to make it.
Speaker 1: It seems like the big corporations--
Speaker 2: Yeah, big--
Speaker 1: --are taking all--gobbling up the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they'll just gobble up the little guys.  And then they make it hard for the, the little guys out here too, because you know, there's so much of that pie and they don't want you to have that pie--
Speaker 1: Yeah, like a new (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) so it's, it's, it's a dog eat dog world in, in radio.
Speaker 1: New FCC [Federal Communications Commission] regulations allow for bigger conglomerate stations now.
Speaker 2: Oh, [HistoryMaker] Michael Powell made it.  He just went in there and kind of gave away everything, you know, that's Colin's [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] son, when he was FCC chairman.
Speaker 1: So you're not happy with his chairmanship?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  No.  No.  No.  No.  I'm, I'm not happy with what John McCain did when he came up with the telecom deal [Telecommunications Act of 1996], I think it was in '86 [sic. 1996].  I'm not happy with what Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] did by signing it, and I think that's the worst thing in, in the world and I think Clinton went back and, and realized what had happened when he signed that thing, but the telecom bill devastated a lot of people.  A lot of minorities and other people who were able--who would've been able to get FM radio stations and you wouldn't have the big conglomerates just gopping--gobbling up everything 'cause when you go out there and you auction these things off, the man with the money is gonna get them.  And the more you got--and, and when Michael came in and he was just have as many as you want, that just made it even worse and people see now.
Story_ID: 536615
Speaker 1: And that's why--I told him, that was bad for politics, the political war because when you get so many radio stations and you can get these talk shows and they air one political persuasion and they're talking heads on there all day and that's all they're talking about and they're just talking and talking and talking, you can persuade people after a while.  You can wear out a rock if you put water on it, after a while it begins to crack.
Speaker 2: Now, tell me if this resembles what you're talking about.  I'm on the highway going from Chicago [Illinois] to Dayton [Ohio], every AM station's got Rush Limbaugh on it.
Speaker 1: Now what does that tell you?
Speaker 2: Oh, every other one.
Speaker 1: Right.  What does that tell you?  Now, who's being influenced--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know?  So they, they make money.  They--you know, he's obviously a popular person and when Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] in that's all you heard.  You know, Clinton was being bashed just about every time you looked around.  But that kind of stuff is, I don't feel is good for, for democracy in this country when all you're hearing is one, one viewpoint and usually, it's a negative viewpoint, you know.  Had people afraid to say that they were liberal; I mean, liberal was a bad word, you know.  Not that Jesus was liberal, but he had his critics too.  But, I mean, when you got that kind of thing, not just, you know, Rush is on a lot of stations and, and they make money off of him (unclear) 'cause he's popular, but there are other stations.  You got G. Gordon, I guess, G. Gordon Liddy, Armstrong [HistoryMaker Armstrong Williams] that was up there for one.  Let's just put it this way, a lot of conservative talk shows that are on, they're talking about conservative issues and they got no use for liberals and liberal issues.  And so, you know, politics tend to lean in that direction 'cause people are saying, "You know what?  I've heard that said over and over and over and over and over and over again and you start to believe it after a while."  As a woman told me one time, "A lie is just as good as the truth as long as people believe it."  And so there's some truth in that.  But I, I didn't think that was good for democracy, that wasn't good for the United States and, and, and it's, and, and it's panning out and it hasn't been.  And you're seeing like, how many liberal talk shows do you hear on air?
Speaker 2: Pretty much zero.  There was an Air America radio, but that just went under.
Speaker 1: That--I think that's pretty much gone under, huh?
Speaker 2: A lot of them couldn't find--
Speaker 1: Couldn't find a station.
Speaker 2: --a station, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I think they talked to me one time by coming here [WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee].  And I had a guy, he was, he was like a liberal Rush Limbaugh but, you know, people saying, "Well, you know, you aren't going to get to advertise."  So people are scared they go out and say anything different than the conservative view because you don't get the advertisers and I'm one of those people, maybe I'm hardheaded, could be foolish even, but I just believe in Christ says, "The light--the truth shall set you free," and so I pray and I go forward.  I pray about it and Lord, I'm going.  And, you know, and I believe it'll work out in the end like those old Westerns, it starts out bad, but it ends up good.  So I'm one of those people that I'm gonna be--I believe in blazing trails, I believe in holding to what I believe in and, and if I'm wrong, I can, I can change my mind, but if I'm right about something, I believe it, I should stick with it and pursue it at all costs.
Story_ID: 536616
Speaker 1: Now, what you're doing is answering my last question before I ask it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but the question is, sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a person who gave his all.  You know, who put his money where his mouth was.  Who did it because he believed in it and he believed he could succeed at it.  He wanted to show people that we can't live in fear, that we must pursue those things regardless to what happens to, to us.  We should follow the leadership of Christ and put it all on the line and let life deal with whatever comes forth.  Let's deal with it.  Follow the example of Christ, and I don't think we'll go wrong.
Story_ID: 536617
Speaker 1: Okay.  The photograph that you're seeing here is an early photograph of myself back when I was program director radio station.  We had a basketball team where we played the different organizations in the, in the community, as well as other radio stations and this was in the early '70s [1970s] and it was called the WVOL Air Force [ph.].
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is a picture of the state capitol here in Nashville [Tennessee] and that was taken, I believe, by the owners prior to myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a picture of my oldest son, Roderick [Roderick Heidelberg], and Nona Gaye, and I believe this was taken in about 2003 or '04 [2004]; 2003, I believe it was.
Speaker 2: Okay.  The picture you're viewing now is a picture of myself and then-Congressman Bob Clement.  And this was 2001 or '02 [2002].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 2: The picture you're viewing now is a picture of myself.  It was--we were having Easter egg--kids were out here searching for Easter eggs and the young lady was one of the entertainers; I don't remember her name, but that was the--was it last year?  I believe it was last year, two thou- it was either 2005 or 2006.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The picture you're viewing now is a front view of the radio station, WVOL [WVOL Radio, Berry Hill, Tennessee].  This station has been out here several years.  That was taken--that looks like T.J.'s [T.J. Graham] car, so that was probably taken in 2005.  That's the right side of the radio station.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, the picture you're viewing now is a picture of Howard Hewett, formerly of Shalamar and myself and that was taken at John Henry's Restaurant and Showcase [Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Okay.  The picture you're viewing now is a longtime dear friend of mine, she's been on this radio station for several years and she's a sweetheart.  On the left, Sister Lucille Barbee, she still has a show; she actually recorded today.  And the gentleman to the right is a friend of mine and also an engineer that does work for me from time to time, his name is Jim Gilmore.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay.  The picture you're viewing now is a picture of my first little Jeep that we used for--to do remotes.  And I believe that one was 2002, that picture was taken.
Speaker 1: Right.  The picture you're viewing now is a picture of myself in my office.  I think one of my employees was taking pictures and, and caught me at an awkward--no, this is--I was out front.  I was at the receptionist's desk.  I can see the picture of James Brown's doll there, yeah.  So I think the receptionist, at the time, was taking pictures and she just caught me sitting there manning the, the phones.
Speaker 2: Okay.  The picture you're viewing now is a picture of myself.  That was taken in 2004--'03, 2003, it was a picture I had made for a magazine here or the black business pages, I believe it was, here in Nashville.
