Story_ID: 655241
Speaker 1: My name is [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole, I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns, today is March 10th, 2017, we are in Miami, Florida.  Would you please say and spell your name, tell us your birth date, birth location and what your work has been, just, you know--
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Alexandria Holloway, A-L-E-X-A-N-D-R-I-A, H-O-L-L-O-W-A-Y.  My date of birth is April 15, 1947.  I was born in Jackson, Mississippi; and my life's work has been as an educator, a music educator, and a consultant.
Story_ID: 655242
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food, all foods.  I would suspect that seafood is my favorite.
Speaker 1: Any particular kind?
Speaker 2: Salmon, shrimp; I also love lamb chops.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year, it's fall and spring.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Coral, which is a mix of red and orange.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Amsterdam [the Netherlands].
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2: May I give you two?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: One is, "There's a destiny that makes us brothers / None goes this way alone / All that we send into the lives of others / Comes back into our very own" ['A Creed,' Edwin Markham].   And my other one is that, teachers are known by the students they teach.
Story_ID: 655243
Speaker 1: So now we're going to talk about your family history and we'll do both sides.  Let's start with your mother.  Would you tell me her name, the--when and where she was born and a bit about her?
Speaker 2: Her name is Alfanette Elizabeth Kelley Holloway, Alfanette, A-L-F-A-N-E-T-T-E [Alfanette Kelley Holloway].  She was born in Jackson, Mississippi.  She was an educator and also a musician.  She was the second of seven children and the oldest girl of five.  Did you want me to tell you more?
Speaker 1: What did she play?
Speaker 2: She played piano and, in college, she played trombone.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, and she also played organ as a church musician.
Speaker 1: And she was born in Jackson, did she grow up there and stay there?
Speaker 2: Yes, she grew up in Jackson, she went to school there.  She went to Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] and she also went away to graduate school.  I think I can talk to--about that a little later.
Speaker 1: Sure, you can tell me now.
Speaker 2: Okay.  She went to, she was born in a time when the teachers in Jackson were, African American teachers were unable to go to the white schools so the State of Mississippi paid for them to study in other states.  She--my mother chose to go to Indiana.  So she went to Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] to work on her master's [degree] and then advanced degrees and she would do that in the summer, like most of my other teachers and she would come back.  She end- she started as a second grade teacher, did some work as an assistant principal and then worked at Jackson State University for a while but most of her work was in public school, public education.  She was a minister of music for two churches, a Baptist church [Pleasant Green Missionary Baptist Church, Clinton, Mississippi] and a Holiness church [Christ Temple Church of Christ Holiness, U.S.A., Jackson, Mississippi] and she just recently died at the age of ninety-three in 2016, January 2016, a beautiful woman, inside and out.
Speaker 1: And she, so she had many degrees.  Are other members of her family educated?
Speaker 2: All seven of my, my maternal grandparents, all seven of the children were educated.  The oldest son chose to go into the [U.S.] military and the youngest son, too, but they both came, returned and went back to school.  The oldest son worked on the railroad [Illinois Central Railroad], as did my grandfather [John Kelley, Sr.] and my father [Clifford Holloway]; but the other girls were, three were teachers and two were registered nurses.
Story_ID: 655244
Speaker 1: And how far back can you trace your mother's [Alfanette Kelley Holloway] family?
Speaker 2: We've been able to go back to my great-great-grandmother but I don't remember much about her.  I do remember that she was, she had the appearance of being white and, you know, that story but we don't know who her father was and my great-grandmother was, her name was Aretta and McCowan, Aretta Owens McCowan.  She was living in Terry, Mississippi and some of those homes that have the tub on the front porch and the--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --spring on the side, she had three children, two girls and a boy.  The son, his name was Jack [ph.], was arrested as a young man.  He found a ring on a woman who had, who was dead.  He was going to meet his girlfriend, he passed by this place and saw this white woman who was dead, took the ring off of her finger, gave it to his girlfriend, so they arrested him and he went to prison.  I think he stayed in prison maybe four or five years and then the person who actually did the murder, confessed and that was how my uncle [maternal great-uncle] was released.
Speaker 1: Oh, because he took the ring so they convicted him of murder?
Speaker 2: Because he had the ring in his possession.  He gave it to his girlfriend who, of course, showed it to everybody.
Speaker 1: Wow.  Your--you said your mother's family, you can trace back to great-great-grandparents.  Was that during the period of slavery?
Speaker 2: Yes, but my great-grandmother was the daughter of a slave--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I don't remember the names.  My grandmother [Mary McCowan Kelley] was, was not.
Speaker 1: And the family in Jackson [Mississippi], what, what, what was their work?
Speaker 2: My grandfather [John Kelley, Sr.] worked on the railroad [Illinois Central Railroad] but he also (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --had two other jobs.  He was, he did yards, you know, on the weekends.
Speaker 1: Like landscaping?
Speaker 2: Landscaping, but they didn't call it landscaping--
Speaker 1: Right (laughter).
Speaker 2: --he did yards.  He worked on the railroad during the week and--
Speaker 1: And when you say he worked on the railroad, what did he do?
Speaker 2: He was the baggage person.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He, but he was just a baggage worker.  He--
Speaker 1: So he would load the bags onto the train?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He also, he did the yards, he also did collection of funeral home policies, burial policies.  He would go door to door to collect.  At that time, people would pay maybe thirty-nine cents or a $1.20 a week or a month for their burial policy for a funeral home and I just remember him, he never drove but I watched him walking around, you know, he'd leave home--he'd leave the railroad and then come home and change into a three piece suit with a tie and a pen and walk everywhere he went, knocking on doors to collect that burial for a funeral home there and then on weekends he'd do the laundry.  My grandmother was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The laundry?
Speaker 2: --he would, I'm sorry, he'd do the lawns--
Speaker 1: The lawns, right--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --okay.
Speaker 2: My grandmother was a housewife.  She just raised the seven children, took care of the home and probably managed the family more than anything else.
Speaker 1: And so--
Story_ID: 655245
Speaker 1: Your mother [Alfanette Kelley Holloway] and siblings, were they the first in the family to be educated?
Speaker 2: Yes, college educated (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) College educated, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: And all of them went to college?
Speaker 2: All of them went to college or to nursing school to get, um-hm.
Speaker 1: They, to have degrees--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and you described that your mother had to leave.  Was it to get an advanced degree [from Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] or, or--
Speaker 2: She received her bachelor's at Jackson State.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Jackson State University [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] is historically a black college [HBCU], you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so they were able to go there but in order for teachers to get a master's [degree] to excel in their profession, they had to leave the state because there was Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi], there was University of Southern Mississippi [Hattiesburg, Mississippi], they were not able to go to those schools.
Speaker 1: And there was no master's program at Jackson State?
Speaker 2: No, and the state paid for all of the black teachers who had a desire to go, to go to school, in any school that would accept them, pay their tuition, pay their room and board, I'm not sure if they paid their transportation, but, and they gave them a stipend to buy their books and spending money.
Speaker 1: And was this with the understanding that they would come back and teach?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was that a requirement of this?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure that if it was a requirement.  I'm sure that it, it probably didn't have to be because they were going to come back--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --anyway and they all did that during the summers.  It was so interesting that all of my teachers, well not in my elementary school but in high school [Jim Hill High School, Jackson, Mississippi], all of my teachers did that and they went to schools like NYU [New York University, New York, New York], Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], Indiana, Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], Iowa [University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa], you know, Colorado [University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado], all the schools, and they'd come back and in our classroom settings they would talk about the experiences during the summer.  So we were getting it intravenously--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --the, the message that it is possible for you to go to a great school and to excel and it's, it was not something that was held from us and we kind of looked forward to that.
Speaker 1: Sure, because they, you had firsthand experience from them--
Speaker 2: Yes, well by the time I graduated--
Speaker 1: --secondhand.
Speaker 2: --from high school, that law had passed and so we were able to go through, go to Ole Miss and those schools, I just chose not to.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, was that provision something that happened in other--
Speaker 2: Yes, it happened in Florida--
Speaker 1: --part, other state, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --Louisiana, Alabama.  I'm, I'm not, I'm not sure about Tennessee but I know that, I've heard people talk about it here in Florida.  I know that there were classmates of my mother's who, who lived in Alabama; and so it was probably central to the southern states.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 655246
Speaker 1: So let's talk about your father.  Tell me his name, please, when and where he was born and a bit about him.
Speaker 2: Clifford Holloway.  He was born in Columbia, Mississippi.  He grew up in Oak Vale [Mississippi] which is about ten miles from Columbia.  His parents died when he was, both of his parents had died by the time he was eighth grade.  He was the oldest of six children and he dropped out of school in eighth grade to help raise his sis- his brothers and sisters.  After the last ones were old enough to take care of themselves, he moved to Jackson [Mississippi].  He had been married, his wife died and he met my mother [Alfanette Kelley Holloway] at a church service [at Christ Temple Church of Christ Holiness, U.S.A., Jackson, Mississippi] and that, the rest is history.
Speaker 1: So, back to his, both of his parents died when he was in the eighth grade.  Were they in an accident or something?
Speaker 2: No, I think the father was ill and the mother became ill.  She had always been sickly, you know, and I think it was just, he's never spoken about those deaths.  I think, I don't know if it was painful.  He told us that he did take care of his brothers and sisters and they've since, you know, always refer to him as the one in charge.  And so, we don't know very much about his life.
Speaker 1: But, but you know that both of his parents died in the same year?
Speaker 2: Not in the same year.  The father died first and then the mother died subsequently, maybe two years later.
Speaker 1: Okay, but in, close--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, as long as she was living, he didn't have to drop out of school.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So he became the--
Speaker 2: The provider for them (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the provider.  He dropped out of school--
Speaker 2: To work on farms and to, you know, help do whatever he could to help give his brothers and sisters a better life.
Speaker 1: And what kind of community were they growing up in?
Speaker 2: It was a farm community, farming community, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did they live on a farm?
Speaker 2: They did and after growing up, he and his brothers, who stayed there for a while, bought a lot of the land and they owned quite a bit of property but when my father decided to move to Jackson, to, to work on the railroad [Illinois Central Railroad], to make more money, the other brother kept most of the land and they shared it.
Speaker 1: And so they bought up a lot of land. Did they have working farms there?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  But they did, you know, family members did most of the work (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and they would hire some cousins or people like that but for the most part it was family.
Speaker 1: And was the farming primarily for the family, like subsistence farming or, or were they actually selling food?
Speaker 2: I think, I'm not sure, I think at the early ages, they probably sold the food.  I do remember, I spent a summer there when my mother was gone one summer.  I didn't like it at all but I do remember picking string beans, peanuts, there were potatoes, blackberries and other people did the greens and the corn and things like that but later I know that my uncle and his son started a lumber business.  So they would cut the trees and sell the timber.
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your father's family?
Speaker 2: That's as far back as I can go to my father (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and his parents.  The town that they moved from, Columbia and Oak Vale, there're not very accurate records, because my father was born in 1905 and so they did not have any accurate records that we could find.  We tried Ancestry [ancestry.com] and it stopped at his father.  His father's name was Ambrose [sic. Jodie Holloway] and his mother's name was Jody [sic. Lucy Holloway].
Speaker 1: But you didn't know the, well, of course (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I never met them, no.
Speaker 1: --because they died when he was very young.
Speaker 2: Now I have pictures of them that my aunt gave us but that's all I have.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 655247
Speaker 1: Did your father ever talk about the racial challenge when he was growing up?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No.  His mission was to keep me out of any problem with racial interactions.  I remember, he also did lawns on Saturday.  He started when he retired from the railroad [Illinois Central Railroad], he started his own lawnsc- landscaping business and I remember that he had a lot of customers who worked at Jackson State University [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] and a lot of white customers and one of them called on a day to make an appointment with him and she said, "Let me speak to Clifford [Clifford Holloway]," and I said, "Excuse me," and she said, "I want to speak to Clifford," and I said, "Excuse me."  "I want--let me speak to Clifford, please."  I said, "There's no Clifford."  I said, "Do you mean Mr. Holloway?"  And he heard me and I tell you, he wanted to kill me because he thought I had, you know, messed up his business but I wanted her to know that his name was Mr. Holloway and I was young and I just wanted to make sure that, you know, she understood that, but I didn't let her speak with him.
Speaker 1: You did not (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: But in terms of his growing up, he didn't reveal any of those stories?
Speaker 2: No, he never told us any different.  I think, in fact, he, he would refer to his childhood as difficult because he didn't have parents but that the whole community helped him, black and white, and it was a very small town [Oak Vale, Mississippi].  So, I, we really got the sense that if you behaved yourself, you know, people would like you and help you but he never gave us any indication that there was a problem in his little town.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  How old was he when he moved to Jackson [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: He was probably in his late twenties or thirties.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: His first wife had died--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and he was much older than my mother [Alfanette Kelley Holloway].  He was eighteen years older than my mother, so--and she was twenty-four when she married.
Speaker 1: So when, so his first wife was from Columbia [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And did they have children?
Speaker 2: No children.
Speaker 1: So she died young?
Speaker 2: She died very young, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, he, but he was still working?
Speaker 2: He was still working in the farm and when he moved to Jackson, he moved to Jackson to work on the railroad.
Speaker 1: And this is after she had passed?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so when he left, well, his siblings are (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They, they were adults, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --adults, right, so then he was able to leave--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --because he had done his job?
Speaker 2: And three of them moved out to California.  So the--where the train--was the City of New Orleans that runs from Chicago [Illinois] to New Orleans [Louisiana] and it passed through that area.  So he was aware of the train; and, of course, you know, you hear that there's work in the bigger cities and Jackson was--it was either Jackson or New Orleans, so he went to Jackson.
Story_ID: 655248
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he goes to Jackson [Mississippi] and do you know how long he was there before he met your mother [Alfanette Kelley Holloway]?
Speaker 2: No I don't, but I know that one of the, one of his friends, a guy who worked with him, knew that his wife had passed and he was single and he asked him to come and go to church [Christ Temple Church of Christ Holiness, U.S.A., Jackson, Mississippi] with him.  He was trying to introduce him to friends.  My father [Clifford Holloway] tells the story that before he went to church, he had a dream that, about a woman who had a sty on her eye and when he went to church it was the night service and he went to church and my mother was playing the piano and when she turned around, he saw the sty on her eye and he was not going to do anything until he could get to talk to her because that was his message from God that this was the woman for him.  I don't even think he was looking for a wife at that time but--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --and my mother was very, a very serious, not looking for a husband.  I mean she was very into playing.  In fact she played for a minister [George Thomas] who traveled and so she would travel with him to sing and she was, of all of my aunts and uncles, she was the one who everybody says was the, the good girl.  She didn't have any interest in boys or girls, you know.  She was serious about her education and she knew what she wanted to do and, of course, she was twenty-four.  So they eventually got married.
Speaker 1: Right. They got married, where did they live?
Speaker 2: They lived in Jackson [Mississippi].  The first home was in a neighborhood that was near the church that they would join.
Speaker 1: And what faith was this church?
Speaker 2: Both were Holiness.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was Holiness in the town where he grew up [Oak Vale, Mississippi] and my mother was Holiness in Jackson (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Jackson, um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so, the service that he went to that night was a Holiness service.  So that was already (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, comfort--
Speaker 2: --a crown for my mother.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: They, so they lived on Church Street with a lot of--professionals lived there and then a new community was being built about a block away from Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi].  They moved and bought a home there and that's where I grew up, on Pearl Street, and they lived there until, I was in graduate school [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] and they moved to Pecan Boulevard.
Speaker 1: And is this a black neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Pearl Street was a black neighborhood.  In fact my mother's sister lived next door.  The doctor, the black doctor lived across the street.  Professors from Jackson State lived on the street because it was new and people who bought into it first.  Now on the next street, it was really a bad neighborhood but that street had been designed to be a place where Jackson State employees and professionals could live.
Story_ID: 655249
Speaker 1: So I want you to go back to your childhood, all the way back to your earliest childhood memory.  What would that be?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory.  I just remember that my grandfather, of all the years of his life, was very special.  I loved my father [Clifford Holloway] but I loved, loved, loved my grandfather.  I was taught--
Speaker 1: And what's his name?
Speaker 2: His name was John Henry Kelley, Sr. [John Kelley, Sr.].
Speaker 1: And whose parent is this?
Speaker 2: My mother's father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was something about him.  I--people told me stories.  I was born with a deformity on my lip and the two nurses who were my aunts, one said, "Operate," and the other one said, "Don't, she'll die," and they tell the story, they told me this story so often that I think that's what really made me attracted to my grandfather.  My grandfather said, "Well operate on that baby because if she lives, she's going to wish she was dead," because I couldn't open my mouth and so I had the surgery.  Well then I was just always attracted to him.  At three years old I had another ailment and I remember he was the one who comforted me.  At four, now I think I was four but I may have been five, I remember being so angry with my mother [Alfanette Kelley Holloway] and my father that I was going to run away but I was going to my grandfather and it was night.  And so I said, "Well I'll just go to my granddaddy," and I walked out of the door and I walked down the street but when I got to the corner, I didn't know where to go and so I just stood there.  I didn't know that my father was following me in the car but that's how (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were a little girl.
Speaker 2: --I knew, I was, I think I was four, but that really is the earliest memory that I have.
Story_ID: 655250
Speaker 1: Now I have other memories.  I went to school with my aunt in Tougaloo, Mississippi.  She was a first grade teacher but I wasn't old enough to go to first grade.  My birthday is in April and you had to be six to go to first grade.  So I went to school with her.  So essentially I had all the first grade curriculum in that school.  So when I went to Catholic school [Christ the King School; Sister Thea Bowman Catholic School, Jackson, Mississippi], of course they didn't make me take the first grade again, I went to second grade (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You were advanced?
Speaker 1: Yes.  I remember being in the Catholic school and not being Catholic and that was a very--it was challenging for me because the kids who were Catholic got special treatment.  We paid tuition and we learned just like everybody else but I always thought there was a little favoritism to the Catholic children.  So I died to go to public school.  I begged my mother [Alfanette Kelley Holloway] every year to let me go to public school.  So I went to public school in the fifth grade [at Sally Reynolds Elementary School, Jackson, Mississippi] and I got beat up every day.
Speaker 2: Physically?
Speaker 1: Physically, talking about bullying.  I would--they would meet me after school, or before school, they'd take food or candy and when I say they, it was one girl, Katie [ph.].  I shouldn't give her publicity but she was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is this a black school?
Speaker 1: It was a black school, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: She and all of her little cronies would take whatever food I had because the teacher, you know in a Catholic school, they teach you penmanship, so the teacher would always say, "Come here my little secretary and write on the board," because I could write so people could read.  They thought I was being special and so they didn't like that.  So I went back to the Catholic school (laughter) until junior high and then seventh grade I went to the high school [Jim Hill High School, Jackson, Mississippi].  At that time we didn't have junior high, we had junior, senior high--
Speaker 2: Ah yes.
Speaker 1: --and so we started in seventh grade and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Went to twelfth.
Speaker 1: --went to twelfth grade, um-hm.
Story_ID: 655251
Speaker 1: So, we were just talking about your parents, I'm curious, as you think of your parents, which one would you say you favor the most?
Speaker 2: That I look like the most?
Speaker 1: No, who--your, who your, your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My behavior?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: My father [Clifford Holloway].
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: Because he was firm, no nonsense, straightforward and hardworking.  My mother [Alfanette Kelley Holloway] is the same way but she had like a, more gentle touch.  So I'm, I'm a little bit of both of them but I think I like the, the way my father handled situations and I like to think that I'm not as sensitive to certain things.  I--it's unfortunate because I'm perceived as being a little harder (laughter) but I think that's who I mimic but I have the musical sense that my mother had and I also--my father didn't understand the need for me to be involved in everything at school because he didn't have that, you know, but my mother thought that the more you're involved in them, the better exposed you are.  So she understood my need to be in everything and my father thought I was just fooling around (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, and your mother was--
Speaker 2: Educated, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) highly educated, yeah, so that made a difference.
Story_ID: 655252
Speaker 1: How many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: One, one sister.
Speaker 1: And is she younger?
Speaker 2: She--she is, she's two years younger.  She's--
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Yvette, Y-V-E-T-T-E, Lynch [Yvette Holloway Lynch] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, and what did Yvette go on to do with her life?
Speaker 2: She's a social, well she was a high school counselor and she did some work in social work--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --as well.
Speaker 1: So who was Alexandria [HistoryMaker Alexandria Holloway] as a little girl?  You, you described getting into everything in school but, you know, how would you describe the child, Alexandria?
Speaker 2: I'll give you an example.  When my mother [Alfanette Kelley Holloway] would go away to school, we would stay with various aunts, cousins, you know, my, whomever, my grandmother [Holloway's maternal grandmother, Mary McCowan Kelley], and one summer we stayed with my grandmother.  I have other cousins who lived up the street and we were very close.  She didn't want us to do anything, play cards, play jacks or anything but I was always the one who would lead the games.
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: I would always, I don't know, I just, I get, no, I don't want to tell that story, cut that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: I have another story to tell you--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --but just give me a minute 'cause I thought--
Speaker 1: No problem.
Speaker 2: --if I'm going to describe, oh I know what I can tell you.  When my mother would leave to go to school, my father would get invitations to different people's homes on Sundays and he would take us and most of them were women and when we'd walk in the door, they'd say, "Oh, Mr. Holloway [Clifford Holloway], who is that, who is that you got with you," and he'd say, "These are my daughters.  This is Yvette, my daughter," and he would go on and on and on and on and talk about Yvette and they'd say, "Oh how pretty she is," and she had a little mole and they'd take their finger and stick their finger on the little mole and say, "Oh she's just adorable," and I would stand in the background saying, over here, over here, somebody, over here, over here, and so I decided that I was going to play the piano and be very smart so people can say, "Mm, that girl surely can play that piano."
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Very good.
Speaker 2: That's what I was thinking about as a child.  My sister is pretty and we're like night and day.  I'm miss outgoing and she's very introverted; and so I spent most of my life leading her to things that she didn't want to do.
Story_ID: 655253
Speaker 1: I want you to take me to the house where you grew up, you know, your neighborhood; and what are the sights, sounds and smells that you remember as a child?
Speaker 2: Okay, the sights that I remember are the, on Pearl Street, where we grew up, it was a hilly street and so our house was on a hill, not a big hill but just a hill, and it was down the street from the high school that I would attend [Jim Hill High School, Jackson, Mississippi].  Between the high school and my house was the football field where we had games and the sights that I remember are those lights that come on at night during the football season.  That was so amazing to me because I'd want to go to every game and my mother [Alfanette Kelley Holloway] would say, "Well no it's a school night, you can't go," and I wanted to go so badly.  When those lights turned on, I went through cardiac arrest and she would always say, "You can't go to every game," and I'd go, "So I'm not ready to go," I'd sit there and I'd play the piano and I'd play, 'We've Come This Far by Faith,' and invariably, if, as soon as I got through the first phrase, she'd say, "Go on, girl," and I could go.  So I knew all I had to do was just to go to the piano and start playing but I loved those lights.
Speaker 1: Did she teach, did your mother teach you how to play the piano?
Speaker 2: No, no, she, I, no, Mrs. Woods [ph.] was my piano teacher--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and the interesting thing about that is Mrs. Woods was very strict and my sister and I both took piano lessons but my sister didn't like it.  Mrs. Woods would hit her on her fingers.  She didn't hit me 'cause I practiced and I really loved the piano but my sister didn't.  So after several years, she just started riding her bike during her lesson and I would take her lesson and I would say, Mrs. Woods would say, "Well, where's Yvette [Yvette Holloway Lynch]?"  I'd say, "Well, she's--she's coming but let me just keep playing until she gets here," and then when I'd be finished we'd go home and we never told my mother that Yvette wasn't taking her lessons.  So she was actually paying for me twice.
Speaker 1: And Ms. Woods was fine with that?
Speaker 2: And Ms. Woods was great with that and my mother didn't realize it until it was time for our recital and Yvette hadn't practiced anything and she said, "Well what are you going to play?"  She said, "I'm--I don't have a song."  She says, "What do you mean?"  She said, "I don't have a song," and I said, "That's okay, mother, because I took her lessons," and I was always defending her for that and it, and it worked out.  I mean, so then my mother put her in cake decorating and baton twirling and sewing and none of it worked but I continued with my piano lessons.
Speaker 1: So you, so what about sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: The sounds, the train, the passenger train sound is the sound that soothes me.  Of course I loved the sound of music but there's something about the train.  I don't know if it's because my father [Clifford Holloway], my grandfather [Holloway's maternal grandfather, John Kelley, Sr.] and my uncle worked on the train [Illinois Central Railroad].  I don't know if it was because we'd go to the train station every summer to see my mother leave as it pulled out or if, we could ride the train for free if it was just going on trips.  I don't know what it is but I loved, and I can tell the sound of a passenger train from a freight train.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So it's the passenger train that I loved so.
Speaker 1: And the smells?
Speaker 2: Gardenias and magnolias because those are the trees that we had in our yard on Pearl Street.
Speaker 1: Oh how beautiful.
Speaker 2: And during the seasons that they would bloom, you could smell them from afar.
Speaker 1: Wonderful.
Story_ID: 655254
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So now, elementary school.  Where did you say that you went?
Speaker 2: I went to Christ the King Catholic school [Christ the King School; Sister Thea Bowman Catholic School, Jackson, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: For elementary you were already in Catholic.  So you, you had mentioned that, that first year when you went with--
Speaker 2: With my aunt (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) with your aunt.
Speaker 2: --and I was not officially in school--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --uh-huh, but that was at Tougaloo [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: And then, and, why did your family send you to Catholic school?
Speaker 2: Because that was perceived as b- now remember, my aunt [Mildred Kelley] lived next door so--my mother's sister, who she didn't have any children, so she basically raised us as well and they were both teachers and they thought that they would give us the, we would get the best education.  This Catholic school was new and they were in, on the ground floor and so they just wanted to send us where they thought we would get a better education.
Speaker 1: Right, and you mentioned that it was somewhat confusing because it's Catholic and you were Holiness [Church of Christ Holiness, U.S.A.] in terms of the religious component and also the favoritism--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but in, in--as it relates to the education, do you feel that you got a good education there?
Speaker 2: I do, I do because, like I said, we did get penmanship.  We, it was more structured but I didn't go to public school so I don't know how to compare that.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I know that the year that I did go to public school, I think I learned a lot because I had a great teacher, her name was Clemathis B. King [ph.] and she was my fifth grade teacher.  She was very firm but I think I learned a lot from her but I also learned (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And where was she, which school?
Speaker 2: She was at Sally Reynolds [Sally Reynolds Elementary School, Jackson, Mississippi]--
Speaker 1: This was at the public school?
Speaker 2: --that's the public school, right.  But in the Catholic school, because it was new, they put two or three grades in a classroom and I think I remember the first, second and third grade in one room and so when the third graders were reading, we were supposed to be doing something else but I always, we always heard what they were doing.  When the, I was second grade, so I heard the math activities, so we learned--and I don't know whether that was good or bad, I just had a very structured education and I did excel so I'm assuming that it was pretty good (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you feel that you advanced a little bit more quickly because you were having that knowledge around you?
Speaker 2: Hearing?  I do, I do, and I also think that when it's structured.  There were things that happened in that classroom, the discussions that the third graders had.  You know, you couldn't help but hear even though you may have been working on a writing sample or you were coloring, you heard their discussions so you knew what's going to happen next, you know, you were a little bit ahead of your time.  We also had recess and we had a period where we could daydream.  We'd look out the window and I think those were my happy moments when I could daydream and, and look.  I didn't think too much about being non-Catholic as much as I thought about being a great kid, you know, with a great family and great opportunities and then, of course, nun--the kids didn't take any, make any difference.  It was just I felt that the nuns, and the nuns were white.  And so I didn't think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the student body was black?
Speaker 2: Yes, all the student body, and there was, there were students in our class who wanted to become nuns and then there were students who didn't.  And so we really had a diverse group of personalities in those classrooms.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm.  And you left there in what grade?
Speaker 2: Sixth, in seventh grade I went to the high school [Jim Hill High School, Jackson, Mississippi].  So sixth grade was my last year.
Story_ID: 655255
Speaker 1: But when did you go to the public school?  That was the high school?
Speaker 2: No, I went to the fifth grade [at Sally Reynolds Elementary School, Jackson, Mississippi]. I--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --I had begged my mother [Alfanette Kelley Holloway] to let me go to public school--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --so she finally relented.  I went to fifth grade--
Speaker 1: And then you came--
Speaker 2: --but it was so traumatic I went back to the Catholic school [Christ the King School; Sister Thea Bowman Catholic School, Jackson, Mississippi]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --for sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Got it.
Speaker 2: But it didn't go any higher than sixth grade so I had to go (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, so you had to go to the--
Speaker 2: --either to another Catholic school, which was across town or to the public school down the street [Jim Hill High School, Jackson, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: And you went to the--
Speaker 2: Public school down the street.
Speaker 1: --public school.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So going from the Catholic school to public school, what, what did you encounter that was different?
Speaker 2: Nothing because, only my teachers were different.  My, my uncle worked at the high school so I was already going to be protected from anything else but what we, we changed classes, that was different from what we did.  The teachers were of different personalities.  Some were strict, some were fun, some were both and changing the classes gave me a better perspective of growing up but the one thing that I really appreciated that we don't do anymore is that, I was in seventh grade, but there were seniors at my high school and we looked up to the seniors, we saw what we were supposed to become.  We saw how we were supposed to behave, unlike sixth, seventh and eighth grade and then you have no frame of reference, you know.  So I so appreciated that and then to see that in the twelfth grade, you can become Miss Jim Hill or you can become the president of the student government, and it was just something that we all aspired to.  We had no thought of being, you know, of course there were some students who were not well behaved but by and large we had a group of students who looked forward to becoming, eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh and twelfth graders.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  What years were you in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, Lord, 1957 through 1964.  I graduated in '64 [1964].
Story_ID: 655256
Speaker 1: So you are in Jackson [Mississippi] in high school [Jim Hill High School] as everything is stirring up--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --related to civil rights?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, and you were in a place where a lot is going on?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean, so, so what do you remember during that time?
Speaker 2: Everything.  We had what we called, mass meetings, and those were meetings that were held at the Masonic Temple.  In the evening, civil rights workers would come to Jackson to speak and as far as I could tell, you know, the civil--the Masonic Temple was a huge arena and so all of the black people were there.  My parents got off work, they got dressed, they took us and so we would sit there and we'd watch [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], Sammy Davis, Jr., Lena Horne, everybody came to talk about our plight and what we were going to do and we would do that periodically.  Everybody knew when the meetings were, everybody went and when I say everybody, I think it was everybody but it wasn't everybody in Jackson but I know that my family went.
Speaker 1: So you went as a family?  Your parents and--
Speaker 2: Yes, we went as a family.
Speaker 1: --you and your sister [Yvette Holloway Lynch]?
Speaker 2: Right, and so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, and did you know, because at this point Harry Belafonte, Lena Horne, they are already celebrities--
Speaker 2: Sammy Davis, Jr.
Speaker 1: --are you, and Sammy Davis, Jr.  You're aware of them--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --as celebrities?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So is that also a draw or is it really just civil rights is the draw?
Speaker 2: It was civil rights because it was just, first of all, I hate to say this but I didn't know I was poor and I didn't know that I was being, I was not advantaged because in our community, we had everything we wanted.  We had a drycleaners, we had the restaurants with white tablecloths.  We had the funeral homes that were impressive.  We had the schools.  We had the teachers who were prospective politicians and who were well respected in the community.  So above that, you know, it was not until we were aware when the Civil Rights Movement came that, hey, you know, these white kids have better books than you, we have second class--we've got used books, textbooks, but because our teachers went away in the summer and they talked to us about their experiences and they were learning, we really had a better, I think, a better education than the kids in the other schools because their teachers learned from old myths and, you know, what was in Mississippi.  So I didn't really think I was poor because we lived in a nice, clean neighborhood and it was not until the awareness of all of this that we started to learn and I think our parents tried to shield us from that but at the same time they wanted us to be aware that there's some things you cannot do.  So when we would go to town, we would dress up on Saturdays and have our Sunday best on because if we walked into a department store, we wanted to be clean and to try on some of the clothes.  Well we couldn't try them on in the, in all of the fitting rooms.  We had our own fitting room.
Speaker 1: There was a colored fitting room?
Speaker 2: There was a colored fitting room in the one store that my mother [Alfanette Kelley Holloway] shopped in.  She shopped in several later but she always went to McRae's.  It's no longer there.  And so we would go to these mass meetings and listen to the speakers and they would talk about things happening in other cities and that the correlation of what was happening in America.  As a, in my junior year, that was the first time that we were going to have a protest march.  I was in the, it was during the school year and so we left school.  All the high schools, all the colleges, everybody who was going to march, we had to march in twos.  The unfortunate thing is that as we were marching, we had to march by the railroad station where my father worked [Union Station, Jackson, Mississippi].  They had told the, the teachers, that, if your children participated in any of these demonstrations, the sit-ins at the stores, or any of the above, that you would lose your job.  And so, I knew that, you know, I wasn't supposed to march but everybody was marching and so I wasn't going to stay at school.  I walked with my cousin and we had to march in twos.  We're walking down singing, 'We Shall Overcome,' and my cousin says, "There's Uncle Clifford [Clifford Holloway]."  I said, "Don't look, don't look, don't look, just keep going, just keep going, don't look."  She said, "Alexandria [HistoryMaker Alexandria Holloway], he's calling your name."  I said, "Unh-uh, he doesn't even see me."  She said, "Yes he does."  And so the girl behind us said, "There's your daddy, Alexandria," and I tell you, my father was on a platform about this high and I'm down here.  He reached down and picked me up on, by the arm and lifted me onto that platform.  I had to watch all the other people go on in the march.  So as the time went by, they got out that night about eleven o'clock, my cousin called and said, they had released them and nothing happened (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause they were all arrested?
Speaker 2: They were, they were all signed in--
Speaker 1: Okay, signed--yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --I guess that's called arrested but they didn't stay and, they gave them a sandwich and how easy can that be, you know.  And so she was home before eleven o'clock; and they didn't have another protest for a while, but they sti- continued to have the mass meetings.
Story_ID: 655257
Speaker 1: Medgar Evers was killed in June, I think it's June, and on the day that they announced that he had been murdered in his own yard, in his driveway, they announced it on the radio, it was a, I'm pretty sure it was a Saturday morning but I can't be sure, I heard it on the radio and my sister [Yvette Holloway Lynch] and I were home alone and I said, "I've got to go to the Masonic Temple [Jackson, Mississippi]," and she said, "Don't go."  I said, "I've got to go, then you need to stay here," and I told her that if something happened to me, at least my parents would have one more child.
Speaker 2: Had you--you had heard that he had been assassinated?
Speaker 1: I heard, they were on the radio that he had been assassinated.
Speaker 2: This is 1963?
Speaker 1: That--I was going into my senior year [at Jim Hill High School, Jackson, Mississippi].  And so I went to the Masonic Temple and as we were coming out, we thought it was going to be coming out like always but this time we came out they had these big garbage trucks that were backed up to the entrance.  And so as we walked out of the door, you were shoved into the garbage trucks and there were dogs to keep us in line.  So we were pushed into these trucks.  They carried us some place and transferred us from those trucks to paddy wagons.  You know those are the, they're about the size of an EMT truck [emergency medical technician] and they put about fifty of us in one that would hold twenty and carried us to the fairgrounds [Mississippi State Fairgrounds, Jackson, Mississippi] where they separated the girls and the boys and the men and the women (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And when you say, we, were you with anyone in particular or you're just, you're--
Speaker 1: I was, you know, there was, I was just, I went--
Speaker 2: Right, you went by yourself.
Speaker 1: --I wasn't, I went by myself but there were other people there who I knew and there were some of my friends who didn't go, you know, but they arrested all of us, everybody who was at that mass meeting was arrested (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And took you to the fairgrounds in a paddy wagon?
Speaker 1: --took us to the fairground--right, and they put the boys on one side, the women on the other side and so when they asked us, what are you, I was under eighteen so they wanted to know what I wanted.  Did I want my parents to come and get me or did I want to stay and I said, "I want to stay."  "Well what do you want us to tell your parents?"  "Tell them to bring me a change of clothes and some money for the Coke machine."  I was so stupid.  Anyway, that's what they did and they told my parents I didn't want to come home because had I said I wanted to go home, they would have released me but they didn't tell me that and then I didn't know but I stayed for a while.  The next day, my cousin came and she said, "Uncle Clifford [Clifford Holloway] said, when you get out just keep going, don't come home."  So I wasn't afraid 'cause I knew my mother [Alfanette Kelley Holloway] wasn't going to let that happen, you know, and I knew my father, he's just that way.  So I stayed the next day and the next day, and the next day the college kids came from Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi], which was a historically black private school [HBCU].  They came in that morning about eleven [o'clock], maybe they were processed earlier, but they came into the room where we were at eleven; and we're talking about maybe four, five hundred people in this room.
Story_ID: 655258
Speaker 1: Already, the people who had been in Masonic [Masonic Temple, Jackson, Mississippi] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No by the time they already get there.  Yeah, there were a lot of people there, maybe the first time, two hundred, three hundred women in one side--
Speaker 1: Okay, but then it swells to about--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --four or five hundred?
Speaker 2: And, and we ate--the guys would eat on one side.  Sometimes we ate together, I think, outside, but we didn't mingle a lot but we'd just play cards and read books or whatever we wanted to do but when the kids from Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] came, they were older.  So they got in about eleven [o'clock] and they, it was time for lunch and they, I remember them saying, "We're not eating that, we're going to boycott lunch," so we boycotted lunch, nobody ate lunch.  The next day, well that evening, we boycotted dinner.  The next day, they were getting processed out that morning.  So by lunchtime, you know, they were gone but we had, now we've missed all these meals and it's dinnertime and I remember my cousin saying, "I'm not eating this."  They had black eyed peas and you know how the inside of that little core of the pea is not in the pea but it's on the plate, she said, "I see a worm," and I looked at her and I said, I looked at my food and I said, "I don't see a worm," and I just kept eating because I had starved for almost two days and I guess maybe like the, another--at the end of the week, or the next week, we were out.  I don't remember how long (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were in for a long time?
Speaker 2: I kept saying, I'm going to look this up to see how long I was in but my father [Clifford Holloway] and my mother [Alfanette Kelley Holloway] had to sign for us to get out and my mother wouldn't sign because she said, if she, if she had known I was going to go, she would have stopped me but since she couldn't stop me in the first place, no signature was going to stop me so she wouldn't sign anything and my father would just, keep going back to the judge saying, "If you just let that girl out, I promise you she won't be back," but all the talk that he did, when I did get home, my mother had prepared all of this food, it was just so much food and she, I know she was worried because people were hurt, they were injured there and I know they were concerned.
Speaker 1: While at the fairgrounds [Mississippi State Fairgrounds, Jackson, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Yes, but my father, everybody was so happy to see me and I'm really happy that I did that experience because it really gave me a sense of who I am and what my purpose is in life and I don't know how to put that correlation together but it changed my whole attitude.  It changed my attitude about school.  I was always smart, I did my work but I didn't have a purpose and so I think that's what really did it for me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were, you were detained for more than a week?
Speaker 2: I don't know how long it was.  I--
Speaker 1: Or--
Speaker 2: --I think it was more than a week but, you know, in that time period, I really don't know how long it was.  I know I was not out for Medgar Evers' funeral and by the time I got out, I had missed a couple of Sundays because the first thing I did was I went to church [Christ Temple Church of Christ Holiness, U.S.A., Jackson, Mississippi] and my Sunday school teacher had a whole symposium on how courageous it was for the people who did not back down because they were afraid.  Because having those dogs at, that was the most fearful time for me.  That was the only thing that I remember that was frightening (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But so you're staying at the fairgrounds, what are you sleeping on?
Speaker 2: We're sleeping on cots and we took--
Speaker 1: So they had set it up, they were, they organized--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --how to take--
Speaker 2: --and they had a little blanket or something and we ate outside.
Speaker 1: And bathrooms?
Speaker 2: We shared the bathrooms.  I think the, the girls had open bathrooms but the boys had their--they were in a different building.  So we never saw them when we were inside, we only saw them when we ate.
Story_ID: 655259
Speaker 1: You describe that i- it kind of helped to focus you to have a purpose.  What kinds of conversations are you having with the people when, over all this period of time that you're together?
Speaker 2: We had conversations with, okay, the kids from Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] were older and I'm not sure that they were much more mature but we all knew that there--the purpose of this was, now at this time, we're getting ready to see that our class can go to any school that we want to.  We're seeing that there are going to be changes in America that will allow us to become integrated and that's what we thought we really wanted, that integration and not separatism anymore.  We talked about that.  We, we read books.  The kids from Tougaloo brought a lot of books and the trustees would bring things in, magazines and things so we would know what was going on on the outside.  The trustees were the people who worked for the prisons and they worked for us (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So they were supportive of you even--
Speaker 2: Yes, well they were black--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and they were very supportive but they were--
Speaker 1: But they weren't supposed to be, though, were they?
Speaker 2: They were supposed to be doing their job and their job was to watch us.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It wasn't to beat us or anything like that but they did have conversations with us, probably not to the point where they were supposed to but they were very supportive.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  So you felt safe when you were--
Speaker 2: I did.  I know that there were, there were incidents in the boys' section that there had been fights and I don't know if there were fights, I don't think there were fights among them, I think there were fights among some of the people who cared for them.  I know that going to the fairgrounds [Mississippi State Fairgrounds, Jackson, Mississippi], in the garbage truck, we heard that a young man fell off the back of the garbage truck and the following truck hit him.  I'm not, I don't know that that's all true.  That's what we heard when we got inside and I know that parents were worried about what was going to happen to their children because they'd seen all the civil rights workers be killed, be beaten, you know, there had been a lot of distractions so there was enough--we were in Mississippi and so there was enough for them to be fearful of.  We were just fortunate at that time.
Speaker 1: And how old were you?
Speaker 2: I was, okay, so I must have been fifteen or sixteen.  I was going into the twelfth grade [at Jim Hill High School, Jackson, Mississippi].  I had not been, I have just finished my eleventh grade year.
Speaker 1: And so you said your father [Clifford Holloway] had been going to the courthouse to try to get you out?
Speaker 2: They had to sign something to say that we, they were going to release us and a parent had to do it because I was underage, I wasn't eighteen.  The eighteen year olds could get out on their own.
Speaker 1: So as you describe, when you finally get out, they're celebrating you.  They're not, you're not getting in trouble?
Speaker 2: No, no, never got in trouble.  I mean, my father was all talk (laughter).
Speaker 1: And how did, how was your sister [Yvette Holloway Lynch], 'cause you had left her?
Speaker 2: I, I left her (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was she, did she talk about--
Speaker 2: She was--
Speaker 1: --what it was like for her when you were away?
Speaker 2: She has not, I don't, she's always said that, you know, I had to be everything, you know.  She wanted to go but she didn't go and that's not unusual, you know.  She always had to be the one to stay back and be the, the one who was going to take care of my family but she's very supportive of me, I mean, more supportive than anybody else and I think that as having been home, she observed the interactions with all of the people, the worrying that my mother [Alfanette Kelley Holloway] did and she probably comforted her but I don't remember her ever saying that she was bitter because she didn't go.  She has said that she wished she had gone and, and she had opportunities to go.  She went to Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] once she left high school.  So, you know, she could have done any of that, yes.
Speaker 1: 'Cause there were more opportunities, unfortunately (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, forever.
Story_ID: 655260
Speaker 1: You say that while you were there you found your purpose.  What, what did you discover your purpose to be?
Speaker 2: I just, I learned that there was nothing to fear; and that I was capable of doing many things, and that that was where I needed to focus.  Up until that point I had always said I was going to be an anesthesiologist.  I liked it because it sounded big, it sounded smart, it sounded intelligent and that's probably why I started my consulting group [AH Academic Consulting Group].  I didn't know that I have no, absolutely no talent for medicine and I can't even stand the sight of blood.  So that was not going to be feasible for me but it was in conversations with other people.  I mean I started, I made them sing, I did a lot, and I really enjoyed the gathering and pulling people together, teaching them music and so I think that's when I realized that that was going to be part of my life's work.  I also realized that I could handle situations that I thought maybe not possible before because I didn't know what to expect when I went to the Masonic Temple [Jackson, Mississippi] that day.  I thought I was going to come right home.  I had no idea that I was going to be there and be able to stay away from my family a night or two and to endure that and so I think that's, that's what I mean.  It's--I just became a stronger, more secure individual, more confident.
Speaker 1: So, did you know Medgar Evers?
Speaker 2: Yes I did.  He was a field secretary of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and although he lived across town, I had worked in the summer at a Y [Young Women's Christian Association] with, as a teen counselor.  We didn't make much music--much money, but that was, and we met him with the teens.  I didn't know him personal- I mean, I met him and we had conversations but not alone.
Speaker 1: But since you had met him, it was very, very real when he was assassinated (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --this was not--
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't some strange person. It was a man that we respected and we loved and, of course, he had been on stage at all of the mass meetings so everybody knew him and he wasn't a strong, he wasn't a talking, loud talking person.  He's just very calm, very caring and very sensitive but very smart--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and his brother [HistoryMaker Charles Evers] was just the opposite.
Story_ID: 655261
Speaker 1: You come home and, are--do you go back to school just--
Speaker 2: I go back to school in the fall to finish my senior year [at Jim Hill High School, Jackson, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: And are you penalized in school for having been out?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No, because a lot of, during the course of the time, I went the first day, others came the second day and the third day so it just varied and so there were many of us, older students, the college students, the high school students who were there at the same time.  So the teachers were really, I want to say they were proud of us.  I can't say that because they didn't say it but we were never penalized.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  So all the while that that you are becoming more conscious, politically, and socially, you're also still serious about music?
Speaker 2: I'm very--I'm the choir director of--the student choir director and the accompanist for our choir at school and I am playing for church as a music, piano player at our church [Christ Temple Church of Christ Holiness, U.S.A., Jackson, Mississippi].  I was making $12.50 a month for every service, every time the door was open because my father [Clifford Holloway] was chairman of the deacon board and my mother [Alfanette Kelley Holloway] was also a musician but she was playing for two churches and so I had the responsibility of playing for the--playing piano (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So even, so at, this is in early '60s [1960s], $12.50 a month for, for music, that was good, right?
Speaker 2: No, it was--
Speaker 1: No, it wasn't good then (laughter)?
Speaker 2: --they thought it was good but I was a child and so they didn't, they thought they were giving me a little, you know, compensation.
Speaker 1: But even then you didn't think that was good?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, but my mother would even take that because if I played and even going into college [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi], I would have to play recitals, I would want a different dress and so she would say, "Okay, you can get that dress but I'm taking your money."  So my little $12.50, I just give it to her.  It didn't pay for my dress but it helped (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter).
Story_ID: 655262
Speaker 1: In 1964, I guess the next summer, you attend a summer music institute at Hampton University [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How did that come about?
Speaker 2: Apparently Hampton had done this periodically over the years in different disciplines so there was a music institute, social science institute, language institute because students from all over the country were selected.  There were two from Jackson [Mississippi] who went into the music program that summer.  It was just a summer program but where we were already admitted to stay there, you know, to do our college studies.  I didn't stay and neither did the other guy.  The other person was a clarinetist and I didn't stay because Hampton didn't have a band at that time.  I knew that I wanted to be a music major and I felt that I needed to have instrumental music somewhere in my background as well.  In addition to that, when I was growing up, Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] was around the corner and their band practiced at night so I was always accustomed to listening to a marching band and because Hampton didn't have that--
Speaker 1: Even when you're at home you could hear them?
Speaker 2: Even when I was at home you could hear the band and that's another sound--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --but Hampton did not have a band.  I enjoyed that summer institute but I wanted to go back home.
Speaker 1: And when you say instrumental music, 'cause obviously the piano is an instrument but you mean something that you can--
Speaker 2: I mean trumpets and horns--
Speaker 1: --handle, yeah.
Speaker 2: --yes, saxophones.  I didn't play them--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --but I liked the sound of them but I knew that I was going to be a music teacher and I couldn't see myself teaching music not having been exposed to all of the instruments.  I also played cello in high school [Jim Hill High School, Jackson, Mississippi] so I knew the strings but I didn't know the horns and the percussion and all of those.
Speaker 1: And given that you knew you wanted to be a music major, you were making a few pennies playing piano in church [Christ Temple Church of Christ Holiness, U.S.A., Jackson, Mississippi].  What made you know that this could be a way that you could make money?  Like did you believe that this could be a career to work in music?
Speaker 2: I knew that it could be, yes.  My aunt, I have an aunt, Aretta [Aretta Kelley Smith], who's my mother's baby sister, who was a music major as well, she was the one who started, when we were little we had a group called the Cousinettes [ph.].  All of my cousins, we sang and we would go around to the various churches singing, there were five of us and she was the music teacher in the public schools, did very well, and she also played in a jazz band.  Now her instrument was trombone but she also played piano and organ and because she was a teacher, I knew that I could be a teacher.  My mother [Alfanette Kelley Holloway] was an elementary school teacher but she taught music.  She made more money playing for churches than I did but she had more experience and so I saw that as, I always got money playing for weddings or funerals or things like that so I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you knew there was the--
Speaker 2: I knew that I could make it as a music major.
Speaker 1: So, you graduate from high school in what year?
Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964].
Speaker 1: And, and so is it '64 [1964] that you then go to--
Speaker 2: Hampton.
Speaker 1: Jack--
Speaker 2: I go to Hampton during the summer--
Speaker 1: Hampton, okay.
Speaker 2: --and in the fall I went back to Jackson State.
Speaker 1: And was there a music program at Jackson State?
Speaker 2: Oh yes--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --a very viable.  In fact, the chairman of the music program was Dollye Robinson [Dollye M.E. Robinson] who was the first black trumpet major to get a degree from Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] and most of the teachers there were renowned in some--in their own instruments.  They had a very strong music program.
Speaker 1: So you, you go in as what?  What, what is your major?
Speaker 2: Piano, my pi- my major was music education with emphasis in piano.
Story_ID: 655263
Speaker 1: Talk about your time there.  What, what are you learning?  Who are you, from whom are you learning?  Who's going to school with you?
Speaker 2: Okay, interestingly, when I was at Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], Hampton gave me a real sense of focus in music.  It was an introduction to a, a four year program.  You know, this is what you are going to learn as a music major.  Charlemagne Payne [Charlemagne Payne, Jr.] was the other student who came from Jackson [Mississippi] in music as well.
Speaker 1: And did you know her before?
Speaker 2: No, it was a guy.
Speaker 1: Oh, excuse me.
Speaker 2: We met, when the article came out in the paper that these two people were going to Hampton on the summer scholarship, our parents called each other and we rode together to Hampton and that's how we met.  We did not like Hampton enough to stay.  Now my mother [Alfanette Kelley Holloway] wanted me to stay but I wanted to come back to Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] and it took me weeks to convince her that that's what I wanted to do.  She finally said okay.  So Charlemagne and I came back but now we've had a whole summer of theory and applied music which meant that the students who came to Jackson State as freshmen in music had not had that so they put us in an advanced class, just the two of us, and gave us extra work and together we became more studious, more advanced.  I hung around the girls who were juniors and seniors who played piano because they were playing the literature that I wanted to play and that I could understand.  The students who were freshmen, the other piano majors with me, were playing music that I had played pretty much in high school [Jim Hill High School, Jackson, Mississippi] so I didn't hang around them so much but the seniors, the juniors and seniors graduated and left me all alone and that's when I became so serious about music that I moved back home from the dorm so that I could practice at home at six o'clock in the morning.  So I would get up at six, I'd practice until I had to go to school, I'd stay at school, practice in the practice rooms, come home and practice again at twelve o'clock.  At the same time I was playing--when the choir went on tour, they would always need somebody to play a piano recital and I would, I was the chosen one.  So, I was so serious about piano.  I saw myself as being a concert pianist.  I got my first grades my junior year, my fresh- the first semester of my junior year and I got a C in piano.  My aunt was the registrar so I always knew what my grades were before they came out and I said, "What did I get in piano, Mildred [Mildred Kelley]," and she said, "You got a C," and I, I knew that was not true.  So I said, "Unh-uh, I didn't get a C, no I didn't get a C."  She said, "Yeah, you got a C."  And so I didn't say anything to my teacher, Mrs. Norris, Gladys Norris.  I was so disturbed that my mother called Mrs. Norris and said, "Well what is she doing wrong because I know that she's practicing but something, what's happening?  Why did she get a C, suddenly?"  She said, "She's not socializing with the other girls."  Well, my friends had graduated and so I spent less time socializing and I, you know, I must have been socializing a little bit because I was already in a sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] but I was practicing a lot.  I didn't hear that I wasn't socializing, I heard she's not practicing enough so I would get up at four o'clock and I'd practice.  I almost went crazy practicing and that next semester I got a B.  And so I did ask Ms. Norris, "Why did you give me a B?"  And she said, "Because I couldn't go from a C to an A," and at that moment I decided I'm not going to be a concert pianist.  First of all, I can't take the critics.  If this is going to be the way I react to a negative performance, I'm--that's not going to work for me.  Secondly, I need to teach people how to become great teachers.  What are you grading me on, don't tell me that this is what you're grading me on so I'm going to teach at the college and I'm going to show people how to really be good teachers and that's when I made a decision to go clearly into music ed [music education] and that I wanted to be a college professor.  So to become a college professor in music, I needed to know the structure of what happens at an early age, in a middle school age, I went from kind- I started teaching in elementary school and I worked my way up so that I would know all of the developmental stages of young people and also know what levels they should attract in music.
Speaker 1: So, just so I'm clear, you, it was your, end of your junior year that this occurs, is that it?
Speaker 2: Yes, that I got the B.
Speaker 1: When you get the B and that you realize--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you wanted, you want to create better teachers than what you had just had?
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And also I didn't think I could take it if I started in a career of performance and I would--'cause I could see myself in New York [New York] playing, you know, and this is not going to work, you know.  I'd heard of people having nervous breakdowns but I'm not going to be that one.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 655264
Speaker 1: You complete your education then at Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jackson State.
Speaker 1: --and then intentionally make the plan to start teaching at--from the elementary school level so that you would understand?
Speaker 2: No I didn't do that then.
Speaker 1: I don't--explain, can you explain that?
Speaker 2: I knew that I was, I knew that I wanted to teach at the college level--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and in order to do that I knew also that I had to get a master's [degree].  I needed to go to--I couldn't just do it--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --at Jackson State but something else happened my senior year.  We had, every music major had to do a recital and I was ready to do my recital.  Now I told you that I started ahead of everybody else and Charlemagne [Charlemagne Payne, Jr.] did too.  We both flunked our senior recitals.  You had to do, go before a jury to play and the faculty will say, that's the jury, they say, "You do, this is fine, your recital is scheduled for such and such a date."  We already had our dates but when I went before my jury, I failed my jury and so I had to go and sit before the chairman of the music department and she said, "You know, you failed, you're going to have to postpone this because when you played the Ravel [Maurice Ravel] 'Sonatine,' there was a section in there that was not clear," and she was right but that was not enough for me to get the failure.  Anyway, they moved my recital back another week, moved it back another week.  I couldn't have it on the day, I wasn't supposed to have it on that day but I worked at it and I did have it on the day that it was scheduled.  The same thing happened to Charlemagne so we thought it was just a political move to let us know, you know, this is, we're going to stop you right here.  We both had our recitals and we both did very well.  So then when it was time to go to grad school, I applied to Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] and the University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California] which was a real stretch but I did get into all of them.  I decided to go to Illinois and I'm glad I did.
Speaker 1: And, and did you get a scholarship?
Speaker 2: Yes I did.  Not only did I get a scholarship, I received a housing allowance.  I lived in the AKA house, the Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority house as a house director.  There was an older lady there but I was a graduate of student--a graduate student and so the sorority paid for me to live there.
Speaker 1: Really.
Speaker 2: I was supposed to supervise the undergraduates, they supervised me and when I say that, it's because they--I was a little girl out of Mississippi, they were so fast.  They teased me a lot because I wouldn't go out to parties, I wouldn't go out to parties or do a lot of the things that they thought I should do because I was studying all the time but it was a great opportunity for me and a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: Did you feel protected because you were in at the AKA house?
Speaker 2: I guess I felt protected, I mean, there was nothing in Illinois that would frighten us, you know.  We were a little bit, a little bit profitable, I think, because at the time Illinois was trying to attract black students and so they did a lot.  They paid a lot of money for the students to go to school.  They gave a lot of scholarships and then the dean of students gave us extra incentives.  There was a conflict between the community and the university as it was in most of those institutions at that time because the community students, or the community people, saw that Illinois was paying people from out of, other places to come to school there and not necessarily the homegrown students.  But that for the most part it was a very profitable, prosperous, positive experience for me.
Story_ID: 655265
Speaker 1: So you, you move from Jackson [Mississippi] to Illinois and, and during a time when, still, you know, civil unrest is at an all time high.  In Jackson, before you left, had been the James Meredith march for freedom [Meredith March Against Fear], there, the Black Panther Party begins during this time.
Speaker 2: Right out of Chicago [Illinois], um-hm.
Speaker 1: There's a lot of, right, so--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis.
Speaker 1: Angela Davis, so now you're in Chicago [Illinois] but you're certainly not out of it, it's just that another--
Speaker 2: I was in Champaign, Illinois but what happened was, the university was aware of all these conflicts--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and so they put in place a black cultural arts center [Afro-American Cultural Center; Bruce D. Nesbitt African American Cultural Center] and they brought Val Gray [HistoryMaker Val Gray Ward].  I don't know where she is now, I just remember that she did a lot to bring to that city cultural activities and experiences that we could all benefit from and I, I don't think, of course there was still, there was still some unrest but the students at the university were there for the university and we did have problems with the administration and when we did that, we did little boycotts but nothing really serious.  Val Gray--I remember bring- Val Gray brought Nina Simone to the campus and she brought a lot of entertainers but Nina Simone came and as a musician I always loved her anyway but I really loved her that night because she stood up on that stage, we were at Krannert Center for the Arts [Krannert Center for the Performing Arts, Urbana, Illinois], it was a new performing arts center and said, "I want all of my people to come up to the front."  We didn't buy those tickets.  Those tickets were very expensive and we were students but this was open to the community and she said, "I want all of my people to come up to the front, especially the students.  You all get up right now."  Well there were people sitting in those seats and she made them get up out of their seats and go back into the back and they did it because Nina Simone said do it and she did her performance and I, that was just such a testament to who she was for me and the power that she held just by her, her being and her music and her soulfulness.  I don't know if I would have been that gracious to get up and give my seat that I had paid money for but she did because she felt like the students really needed to hear what she said.  It was a beautiful performance.
Speaker 1: And this, was this on campus or--
Speaker 2: It was.  Krannert is on campus but it is a performing arts center just like the art center here for the community.  And so there were a lot of arts entertainment but to have an event on the campus, our black cultural arts center sponsored it and they could have it wherever they wanted to but they sold tickets to bring it and that was just one example of entertainers that she brought.
Speaker 1: And what is the formal name of the grad school you went to?
Speaker 2: The University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what were your years there?
Speaker 2: I went in the fall of '68 [1968] and I received my master's [degree] in the spring of '69 [1969] and I didn't know what I wanted to do so they gave me a fellowship to go to school again and so I went back and got thirty hours, what they call the- an advance certificate.
Speaker 1: There?
Speaker 2: There, that one year.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: In the spring of '70 [1970].
Story_ID: 655266
Speaker 1: My grandmother [Holloway's maternal grandmother, Mary McCowan Kelley] died, I think it was '70 [1970], and I was on a plane going to her funeral.  The man sitting beside me was one of the superintendents of the Champaign public schools [Champaign Unit 4 School District] and we talked and he asked me would I like to come and work for him and I said, "No, no, I'm not interested in staying in Champaign [Illinois] anymore, I'm going to go some place else," but when I came back from my grandmother's funeral, he called every day and asked me to apply and then he told me, he sent me an application and I told him I wasn't interested but his name was Cleveland Hammonds [Cleveland Hammonds, Jr.] and I used to call him Jesus because that man was such an incentive and inspiration to me.  Anyway, after he just was so relentless, I took the job.  But--
Speaker 2: And what was the job?
Speaker 1: General music teacher at Garden Hills Elementary School [Champaign, Illinois].  That was a challenge for me because, and he knew it.  That school was, the principal was Louise Brundidge, white, former military, gender alternate woman who did not like black people and in my first evaluation in October, she said to me that I had to remember I came from a little colored school in the South and I said to her, "Yes, but I went to this school here, your school, and if you had seen my transcript, you would see that I made better grades at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] than I did at Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi]."  So that was a really kind of, that let me know that I was going to have a problem with her but I worked and worked.  I was so, I was working so hard because I really enjoyed the students and I was good and they enjoyed what I did.  My next evaluation was in February and she said, in the course of that evaluation, that, "Sometimes, you know, if your mother has done day work all of her life, you can't be a good teacher."  I didn't see the correlation there but I also knew that my mother [Alfanette Kelley Holloway] had not done day work and it didn't matter because I knew a lot of mothers who did and their children were successful.  So I just reached in my purse, at the time, you could smoke in buildings so I reached in my purse for a cigarette, as I was very upset and she wrote in her response, in her report to the superintendent that I reached in my purse for a gun.  So when I, I was called in to see the superintendent and I told him exactly what happened.  He said he knew that I was going to have some frustrations, I was going to be challenged there but he had to put me in that school because he knew that I would be the best teacher but they had had problems with that principal before and I said, "But I don't need--," you know, I didn't need that in my life.  He said, "Well, it's going, don't quit now, don't quit because if you quit now," 'cause I threatened to quit, he said, "if you quit now, you will never know if you'll be a good teacher," and so I did and I would talk to my aunts and my mother.  My mother would say, "Just kill her with kindness, baby, kill her with kindness."  My aunt [Mildred Kelley] would say, "Honey, cuss that woman out and come on home. You don't have to take that."  So I was really, I didn't know what to do.  I stayed on the job but he said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And this is your aunt, the one who lived next door?
Speaker 1: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, so you, you're getting it in both ears.
Speaker 1: So I said, well, I, I'm going to stay, 'cause he said, "Don't leave, don't leave," he said, "I promise you it'll be okay."  Well, when she wrote that I had reached in my purse for a gun, I said, "Dr. Hammonds, if I had had a gun that day, I truly would have used it.  I would have used it that day because I was really upset with her," well I don't know that I would have used it but I thought, if I had one I probably would have.  I was so angry but, about a month before school was out, I saw her walking down the hall crying and so I asked one of the other teachers, "Why is she crying," and she says, "Well, she just found out that she has cancer and she's going to move to Arizona and she's leaving next week," and I felt, um, just look at God but I could, I mean, I was sorry that she had the cancer but it was just the confirmation that sometimes we go through struggles, we don't have to fix them, they just work themselves out if we can just be patient and I was glad I stayed because the next year another principal came and all the buzz was, "Whoo, he's so mean.  This man is, nobody's going to be able--," but I figured I had been through the worst so I would stay and see what happened and this man became another one of my mentors, Murphy McKinney, and he was a very firm principal but he truly had the heart for kids.
Speaker 2: Wow, and how long did you stay there?
Speaker 1: I stayed there until my sixth graders graduated.  I was there three years and then my sixth graders went to the middle school, I went with them.  There was an opening so I went with them and what better way to see, you know, I knew what they were capable of doing but when you get to the middle school, now this junior high school, kids come from other schools (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is this Franklin, Franklin [Franklin Junior High School; Franklin Middle School, Champaign, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Yes, uh-huh, kids came from other schools as well.  So while I did have the students who knew me, there were other students I had to get to know as well.
Story_ID: 655267
Speaker 1: So now you then were at Franklin [Franklin Junior High School; Franklin Middle School, Champaign, Illinois] from '74 [1974] to '76 [1976], is that right?
Speaker 2: I left one year to go work at Jackson State [Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi], 'cause my aunt [Holloway's maternal aunt, Mildred Kelley] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --who lived next door called and said, "Jackson State is looking for a piano teacher, and Dollye [Dollye M.E. Robinson]," who's the chairman of the music department, "Is going to call you and you tell her, yes, you'll take it," and I said, "I got a job."  She said, "Just tell her you'll take this job because they're looking for a piano teacher and I know she wants you."  Well, why does she want me?  She wanted me because Mrs. Norris [Gladys Norris], my old piano teacher, said, "Find Alexandria [HistoryMaker Alexandria Holloway], she can take this job."  So in my interview, I said, "Well, I'll be, will Mrs. Norris be there," and she said, "Yes," and so I took the job.  The first thing I decided I needed to do was to talk to Mrs. Norris and I asked her why did she give me that C and that B and that I held that against her for so long, it really changed my life and she said that, you know, she, she didn't know any other way to deal with me.  Of course, I could play and she just wanted to make sure that I had--didn't focus so much on performance and not grow socially.  I still didn't understand it but I decided to forgive her and she was older and so I took a lot of the workload from her and decided to just help her.  Well, taking the workload from her meant that all the piano students she could have but you remember I told you that all the music majors had to do recitals?  That meant I had to rehearse with all the music majors to prepare for their recitals.  So I'd go to work at eight and I'd come home at ten [o'clock] because I teach my classes, then I'd have rehearsals.  After--I took a leave of absence from Champaign--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and a cut in salary to go do my part to pay back and give back to the school that had been my alma mater because I felt like I needed to do that.  Remember I told you my, okay, there's a destiny that makes us brothers, okay, so I, I felt like I needed to give back.  So I went, I gave back and with all that work and with the cut in salary, in the summer the vice president said, "I'm going to do something for you that I haven't done for anybody else, I'm going to give you a five hundred dollar raise."  He didn't know that some of my best friends were the guys who had come in with me and they came in with a two thousand dollar salary higher than mine and that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you knew that?
Speaker 2: I knew it because they talked to me, you know, but I never made a big deal out of it because I was giving back to my alma mater and so I decided that since I had taken the leave of absence and a cut in salary and I was working from eight 'til ten that that wasn't going, that was not the life I wanted and students all over the country might need me, I didn't need to just be there so I left plus it was very competitive at that school.  I didn't have a doctorate and to excel or to be promoted at historically black colleges [HBCUs] and any place, any college, you needed to have your doctorate.  At some point I was going to have to go to get my doctorate, so I went back.
Speaker 1: And so did you tell him that you knew about the--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --the difference in salary?
Speaker 2: No I didn't--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --I just decided to--
Speaker 1: You just left.
Speaker 2: --I just said, "Thank you but I decided I'm going to go back to my job."  'Cause it wasn't just the salary, you know.  I had friends who were working there.  I had other women friends who were working there for less and so that didn't make, it wasn't that difference.  I was living at home, I really didn't need money but it just was not the life that I saw for myself.
Speaker 1: So you went back to Champaign [Illinois], then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then I went back to Franklin to my same school--
Speaker 1: Oh excuse me, right, and back to Franklin--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --where you stayed until you went to Miami-Dade [Miami-Dade Community College South Campus; Miami Dade College Kendall Campus, Kendall, Florida]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 655268
Speaker 1: So how did that happen?  How did you--
Speaker 2: I was, I became ill.  When I went back to Franklin [Franklin Junior High School; Franklin Middle School, Champaign, Illinois], I became seriously ill; and so I resigned from my job in March, February or March--
Speaker 1: You're a young woman, you're in your twenties.
Speaker 2: I was twenty-five, I think, but I had, I had a serious problem and I, the doctor told me that I needed to go to the hospital right then or that I would die.  I said, "Well, no, I can't let my mother [Alfanette Kelley Holloway] come up here in February because she doesn't know how to drive in the snow."  I got on a Delta Air Line [Delta Air Lines, Inc.] and flew to Jackson [Mississippi] and decided to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) While ill when your doctor said you needed to go to the hospital?
Speaker 2: I did and I made it and I went to the doctor in Jackson the next morning, he said he could tell that I was raw on the inside, that I had had some serious illness but it wasn't urgent and that it seemed that I was getting better, did I still want to have the surgery and I said, "Yes," because it was unbearable, you know.  So I had the surgery and I stayed in Jackson for the rest of the summer and the rest, you know, maybe until--I was ready for the next year but during the time that I was in Jackson I had resigned.  Technically, I didn't have any insurance.  So, I went to deal with that and I got a letter from the superintendent, Dr. Hammonds [Cleveland Hammonds, Jr.], who had not accepted my resignation and so the college, I mean, I'm sorry, the system paid all my insurances, they paid all my medical bills and gave me back pay of my salary so that's why I--
Speaker 1: What a blessing.
Speaker 2: --I really just loved him to death.  When I went back to Champaign [Illinois], I was working and a man from Miami [Florida] called and said he [David Roberts] had gotten my name from the placement office at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], would I be interested in a job down here and I said, "No, thank you," I was very happy because now I'm well and I planned my year and then he called back maybe a month later and he got my name from someone at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  When he got the same name, he was relentless.  So I said, "Okay, I will consider it but I don't think so," but then I got a job as a union rep [for the Champaign Federation of Teachers] for a conference down here; and I came to the conference and the rest is history--I took the job [at Miami-Dade Community College South Campus; Miami Dade College Kendall Campus, Kendall, Florida].
Story_ID: 655269
Speaker 1: So the, the, what was the first job at Miami-Dade [Miami-Dade Community College South Campus; Miami Dade College Kendall Campus, Kendall, Florida]?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's instructor of music.  I was on the faculty, music faculty.
Speaker 1: Oh okay, so, no, what was the job that brought you to Miami [Florida]?
Speaker 2: I was a representative.  I was still in Champaign's system, school system [Champaign Unit 4 School District].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was selected as a representative to the union conference, to union convention?
Speaker 1: Yes, okay.
Speaker 2: The united teachers of Champaign [Champaign Federation of Teachers], or whatever it's called and I was not previously a member but I joined because I--you could only impact from inside and I didn't like what some of the things were, they were doing.  Anyway, they sent me as a representative to their convention, it was in Miami Beach [Florida].  So I went to Miami Beach and the person with whom I had been speaking about the job was Dave Roberts [David Roberts].  I called him on the day before I was going to leave, I'd been here a week and I said, "I'm in Miami, I just wanted to let you know that I was here, I'm leaving tomorrow and just to say hello."  He said, "I'll come and get you, let me come and get you," and I said, "Oh, I don't have much time."  He said, "Please, just let me come and get you."  So I went to, I went with him to lunch and he drove me all the way down here to Kendall [Florida], which is about a forty-five minute ride, and showed me the building, showed me, introduced me to the faculty, told me where I would likely live and he said, "So if, if you really want this job, it's yours."  So we walked back to the hotel, he said, "How much do I have to pay you?"  I said, "You, you just really don't have enough."  I said, "I've been on Miami Beach, I have not seen any other black people, I didn't see any down there, I just, I'm just not comfortable here," and he says, "Well if you think about it, it's still, you know, your job."  So I go to church the next Sunday, I get there late and the pastor is preaching and he stands in front of me and he says, "Don't miss a blessing, don't miss a blessing, you never know what God has for you."  Now the year before I had been ill and so I thought, "Well maybe this is."  So on that Sunday, I called Dave Roberts, I don't know how I had his home number, but I did, I asked him, had he hired anybody for that job and he said, "No, it's your job, it's your job."  I said, "Well when do I need to be there?  When would you need me to be there?"  He said, "August 14th," and it was August 1st, bless you, it was August 1st.  So, I said, okay.
Speaker 1: So it's the summer now, so you're not teaching?
Speaker 2: It's the summer, I'm not teaching, I'm getting ready for the fall, I was very happy getting ready for the fall.
Speaker 1: And also I'm sure you were feeling a certain sense of loyalty to the school [Franklin Junior High School; Franklin Middle School, Champaign, Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Cleve Hammonds [Cleveland Hammonds, Jr.]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, because he's taking care of you.
Speaker 2: He gave me another leave of absence to come to Miami, he did.
Speaker 1: So he really valued you and knew that he shouldn't try to--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --stifle your--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --your ascent.
Speaker 2: Yes, all the way through.  I mean, just, just a wonderful (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is this a black man?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He was, there were only four single black women in Champaign [Illinois] and his wife [Yvonne Hammonds] knows this because we tell her this story all the time.  Each of us loved him so much because he was such an upward man, I mean, he was an upright family man but he cared about us and we, we all thought, would he talk to you?  Would he talk, and we would have these conversations.  He never did anything inappropriate at all, nothing.  And so we learned to love his wife as well, but he was always very good to us (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And--
Story_ID: 655270
Speaker 1: So you go back, well, well you're home, it's church, you have this moment with your pastor; then you call Dave Roberts [David Roberts], he says it's your job.  Do you then call this gentleman, Mr. Hammonds [Cleveland Hammonds, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: No, I call my mother [Alfanette Kelley Holloway]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and told her that I think I'm going to be moving to Miami [Florida].  I had to call her because I had no money and she said, "Yeah, right, uh-huh."  I said, "No, really.  I'm going to call a moving company but I have to, they have to move my furniture."  I had a furnished apartment.  The only piece of furniture that I owned was an upright piano, a piano bench, a radio and a TV (laughter) but I couldn't move the piano, my grandfather [John Kelley, Sr.] gave me the piano (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So your furnished apartment came with the school system [Champaign Unit 4 School District]?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: You just rented an apartment?
Speaker 2: The furnished apartment, I rented a furnished (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: All those apartments were furnished, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I hired this moving company come, to come and move my piano--
Speaker 1: To take your three or four things.
Speaker 2: --and I moved to Miami and I didn't have a place to stay.  I had a friend in Palm Beach [Florida] so for the first three weeks I drove from West Palm Beach [Florida]--
Speaker 1: West Palm Beach, right.
Speaker 2: --to Kendall [Miami-Dade Community College South Campus; Miami Dade College Kendall Campus, Kendall, Florida], which took no more than an hour then, every day and back.
Speaker 1: And is Kendall the main campus of Miami-Dade [Miami-Dade Community College; Miami Dade College, Miami, Florida]?
Speaker 2: Not now, it's Wolfson [Miami Dade College Wolfson Campus, Miami, Florida].  Kendall, it's always been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But at that time, no?
Speaker 2: It was the newest campus, okay--
Speaker 1: Okay, got it.
Speaker 2: --and it was a large campus but now there are so many campuses.  It was one of three at that time.
Speaker 1: And at the time, was Miami-Dade a four year college or two year?
Speaker 2: It was a two year college when I first came, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was a two year college, right?  And, and so, what is your first job?
Speaker 2: Faculty, music faculty.
Speaker 1: And you're teaching piano?
Speaker 2: Teaching, I was teaching music education, piano and music theory.
Speaker 1: And after you're there for one year, is that it?  Is it a one year trial, is that it?
Speaker 2: It's a one year, no, no, I was hired as an instructor but I had the option of going back to Champaign [Illinois] if I wanted to.
Speaker 1: Ah.
Speaker 2: I was not given tenure, though.  You get tenure after three years--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --well then you did, after three years but I was hired as a faculty member, full time faculty member.  After my first year, I started teaching a class at Florida International University [Miami, Florida] part time just to, a night class for education majors who needed, who were required to take a music education class.
Speaker 1: Now Florida International, could--de- describe for me what each of these schools is.  What is Miami-Dade and what is Florida International?
Speaker 2: At that time, Miami-Dade was a two year college with the freshmen and sophomore level.  Florida International (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So like a community college?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Florida International was also a two year college but it covered the junior and senior years.  Later it became a four year and added the freshmen and sophomore years which then made it competitive with Miami Dade College but Miami Dade College has always had more students because it was a school that students who were immigrants could come and fulfill their college dreams, it was less expensive and it had more options.  So we always had more students.
Speaker 1: And when you were teaching also at Florida International then, anyhow, it was, they were not competitors in '76 [1976], is that?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm.
Story_ID: 655271
Speaker 1: So you're, you're in Florida--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in Miam- not just in Florida but you're in Miami [Florida] which is kind of a different kind of environment, certainly from Jackson [Mississippi].  What is your experience being, you know, getting acclimated to being in Miami?
Speaker 2: Initially, it was cultural shock to me because I realized very early, first of all, the climate was different and so I'm coming from Champaign [Illinois] where I have all kinds of coats and different colors and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --I mean, all kinds of clothes and it gets to be sixty degrees and I see people walking around in yellow coats and pink coats and I thought, what is this because, you know, first of all, the coats were out of style, they were not normal coats.  Secondly, there was a political issue.  There's this great divide between people who were native Miamians, there was a perceived divide--division, people who were native Miamians against people who came here from other places.  Now even among those people who came here, we're talking about people who came from Georgia, South Carolina, Chicago [Illinois], New York [New York], most of them moved to the southwest part of town and those native Miamians stayed north and so you didn't see a lot of integration among those two.  And then there were a group of Haitians and Cubans and people who came to do the jobs that African Americans used to do in the hotels and they would do them cheaper and they were a little bit more self-sufficient in that they would come and live with their families, I'm talking about the Haitians, the Cubans and other minorities, until they were able to build and grow their families and get better homes.  You know, they, they would sacrifice to get better.  We tend to not want to live with one another and so we're struggling independently and they're willing to do three or four jobs.  I remember going to a place where somebody had told me they were selling shoes and I walk into this, it's like a, we call them shotgun houses where you walk in, there's a living room, another room and a kitchen and you can see straight through the door.  Well in the living room was a cot and in the second room were these shoes all in the room and then there was a kitchen and the lady told me in her broken English that there were four families who lived there and the men would work different shifts so that they could, when they came home, they could sleep but the families would sleep either in that back room or in the front room on the floor, wherever, until they were able to save enough money to move into a larger place.
Speaker 1: Wow.  So, in terms of the black community, who, who were you socializing with?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a good question.  Well the first thing I noticed was, there was an incident that happened.  A young man, the police raided his house and so then I heard on the radio that there's going to be a mass meeting.  Oh, I am so, so honored that I'm in Miami at the time of a mass meeting because it's got to be just like those, you know, in Jackson.
Speaker 1: 'Cause that's what it was called, right?
Speaker 2: It was called a mass meeting.  Well, that was one announcement and it was going to be up in North Miami [Florida] on 7th Avenue, something, something, something, something, and then the next announcement that I heard was there's going to be a mass meeting in a different place and this is led by a different person.  I heard three announcements on the same day.  I couldn't figure out where the mass meeting was going to be.  And so the first thing I figured was, somebody's got to be in charge and I didn't know who the person was, if it was going to be the person A, person B or person C.  It sounded like they had not gotten it quite together; so I didn't go to either one of them, and at the same time I didn't feel like there was a forward movement.
Story_ID: 655272
Speaker 1: Simultaneously, the superintendent [of Miami-Dade County Public Schools], and this is later, and I don't know how much later, we had a black superintendent, Johnny Jones, fabulous man, very smart, willing to work out a lot of the kinks in our school system and you could just tell by the way he had come aboard that he was moving our educational system forward and I was very impressed but he was accused of stealing gold plumbing.  I don't know, I don't want to go into the details but that was a big deal.  They had his trial on TV and I thought, how awful that is even if he's guilty, why do you put this trial on TV at night?  So that was a subject of conversation.  Everybody in the city watched that trial and so you saw people who supported him, testify, you saw people who were against him, testify, it was just horrible, horrible.  I walked into my office, I was the only African American in the music department, the English department, the art department, the communications department [at Miami-Dade Community College South Campus; Miami Dade College Kendall Campus, Kendall, Florida], and so I walk into the office and in the main office there are most of my faculty there and they, "Come here, Alex [HistoryMaker Alexandria Holloway]."  Well I'm acclimated to the department.  I know I'm the only--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Rolling, okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: --and so I walk into my office and then the--my colleagues are in the outer office, like a lobby, and they say, "Alex, come here, come here," and I walk in there, at that time, I was wearing a curly perm so my hair was down here and I came here with a short Afro but I had allowed my hair to grow, and they said, "Alex, tell us, what do you think about this Johnny Jones man," and it was just the way that they asked me, which already, I assumed that they had already made an assessment themselves and they were asking me to corroborate or to tell them something different or to defend him and I was very, very offended.  And so I said, "Excuse me," and they asked the question again and I said, "I'll tell you when I get back."  I left the campus, I went to my beautician, I said, "Cut my hair" because had I had my hair short, I don't think they would have ever asked me that question and I cut my hair, I came back to the office, they never asked me that question again and no question similar to that and it wasn't because I couldn't have answered them because I thought it was a disgrace, I could have said that, it's just that I didn't think that I wanted to even deal with that, with them, that was not a conversation that I wanted to enter.
Speaker 2: And so, hair is such an important part of black culture, especially for African American women.  You describe the curly perm going back to the natural.  What--short natural--what do you, what do you think that means because you, you make, you had this haircut as a form of empowerment, right?  What, what do you think that meant, the difference between that curly perm and, and your short natural?
Speaker 1: I think it meant that I was ready to assimilate when I had the curly perm, that I went from the short natural, I wanted to change and I allowed my hair to grow so that it could do that and the curly perm was easier to deal with than just a regular perm but at the same time, and I don't think that internally I changed, I think my hair changed, but I think that the perception of others is that they don't approach you with certain circumstances or conversations if they feel that you are a little distant and the short 'fro gave me that distance.  Now I don't know that that's for everybody but that is, that's how I felt about it and I still feel that way.
Speaker 2: And around what year was this?
Speaker 1: I don't know, probably, it was in the '70s [1970s], late '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 655273
Speaker 1: And so you are teaching, well, let, let me ask this.  When you realize you're not going back to Champaign [Illinois], what is that conversation with Mr. Hammonds [Cleveland Hammonds, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I just told him that I really enjoyed it and over the year I had probably been in communication with him maybe three or four times but to give him an update on where I was so that he could go ahead and be thinking about possibilities but what I learned about being at Miami-Dade [Miami-Dade Community College South Campus; Miami Dade College Kendall Campus, Kendall, Florida] was what I saw that they did for students who came in unprepared and how they were able to bring these students up to par so that they could matriculate in a college program.  I saw how the students who came willingly were so eager to learn and that was something that I had not experienced at Jackson State [Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] or the public schools, not that those students weren't eager to learn, it was just that these had an internal purpose, you know.  Most of them were trying to better themselves, to improve their lives.  Some of them were older, they were not all seventeen and eighteen years.  Some were twenty-six, thirty, forty-six, coming back to school for the first time and I just really appreciated the opportunity to serve them.
Speaker 1: So, you're now at the school for a while.  How does your job change, you know, are you adding classes, what are you, what are you doing?
Speaker 2: I am adding classes.  I'm taking on responsibilities with different committees in the school and after my third, I'm not sure if it's my third year or my fifth, after my fifth year, I guess, I decided, oh, yes, after my third year I got married, and then after a while I got divorced, after then I decided that I wanted to--
Speaker 1: Okay, wait.  What's that while?  You get married and it's a short period of time?
Speaker 2: It's shorter than most people but it was long for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wanted to go back to school.  I knew that once--while I was married, I didn't think that I would ever be able to go back to get a doctorate because I was established, you know, and I, after my divorce I realized that I could not work at the level that I was working, teaching all these different places and I was working for the National Endowment of the Arts [sic. National Endowment for the Arts], I was teaching private piano lessons, I was the minister of music at a church, I couldn't do that and go work on a doctorate, here.  So I needed to leave (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And be married at that point, that was a lot, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  And so after my divorce, I still was working and I was doing all those things but I felt like I needed to be away from Miami [Florida] to give my attention to the studies.  I was teaching music to students who were going to be teachers and there was music research that was coming out that I didn't know how to interpret and I thought I needed to go back to school just to learn how to interpret the research.  So, I applied to Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] and I had a friend up there who coerced me to come and visit the students.  I was offered a scholarship and I did go to visit the students.  I went to visit music students there and I looked at the facilities but I looked at the students and they looked so weary, they had been there for so long, you know, more than three years and four years and some of them were getting jobs and some of them had no prospects and so I was teaching at Florida International University [Miami, Florida] and I told the young, the, my boss that, "I'm not going to be teaching anymore, I'm going to school," and he says, "Well, where you going?"  I said, "Well, I'm going to probably go to Indiana and even though I didn't like it," he said, "Well," I shouldn't say that.  He says, "Well what are you going for?"  And I said, "Because I really want to learn how to interpret the music research," and he says, "Well why don't you look at where those people are, who's doing the research," and honestly, I picked up a journal of music research, the faculty at Florida State [Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida], the students at Florida State who are now teaching at other places with graduates and I said, "Well maybe that's where I should go.  Let me see if I can apply now."  I applied, I was admitted and given a scholarship.  So that was--
Speaker 1: So did you stop teaching or you added this?
Speaker 2: No, I stopped teaching.  I requested a leave of absence, they called it, what is it?  A--they called it--a period of study that you can take away to go study--
Speaker 1: Like a sabbatical?
Speaker 2: Sabbatical, yes, and I applied for it but there were 105 applicants, out of the college, 'cause you had so many campuses and the only requirement was that you submit a proposal but I was young compared to the other people who had requested the sabbatical and I remember one of the guys on the committee saying, "Do you want me to fight for this," and I said, "No, if it's for me to have, you know, you don't have to fight," and my associate dean of arts and sciences was on the committee.  She walked into that meeting and I'm told that she said, "There's one that we don't even have to look at.  This young lady is trying to go so she can learn how to do research.  We want to grant her the sabbatical."  So I didn't have to compete with everybody else.  They gave me the sabbatical, I was able to leave and just, once I decided to go that year and I was admitted into the doctoral program, I asked for extensions and they granted them.  So for three years I stayed away.
Story_ID: 655274
Speaker 1: And so, the person (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I've got to sneeze.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I thought (laughter)--
Speaker 1: You okay?
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: That's all right.  The person who went into the room to say that, was she the one you had told that you wanted to--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: It had just gotten--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had not even talked to each other.
Speaker 1: The word had gotten out.
Speaker 2: I don't know that it had gotten out.  They, you know how a committee gets to read all the applications.
Speaker 1: Sure. You had written that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So the young man who asked me was a dean--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --and this was my dean who decided that she would support my application.
Speaker 1: So then you--
Speaker 2: And they didn't talk to each other, I'm sure.
Speaker 1: At the time that this is granted, are you teaching at both Miami-Dade [Miami-Dade Community College South Campus; Miami Dade College Kendall Campus, Kendall, Florida] and Florida International [Florida International University, Miami, Florida]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's--
Speaker 2: But I don't need to ask for leave at Florida International because that's part time.
Speaker 1: Got it, okay.  So then you go and you're, then gone for three years?
Speaker 2: Three years, the best three years of my life.
Speaker 1: What made it the best?
Speaker 2: The professors.  Cliff Madsen is, Dr. Clifford Madsen, was the head of the music ed [music education] department [of Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida] and he was, I mean, just by his very nature, he cared about the students but he was so smart and he--everything he did was based on research.  He taught a class called behavior modification and we used principles of practical examples of how you change behaviors in the classroom.  For, I'll give you the first day.  We walk into the classroom, there are not enough chairs, so people have to go outside, down the hall, up some steps to get chairs to fit into the classroom and that happened for the first week.  Everybody started coming to class on time because they didn't want to be the one to have to go and get the chairs.  Well, after the second week, we wondered.  Did he just keep the chairs in here?  What happened?  He did that so that you would get to class on time the first--you learned the first day that you got to go get chairs, you're going to try to be on time the next day and so you don't know when there are not going to ever be enough chairs.  Everybody came to class on time.  So that's just, I mean, just that example taught me that this man is about business and he did so, so many of those examples that it just, it, it just opened my eyes to how you get teachers to focus on what they need to focus on and what, how you get students to do what they need to do.
Speaker 1: And, and so you're learning, you're there because you want to learn how to interpret--
Speaker 2: Research.
Speaker 1: --the research.  You're getting your Ph.D.  What are the, what are some of the highlights of the education while you're there?
Speaker 2: Clifford Madsen was one and he taught us so many life's lessons, not just the music education but that was my primary, primary reason for enjoying it.  My second one was that although I did not have to take piano in my course of study, I did and he allowed me to take piano from this wonderful pianist, Leonidas Lipovetsky.  My, in my class, we had private lessons but Lipovetsky did it in such a way that the person who came before you had to stay and hear your lesson and you had to come early to hear him.  My partner was Marcus Roberts.  Now I didn't appreciate that except that Marcus was blind and he could play classical music better than I was.  He was an undergraduate and I was a graduate student but I hadn't played classical music. I was just taking the lessons to do that.  He was so much better than I and Marcus became a jazz musician who is now traveling the world playing and I, I can imagine that he was sitting in that class thinking, why am I listening to this little pitiful girl play the piano, but to me it was, I was learning from him but I was so amazed that he had such facility and he was playing from music that there was, you know, that was not music, not in my way of learning.
Speaker 1: Are there any other prominent scholars who were there at the same time as you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, Bob, oh you mean who were studying?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, or teaching.
Speaker 2: Well, Bob Glidden [Robert Glidden] who was the dean of the school of music or the College of Music [Florida State University College of Music, Tallahassee, Florida], taught a class called chairing the academic department and I took that class along with three other people and we looked forward to that class because he used his life and his work as instruments to teach us how to organize and how to chair a department.  He later became the president, the vice president and then the president of Miami University [sic. Ohio University] in Ohio [Athens, Ohio] and just was very prominent throughout the music education world.
Story_ID: 655275
Speaker 1: I, when I left Florida State [Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida], we were sitting in a, I was back in Miami-Dade [Miami-Dade Community College South Campus; Miami Dade College Kendall Campus, Kendall, Florida] and we were sitting in a meeting and the chairman said, "I think I'm going to give up my role as chair.  Is there anybody in here who wants to do it?"  I said, "I'll do it," because I had already had that class from that master [Robert Glidden] so I figured I can do this, I got a book (laughter) and he had taught us everything and I think she was a little bit threatened because I had had that class and because I had just finished the doctorate.  So, I went through the process and got the job.
Speaker 2: So, it was a direct correlation from having learned that, huh (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, and wanting to do it.  I never wanted, I was happy doing teaching, you know, but then after having that class and seeing the transformation.
Speaker 2: Well, so becoming a chair is a very different job, it's more administrative, right, and is it developing a curriculum as well?
Speaker 1: Not necessarily.  You work with the faculty to develop the curriculum but you have to administer it.  One of the things that encouraged me was because during the time that I had been teaching, I started this group called, JUBA [JUBA Gospel Ensemble].  It was a gospel choir and I could never get funding, directly, from the administration to purchase anything.  Now they gave me money for robes, but for music, because at that time, gospel music wasn't written out as it is now, you know, you basically had to listen to it on an album or some kind of tape or you write it yourself and that's how you learn to perform it.  And so with this group of gospel singers in an academy, I had to have something to make sure that they were learning the right structure.  So I asked for money to purchase albums.  That didn't make sense to administrators who were not musicians and who are not African American, who don't know gospel music 'cause if I need to buy music, I just go buy the sheet music.  So, what I figured out is, and I always had to justify that, so as I'm thinking about becoming an administrator, the one thing I can learn is where is the money because I saw the science department getting equipment.  I saw the business department getting computers.  I saw everybody getting what they needed except in this little realm.  I just wanted to know, where could I carve this out.  So I figured I'd become a chair for six months or a year, learn about where the music [sic.] is and go back to teaching.
Story_ID: 655276
Speaker 1: So let--let's talk about JUBA [JUBA Gospel Ensemble] for a minute because you're, you were asked to create a gospel choir but this is not your background at all.  I mean, you were, you grew up in a Holiness church [Christ Temple Church of Christ Holiness, U.S.A., Jackson, Mississippi] so you've had some experience (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --but not really 'cause gospel music is more like Baptist, right?
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I grew up in a Holiness church that did not perform gospel music.  The church that I belonged to was founded by Charles P. Jones, Charles Price Jones, and he and George Mason [sic. Charles Harrison Mason], the founder of COGIC, Church Of God in Christ, were friends.  They split and George Mason started this Church of God in Christ, Pentecostal, Apostolic kind.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Charles P. Jones started Holiness, U.S.A. [Church of Christ Holiness, U.S.A.] and so in this church there was a lot of clapping, shouting, over here it's very straight, very, no clapping, no shouting.  The music was written by Charles Price Jones.  Every now and then they would throw in something like 'Amazing Grace' or--but nothing very emotional.  His music is scripturally based, very rhythmical and very musical but classical trainers could play it because it's written true to the sound and it's, because it's so scriptural, it didn't mean that they were less religious it just meant that they were less demonstrative.  We also had an orchestra when I was growing up in my church and we also had a men's glee club that, from my memories, sounded pretty much like the Morehouse Glee Club [Morehouse College Glee Club] at that time but as years passed, you know, the men stopped singing or the instruments, whatever, but we didn't clap, we didn't shout and if anybody said, "Amen," or "Thank you, Jesus," everybody in the church would turn around and look at them as if they were inappropriate.  So, my only connection to any gospel music was with my group, the Cousinettes [ph.]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --when we sang (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you were young.
Speaker 2: --'We've Come This Far by Faith' is one song, the rest of them were hymns but because we're saying there were like five of us, people liked it because we were little children and we were very musical and the music was upbeat but it was not gospel.
Speaker 1: So then--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: --you were asked to create a gospel choir, that's a challenge?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened was I was directing the college choir [of Miami-Dade Community College South Campus; Miami Dade College Kendall Campus, Kendall, Florida].
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: You know, you asked me if I had more responsibilities.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Then the choir director was ill and so that year I took the college choir.  The college choir was made up of mostly white students.  We didn't have many black students in the program.  And so I was asked to provide some kind of entertainment for our black history program in February.  So I took the college choir and I said, "Okay, I'm going to teach you two gospel songs that we can sing, very popular songs that we can sing on that program."  It took me two weeks to learn 'Sign Me Up' and something else so that I could teach it to them and I was very proud of having learned that music to teach.  I taught it to them, they sang it that--on that day and when they got back to the music department, they told the chairman they wanted to have a gospel choir--
Speaker 1: Oh, so it was the students (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) because they really enjoyed singing that, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The music department chair calls me in and says, "You're going to have to do this, this is what the kids want."
Story_ID: 655277
Speaker 1: There was no curriculum for gospel music in the State of Florida, I had to write that program up, I had to find music that I could teach.  So I went to the Gospel Music Workshop of America [Gospel Music Workshop of America, Inc.] that summer and, honestly, I got so much music that was written down that I really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Already, right.
Speaker 1: --yes, I really learned a lot that summer and I was able to bring enough back to do a repertoire.  Well, I started recruiting students, you know, you want to sing gospel?  And I remember going to the cafeteria one day with one other student and I said, "I've got to have somebody to play. I can't play and direct," and she said, "That guy over there plays," and I said, "You heard him before?"  She said, "Yeah, he plays real good."  I went--he had on shorts up to here (gesture).  He was a basketball player on scholarship for basketball and I said, "Do you really play piano?"  He said, "Yes ma'am."  I said, "Could you come to the music department with me?"  And he came.  I said, "Now show me what you can do.  Play something for me."  He played, he quit the basketball team and came to be the musician for JUBA [JUBA Gospel Ensemble] and so the rest is history.  They just started and they brought in students from all over.  Their parents, 'cause these are the kids who live here in Florida, followed them everywhere they go and every church invited us to sing because now you've got college kids who are well behaved singing and then the administration, every time there was a program, they wanted them on because, you know, singing, clapping black kids, they wanted them on the program.
Speaker 2: So black kids.  So, so it quickly became not a white choir (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It quickly became not a white choir.
Speaker 2: Were there any white students who stayed on there?
Speaker 1: Yes, there were, still, maybe, it depends on the semester, three, four, five at the most, but when we recorded the album ['JUBA Live'], there were about five.
Speaker 2: And so, is this happening right after you've gotten your Ph.D. and you're back at school [Miami-Dade Community College South Campus; Miami Dade College Kendall Campus, Kendall, Florida]?
Speaker 1: No this is before I left.
Speaker 2: This is before, before?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Around what year was that?
Speaker 1: I went to Florida State [Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida] in '81 [1981] so it had to be '79 [1979], '80 [1980].
Speaker 2: Okay, and then when did you record the album?
Speaker 1: Probably, you know, when I came back, I want to say I recorded that album in '85 [1985].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Because I came back in '84 [1984] and after I recorded the album, I got sick again and I stayed off a year.  So it had to be '85 [1985] because I remember thinking I had recorded the album, I went to a conference in Keene, New Hampshire and New Hampshire was, the plane was very low, I could see out of the windows.  I could see the water, I could see the sky and I could see the land and I remember hearing the song, 'When the Saints Go Marching In,' that was one of the songs we had recorded on the album, I thought I was hearing it because it was so recent but it was, it was just the beauty of that whole area and when I came back home, about a week later, I became ill; and so that was, that carried me into the next dimension of my life.  After that year of being off, that's when I became the chairman of the music department.
Story_ID: 655278
Speaker 1: So you've been, you've had the experience from, from childhood, from birth, of having different illnesses?
Speaker 2: And they've all been rare, very rare, rare in black women, rare in women and serious but after each one, I, I had a better, I had a better life.  I'll tell you off camera (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, but so, just, you know, because people have all different kinds of lives and illness is a part of life for some people, as you have been on the track of building your career but also facing down illness, just, I'd like for you to talk a little bit about your inner state, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay, well then in order to do that I have to tell you what they were.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My first major bout was when I was twenty-four, twenty-five, I had a hysterectomy.  I had endometriosis and that was so severe and it was rare in black women at that time and rare in women under thirty but it caused me to have to have a hysterectomy.  After that, that's when I got the job in Miami [at Miami-Dade Community College South Campus; Miami Dade College Kendall Campus, Kendall, Florida].  Now, had I been going the way that I had without that illness, I never would have been able to endure this job because I was ill all the time.  This allowed me to be well and to be healthy and to move forward in a career and when I finished my doctorate [at Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida] and came home from that conference in New Hampshire, I had recorded the album ['JUBA Live'], I had gone to the conference, my sister [Yvette Holloway Lynch] had been here to visit and I'd been up, I just had no rest.  And so that night I had decided that I was going to sleep for a week, I started my vacation.  So I was going to sleep for a week, I wasn't going to, I had gone to the grocery store, I'd done everything.  Someone knocked on my door, it was one of my former students and she said that she had missed her flight, she was moving to the Bahamas, could she stay here and I said, "No, indeed.  You need to go and--go home," and she said that she and her family had had a fight and that's why she was leaving home.  She just wanted to stay until she could get on a flight tomorrow and I said, "Well, you can stay if you call your mother and tell her but when you come in, you go up into that guest bedroom and don't bother me.  You can just do whatever you want to do, do not bother me but you can stay just one night."  And I had honey roasted cashews and wine cooler, I was just having a ball, and I smoked.  During the course of that night, it wasn't late, it must have been about 10:30, I started to choke and I couldn't stop and I couldn't talk.  I wouldn't have been able to call anybody on the phone and so I went to her room, she was a nursing student and I knocked on the door, she had been in JUBA [JUBA Gospel Ensemble], I knocked on the door and I said, and she saw me and she said, "I've got to take you to emergency."  So she took me to emergency.  They treated me at first for asthma but I didn't have asthma, I had what took almost thirteen doctors to tell me that they thought they could help me but then they looked at my X-rays and they couldn't.  The final doctor, I was getting ready to go to Mayo [Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida] and another doctor, my doctor called and said, "I have another doctor who says he can help you."  He called and said, "I can help you, I'm a thoracic surgeon and I've looked at your X-rays, I know what it is."  I had a thymic cyst that had wrapped around my heart and my lungs and he was, he felt like he could be able to help me but that I was going to have a T scar right here but when he went into surgery, he was able to do it without the scar so I have the scar down here so everybody thinks I had a heart surgery but I didn't but that took a year for me to recover from that.  After then, I started getting all these promotions.  I was chair and I was only chair for six months.  I became associate dean and then later the new president came, I did that for several years and the new president came and I became, he appointed me as a dean, an academic dean [at Miami Dade College Wolfson Campus, Miami, Florida].
Speaker 1: So all these blessings came (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Every time.  I had breast cancer in 2010 and that was preparing me for retirement because before then I thought nobody could do my job.  So I had to let go and let other people do it and it was just amazing to see how my staff was just fabulous.  I mean, they could do this with, and, and so I was able to release it but I would have had so much anxiety because I had started the Honors College [at Miami Dade College, Miami, Florida] and it was just, you know, it was just my baby, so I didn't think I could give it to anybody else--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --but now it's gone.
