Story_ID: 619192
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Thomas Cleveland Holt, and that's Cleveland, as in Ohio, and Holt, H-O-L-T [HistoryMaker Thomas C. Holt].
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind your name?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I mean, my father's name was Grover Cleveland Holt [Grover Holt], which, you know, my grandmother, paternal grandmother [Lillian Walton Holt], obviously, named him after the president, which was not uncommon.  Obviously, she didn't know much about Grover Cleveland [President Stephen Grover Cleveland], so, but, and so I, you know, took the middle name from my father, so--
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Danville, Virginia, or actually, Pittsylvania County in Virginia, where Danville's located and November 30th, 1942.
Speaker 1: Okay and, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm now a professor of history at the University of Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Yeah, what is today? It's the 27th of May, 2010.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in my office at the University of Chicago, the Social Science Building, 1126 East 59th Street, Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 619193
Speaker 1: Okay, well, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight, People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone, I mean, all require, all the questions just require a brief answer--they're kind of a warm up, you know.  So, the first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: A favorite food. I guess steaks (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the, the Normandy coast in France.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No, I can't really think of a favorite phrase or saying.  I guess the closest thing that comes to mind is, you know, Frederick Douglass', you know saying that, what is it?  I can't remember it now.
Speaker 1: The, "Power concedes nothing without a demand"?
Speaker 2: "Power concedes nothing without demand," and, oh actually no, it's just before that, he was saying that the--those who expect to get change without, you know, struggle are like, you know, getting the crops without the rain and the thunder and the lightning, so, I always liked that one.
Story_ID: 619194
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Grover Holt] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: It's Catherine, spelled with a C, Fitzgerald Holt [Catherine Fitzgerald Holt] and--
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April 21st, 1924.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: Also in Pittsylvania County, Danville [Virginia].
Speaker 1: So this is like rural Danville, or the South, you know.
Speaker 2: Well it's out there, yes, it's a rural area.  I mean there were, both my grandparents were, you know, farm folk and not that far out, about, they were located, my home actually, place, was about two miles outside the city limits of Danville.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I went to county schools, for example, as did they, so--
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  I mean, how, are there stories about your ancestors, what they were doing and, during slavery, Reconstruction or, you know, or, what's the lore in the family?
Speaker 2: No, actually, it's not much of that, so it really, I mean my, my grandmother, my mother's mother, so my maternal grandmother, in some sense raised me.  I mean, she was, she was living with us and was my, you know, caretaker during the day when I was a kid and, and she would have stories about the area.  They didn't go back to slavery.  I mean, slavery was something that was quite hazy to her, like she was born, I guess, the 1890s and she, so she didn't have, you know, stories going back that far but they would be about the, you know, early 20th century, you know, one sort of about the train wrecks and, although she did tell me, pass on stories from her mother about, 'cause her family lived in this area, you know, since, as long as they can remember, about the fortifications, 'cause Danville was the last capital of the Confederacy. That's sort of, on the signs as you drive into town, that's what they'll have, "The Last Capital of the Confederacy," their claim to fame.  When Lee [Robert E. Lee], you know, abandoned Richmond [Virginia], because the Union forces were approaching and they got as far as Appomattox [Appomattox Court House, Virginia] but he was headed to Danville and the, the Confederate government had established its base in Danville, you know, because they had abandoned the capital and so thus it became the last capital.  And so she had stories about that she, would pass down to her about fortifications and, and trenches and stuff being, you know, constructed because they're expecting a big battle there, of course it never happened because Lee surrendered before he got there but that's about all, there's no stories of slavery per se or much beyond that.
Speaker 1: Okay, none passed down to 'em, 'cause I, not from any, from their ancestors?
Speaker 2: No, not that she, you know, passed on.  She would have been the one to pass it on to me.
Speaker 1: So one of the stories about where they worked or who they worked for in slavery or what place they were on or, none of that?
Speaker 2: No, no.  There's a bit more of that on my father's side than their.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they, I would think, though, that it was right in that area since they never left, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, no, no, absolutely.  I mean a lot of things happened.  I mean, Danville was also the site of a major race riot back in 1883.  That's, in fact--
Speaker 1: Did they remember that?  I mean, your grandmother was born--
Speaker 2: No, she never talked, yeah, she was born after that but she, yeah, again, stories passed down to her, she, she didn't talk about that.  So, and it might be, you know, there's some things that people who pass down stories in black communities, black families, and then there's things that are unsaid, you know, that, either because they're too painful or they don't want to, you know, that they don't want to pass on to the children.  I mean, it's, it's a phenomena that, you know, I think that we don't often take account of.  I mean, so there are two things that are happening here.  There's both the passing on of a legacy and then a wanting to basically put an end to those kind of, not to pass that on to your, your children because either it's shameful or it's, you know, demoralizing or whatever.
Speaker 1: So did, did you find out about the race riot of 1883 by reading about it later?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot later, I was an adult.
Speaker 1: So nobody, when you were coming up mentioned it?
Speaker 2: In fact, yeah, in fact I have a cousin who actually wrote a novel in which, using the, the riot of 1883, 19--yeah 1883 as a setting but, but it was not a part of my childhood, obvious- obviously not a part of my school history.  I think none of that would be a part of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was your mother--well tell us about your mother's family.  Who raised, now what, what was your grandmother's name, your maternal grandmother?
Speaker 2: Carrie Price Fitzgerald.
Story_ID: 619195
Speaker 1: Basically, they were all farmers, I mean, were working on (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah.  I mean, by the time I was born, they were not really farming and people were working in the cotton mill or tobacco factories which were a major, you know, part of the non-farm industrial complex in Danville [Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay, so they worked jobs more or less, you know, they were, they had to have a job in the tobacco industry and cotton mill?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, yeah, by the time I was born.  I mean, but I don't know, on my father's side, you know, my grandfather [Isaac Holt] was still operating the farm when I was a teenager.  So, so it was somewhat different but on my mother's side, no one, I mean, people raised gardens, you know, substantial garden, in fact, but no one was making a living from farming as they had been earlier.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, where did your mother [Catherine Fitzgerald Holt] go to school and--
Speaker 2: She went to school in, in the county.  In fact, and she went only to, you know, eighth grade, elementary school, not eighth grade, actually seventh grade, and in fact I went to the same school, as did my father [Grover Holt].  So, it was a small, you know, rural school, had begun as a one room school and then by the time I was there, it was expanded to three rooms with, you know, with three different teachers and the classes all--from, you know, pre-primer on to seventh grade, the classes were divided up among those three teachers.  When my mother was there, in fact I had the same primary teacher as she had had, a Ms. Williams [ph.], who was a small little woman but a real force.  I mean, I remember as a kid that there would be these big boys, you know, at least to me they looked huge and she would be, had them in, under control and if they got out of hand, she would actually whip them.  I mean, this is a small little lady but she taught my mother and my father and then taught me so multi-generations of people were taught by--
Speaker 1: What was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: It was called Mount Freeman [Mount Freeman School, Danville, Virginia] and it was, as often was the case, the name came from the church but it was, you know, situated right next to and, and actually associated with the church [Mount Freeman Baptist Church, Danville, Virginia].  I mean, it wasn't--
Speaker 1: Was it a Baptist church?
Speaker 2: A Baptist church, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean it wasn't--it was a public school but, you know, it was part of the community, in a sense of, I mean, a sense of ownership the community had of it. And Mount Freeman, itself, the church, was named after a family that had been in that area.
Speaker 1: The Freemans.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, so multi-generations of kids passed through there and, at least that one teacher had taught multiple generations.
Speaker 1: So it was actually a family named Freeman 'cause I was thinking it was like free man like a freeman like, you know, free (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, it was the family named Freeman.
Story_ID: 619196
Speaker 1: We were talking about the name, the church [Mount Freeman Baptist Church, Danville, Virginia], the school, okay, but, I didn't ask about your mother's father.  What was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: George Fitzgerald.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He actually, well actually he was alive when I was born but died shortly after so I never knew him.
Speaker 1: Okay, you say you were basically raised by your grandmother [Carrie Price Fitzgerald]?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I was--my mother [Catherine Fitzgerald Holt] and father [Grover Holt] were working and my grandmother was at home so I spent a lot of time with her.  She was, she was lived--in fact, we actually lived in the, the house that I was, you know, born in and grew up in, was the property of my grandfather, my maternal grandfather that when my mother and father married, they moved in.  My mother was the youngest of that, you know, of their children and she--
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters did he--did she have?
Speaker 2: That she had?  Let's see, there were, there were four girls and two boys and then the, and my mother was the youngest and the, my father, I mean, my father was in the war [World War II, WWII] at the time that I was born and so my mother was living, you know, in the house and they continued to live there, my fath- my grandfather died, continued to live there after the war, in fact, throughout my childhood, in fact.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did your mother have any stories about growing up that she told you, what it was like when she came along?  She was born in '24 [1924], right--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so she was a Depression [Great Depression] era--
Speaker 2: Yeah. No, she didn't actually talk very much about that and she, I mean, most stories came from my father's side than from my, my mother's side, actually, interestingly enough.
Story_ID: 619197
Speaker 1: Okay, well let me, let me ask about your father's side of the family and then we'll get them together.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Grover Cleveland Holt [Grover Holt].
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It's July, July 22nd, 1917.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was he born in that same area?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, further up the country, but in Pittsylvania County [Virginia], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what can you tell us about his an- the ancestors on that side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well he was born into a farm family.  My grandfather, who was Isaac Holt, and my grandmother was Lillian Walton Holt, and there's not much, I think was passed down about my grandfather, the Holt side of the family, but a fairly rich story about my grandmother, who was very light skinned, as were most of the Waltons. And as I learned later in life, you know, the, you know, the family origins were, you know, with, as, as many families, through the former slave master, who had, had sexual relations with, obviously, one of his slaves and that produced the, the Prices and the Waltons from whom that maternal side, maternal side of my paternal side of my paternal grandmother's side, the family actually derived and more interestingly, after slavery, that side of the family got land, they became landowners because of a legacy from the white, you know, slave owner family, from which they arrived.  And so, my grandfather then was one of, well actually it was one of the few, there were a number of people actually in that area where he lived, of black landowners.  So it was a small, small landowner, small farmer, and, which made a big difference because most of the kids I went to school with were sharecroppers and, you know, subject to all the kind of problems that people encounter as, as croppers, whereas he had, I think it was a small farm, it was about six to eight acres, something like that, but it gave a measure of independence and security that most of the peers of my father did not have and, you know, showed up in things like, you know, school attendance.  Sharecroppers were pulled out of school, would get to school late in the fall because they're still engaged in the harvest, would be pulled out of school most any time and certainly early in the spring.  So they had a much shorter school year than the rest of us and you could see this, I mean as I, even in my day, going to school in the '50s [1950s], I would see, you know, people being pulled out of school and, and this kind of irregular pattern.
Speaker 1: I never thought of, thought of it like that.  I thought, you know, in the, in other stories I've heard, I guess maybe I assumed that the school was closed when, when harvest time came and planting time came--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you're saying that the, just the sharecroppers' kids had to leave--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, I mean--
Speaker 1: --and everybody else was still--
Speaker 2: I mean I don't, it's, it's, actually, I never heard of that happening in, in that particular area, in that particular school.  Obviously, other places you read memoirs and stories of a school actually, a famous one of Ned Cobb and the, the book that Ted Rosengarten [Theodore Rosengarten] did as a, his memoir.
Speaker 1: 'All God's Dangers' ['All God's Dangers: The Life of Nate Shaw'].
Speaker 2: 'All God's Dangers' where, you know, the school was closed all together, this is in Alabama and undoubtedly Alabama, Mississippi, a lot of that happened, probably, some place in Virginia (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Everybody's a sharecropper down there, so--
Speaker 2: Right, whereas, here, I mean my grandfather was a small owner, a number of his neighbors were also small, you know, farm owners and, and so the school was not closed and at a sense, as I said, that you know, the people had a kind of propriety interest in their, in that school, this is Mount Freeman [Mount Freeman School, Danville, Virginia] I'm talking about and, although it's a public school under the control of the, you know, public authorities, a lot of ways in which it was managed and, and controlled, I think, reflected the community interest and values much more than it might have been the case in other places where there were fewer landowners.
Story_ID: 619198
Speaker 1: I mean, historically, the upper South, which is where we were, there was a much, higher degree of landownership among black people than you would find in the lower South, in the black belt, and, and perhaps this is also reflected in this, in this area, Virginia.  It had a lot of features, very common, or very similar to, the Deep South, in many respects but, in that regard, the economic situation, and the tobacco growing area rather than the cotton growing area, you can do that in smaller farms was, profitably, as opposed to cotton which is much more difficult, you know, to make ends meet, I suspect with a small farm.
Speaker 2: Okay, you need larger acreage to get enough cotton?
Speaker 1: Yeah, larger, yeah, yeah, whereas, I mean, people obviously did it, you know, they raised cotton on small plots but tobacco is more, I think, amenable to that kind of economy.  And so you had, you know, many more small farmers and I think that changed the racial dynamic and the, the social dynamic in this area and reflected in something as, as specific as, you know, how long your kids could go to school in the given year, how many months, how many days, so--
Speaker 2: Okay, so, now, we're talking about your father's [Grover Holt] side of the family and this legacy from your grandmother [Lillian Walton Holt], you know, provided this land and--
Speaker 1: Right, it's quite extensive.  I mean, there was this particular small farm that my grandmother had, you know, had inherited but the Waltons themselves, across from the church, in fact, there was a large, right across the road, a large plot of land, out of how many acres, that was also part of the Walton legacy.  And so around the, you know, at least this part of the county, you would find these, you know, plots that were, some of them uncultivated and, in fact, they were the property of the larger extended family of Waltons so it was quite interesting.
Speaker 2: So we got to, we got to assume that they were, during slavery, part of a big plantation, large holdings.
Speaker 1: Yeah, extensive holdings, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, were there, what were the names of the white people?  They, did they have the same name, the Waltons?
Speaker 1: The Shultz.
Speaker 2: The Shultz.
Speaker 1: I did some research some years later and finally uncovered the name which is--of the original owners.  It's a strange name (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Shultz is S-H-U--
Speaker 1: S-H-U-L--
Speaker 2: --T-Z--
Speaker 1: --T-Z, I think it was, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Actually, the problem is, one of the difficulties doing research on them was that the, there were different spellings of it, in the records, and I ended up having to use a Soundex and the census to actually pin them down and then use that to hook up with the property records in the county [Pittsylvania County, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Now that's a German name.  Was--is it a, was it unusual for Germans to be, you know, to be big landowners down there or was that, I mean--
Speaker 1: No, there wouldn't be many Germans. They probably had, you know, from some distant, distant connection, that was not, I mean they would not have been German immigrants. I'm, in fact, fairly certain but that the origi-origin of the name may have been, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --German but--
Story_ID: 619199
Speaker 1: What's your sense of how your father [Grover Holt] was raised up?  What did he talk about in terms of--
Speaker 2: Well my father was one of nine brothers and one sister, who actually died when I was very young. I didn't know her. And one of the brothers died in a car accident when I was very young, but the others survived into adulthood, you know, sort of this extensive, you know, family of, of them who, you know, they were actually were a lot of fun to be around when they'd get together and trade stories and jokes and so forth, they were a lively crew but he was the third, I think, oldest brother and, you know, his stories were mainly about, you know, the kind of childhood, not really, again, race relations didn't enter into the stories that were passed on.  It was, you know, the community and the crazy things he and his brothers did and the relationships and things of that sort and I don't remember actually him ever, until he gets, when they were telling me stories about being in the [U.S.] Army. There I'd get much more about conflicts with, you know, white authority but the stories of growing up are really sort of contained in the community.  I mean, it's, you know, it's about the community, it's about the family, it's about relations within that and, and relations among the brothers.  It's not about, you know, conflicts with, with whites in the community, as such.
Speaker 1: Okay, did they really encounter white people that much when they--
Speaker 2: Probably much less so because, being small farm owners, I mean, however small, their lives were contained within, within that community.  I mean their, their work life was, you know, so he'd tell me about conflicts with his father [Isaac Holt] about the work and his expectations but, you know, it's not about being, as he might have been as if he had been a sharecropping family, having to deal with the, the white boss and the school, of course was, you know, contained, again, a part of the community. I mean, segregated obviously, but by that, by virtue of that really, enclosed within, within the black community, the church.  I mean, much of his daily life, you know, did not involve, you know, that much in terms of encounters on a day to day basis with white people.
Speaker 1: So, his father basically ran a farm so his occupation was, was managing the farm, which was a pretty good size (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right, yeah, I mean, and of course, you raised tobacco which, you know, the whole cycle of that.  In fact in his, toward the end of his days, I would go up there as a kid and, you know, and, and, when they were harvesting tobacco and work on the farm, but raise food crops, you know, animals, chickens, hogs, that kind of thing, had fruit trees on the property and across the road.  So basically, it was fairly self-contained in terms of their subsistence needs and, and so, so stories and, you know, and a sense of life was about, you know, the harvest, the seasonal, you know, changes and harvesting, and harvesting the food crops as well and hog killings and my grandmother [Lillian Walton Holt] canning the vegetables and the fruits, you know, for, for winter, all of which, of course, you know, just took for granted.  I mean, I didn't think much of it until, you know, now looking back on it.  So it was a much more, I think it was probably true and I have less sense of why, on my mother's [Catherine Fitzgerald Holt] side too, I mean, they were pretty self-contained communities and obviously there would be conflicts with whites but they were sort of, you know, just occasional conflicts, you know, on the street or something, you know, being, but not in terms of anything built into the system.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 619200
Speaker 1: You said at one point that your father [Grover Holt] did more discussing about conflicts, I guess with his, within his own family that he did, otherwise.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were there any con- I mean, what were the source of conflict?  Did he have aspirations to do something else other than farm or did--
Speaker 2: You know one story tells me, he told me about, or I got the bits and pieces of it as I was growing up, how he and his brothers basically confronted my grandfather [Isaac Holt], you know, 'cause they, you know, so the family economy in that situation is one in which, you know, the, the family provides the labor.  I mean, he may have hired people. I think later on, in fact he may have hired, you know, day laborers to come and help with the harvest, you know, when they, when they, there's a lot more work to be done but for the most part, you know, having a big family was, you know, especially boys, provided the labor to keep, you know, production on the farm.  And so, at some point, they confronted him that they, you know, had enough of that and they wanted to, you know, abandon farming and go to the city and I guess, actually most of them actually, the, the, the key point of departure was after World War II [WWII] where, you know, they went off to, migrated to, you know, other places. My one, two uncles actually ended up in New York, in Brooklyn.  One, actually two, eventually ended up in Chicago [Illinois] and one in West Virginia and so forth. But even before that, they had basically confronted him that they needed to, you know, have a different life and, independent of him and the farm and that was a big, you know, sort of traumatic moment that sort of came--at least something that he could, you know, pass down as a part of the story, family lore.  So there weren't other things of any significance.  I mean, the usual kind of conflicts between brothers and so forth but, but it was more about the solidarity actually of them and, you know, and the extended family.  It was not only the nuclear family but, you know, the, with all those cousins and, and connections who also were located in that community, in the broader community, that was--
Speaker 1: This is a, really just a personal story of a bigger picture in the country of people leaving the farm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --going to urban areas and--
Speaker 2: Well, in fact, very much so because even before my father's generation, than an earlier generation, again on my grand- paternal grandmother's [Lillian Walton Holt] side of, of Waltons who had moved after World War I [WWI] in the first great, you know, migration and in a sense established a beachhead, if you will, in Brooklyn.  And so when my father's generation comes along, and they, you know, want to leave, that's where they went to, you know, either temporary work, you know, for a while and then come back home or eventually to settle and they all end up settling in Brooklyn and the, you know, my grandmother's brothers had established, in effect, you know, lives in, in, in, just after World War I, in Brooklyn.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had uncles in Brooklyn?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had great uncles in Brooklyn, then uncles and then for my, for me, when I was a junior in high school [Southside High School, Blairs, Virginia] and wanted to, you know, leave to find work, I went to, again, to Brooklyn. I stayed with my uncle and, and that part of the family, extended family that was there enabled me to do that, you know, as opposed to just sort of landing there with nobody, you know, to stay with or know.  And so, so you know, it continued, multiple generations as a result of that first, first group (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 619201
Speaker 1: How far did your father [Grover Holt] get in school?  How far did he go?
Speaker 2: Only to-- none of the brothers in that first initial stage went beyond, well, no, that's not true.  The older brothers only had an elementary school education.  There was no black high school in the county [Pittsylvania County, Virginia] when they were coming along and that would have been late '30s [1930s], early '40s [1940s] which, again, is also a pattern in a lot of the South.  I mean, there were black high schools in major cities but not, you know, not generally available, especially in the rural South.  Later the sort of second half of the younger brothers, of my father's generation, some of them commuted to the high school in the city, that had been established in the city. That is in Danville [Virginia].  The youngest of them, by the time they were coming along in the '50s [1950s], there had been a high school [Southside High School, Blairs, Virginia] established in the county that was at least close enough to, to commute to, to catch a ride to get to and later when I was coming along, they had bus service to get to.  So, as a result, my father only had an elementary school--my father and a number of his brothers only have elementary school education.  My father, when I was a young, when I was growing up, I mean, I was preteen, I guess, was, would take courses at the local high school, took a correspondence course for a GED [General Educational Development] and through some combination, got a high school diploma not too long before I got my own, same with my mother [Catherine Fitzgerald Holt].  So the, so that's part of, you know, again, representative, I think, of a lot of black families, especially in the rural South that having education beyond elementary years available to them just, just having the buildings, I mean institutions, was something that was fairly late in coming (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 619202
Speaker 1: Is there a story that your parents tell about how they met?  Was it some other, somebody introduced them (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, actually not.  There was--
Speaker 1: Was it kind of inevitable that they would meet in that area or what?
Speaker 2: No, I mean it was, I mean they all, those families knew each other.  I mean, I guess what's striking in their case is that they really belonged to different churches.  My mother [Catherine Fitzgerald Holt] belonged to a church, again, which the family was very much involved in its sustaining--
Speaker 1: What was the name of that one?
Speaker 2: Called the Mill Creek Church, Baptist Church [Mill Creek Baptist Church, Danville, Virginia], which was the oldest church, actually black church, in that area and my grandmother [Carrie Price Fitzgerald] and grandfather [George Fitzgerald] on my mother's side were, you know, really mainstays, you know, in the, sustaining that church and in fact I went to that church when I was a kid, whereas my father [Grover Holt] went to an entire--the Mount Freeman [Mount Freeman Baptist Church, Danville, Virginia] that I mentioned, entirely different church and that was perhaps unusual because they were moving in different kind of circles but they knew each other and, and, you know, somehow, you know, fell in love and got married.  I mean, they got married during the, during the war, so, second war [World War II, WWII].
Speaker 1: Okay, they were, okay.  Your father was, I guess, about twenty-five, I guess, or--
Speaker 2: Let's see, he would have been--
Speaker 1: Forty-one [1941].
Speaker 2: --forty-one [1941] so, what would he have been, twenty-three I think, something like, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, while they were, okay, so, they got married while the war was going on but he hadn't been--
Speaker 2: He was headed off to war.
Speaker 1: Oh, he was heading off to war, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, all right, so had he already joined the [U.S.] Army when he got married or?
Speaker 2: I'm, yeah, I'm fairly certain he had, yeah, and that was during a leave that, yeah, they got married.
Speaker 1: Okay, you were born in '42 [1942] so--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were born while he was away?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.  I, I didn't really know him until I was about three or something 'cause he, you know, when he came back from the war.
Story_ID: 619203
Speaker 1: So when you think about your parents' personalities and talents and various characteristics and dispositions and who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Probably a little bit from both. People always, you know, people talk, I mean they always say they, you know, "Well yeah, he looks like his father" [Grover Holt] and then others, I think actually I favor my mother [Catherine Fitzgerald Holt] more in terms of facially and stuff.  In some ways they were complementary.  They were both very stubborn people and they were, again, talk about family stories, stories of my mother and of my father of, you know, incidents in which their stubbornness was evident and so I guess I got a combination of that through both of them and the family lores that, you know, well you take after both of them, you couldn't avoid it being stubborn the way, given your father and your mother and, you know, who knows.  I mean, people tell you, I mean family and friends, you know who know them, say. "Well, that's just like your father," or, "That's just like your mother," so, any number of ways in which I'm, I'm a product of both of them, so--
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, so just you?
Speaker 2: Just me.
Speaker 1: You're the only one?
Speaker 2: I'm the only one.
Story_ID: 619204
Speaker 1: Well, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: An earliest childhood memory. I'm not certain what that would be.  I mean, I have early childhood memories but I'm not certain what the earliest is, yes.
Speaker 1: What the earliest one would be.
Speaker 2: I guess, no specific memory.  I, when I was a kid, and we're living in the rural area there wasn't, you know, transportation.  My grandmother [Carrie Price Fitzgerald] didn't drive and I--indelible memories of walking with her on the road, 'cause she was a great walker.  I mean, that's how she had to get anywhere and so she would walk great distances to see people, visit, you know, relatives or friends or whatever and the church [Mill Creek Baptist Church, Danville, Virginia] itself and she'd get out with her cane and, you know, and I'd be trailing behind her, you know.  So, that's the image, I guess, it's probably the earliest for me.  Others which, had to have come much later, were train rides and, again, with my grandmother, that is my maternal grandmother, and where she'd be going off and I'd go with her to visit her daughters, one in New York [New York], for example, one in Washington, you know, D.C. and, and I loved trains.  I think I loved them before that but I really, you know, loved train rides.  And so those are images that come to me.  So probably a lot of my earliest memories would be in connection with my grandmother because she was the one that I spent most time with 'cause my, my mother [Catherine Fitzgerald Holt] and father [Grover Holt] were working most of the day and in fact into the weekend.  So, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this lasted pretty long, I guess your early years were, a lot of the time was, spent with your grandmother, I guess, and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, until--my grandmother moved out, actually I was, I think, eleven when she, you know, went to live with another of my mother's sisters and, but much of the first eleven years was, she was very much a big part of it.
Speaker 1: Was she mainly the only one around 'cause you didn't have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Were there other family members around too when--
Speaker 2: No, because, I mean, they were, they were around, I mean, not that far away but, again, my, my mother's older brother was just down the road, for example, but, I mean, they're all working too, so, so in terms of being at home, you know, as, especially preschool, but even after that, you know, it was my grandmother that was, who was the anchor, you know, of everyday life.
Speaker 1: How would you, I guess, or how do you remember her influence on you coming up?
Speaker 2: Well, I used to, you know, the memories that stand out, she was a very proud woman and, again, the strongest images of her, like when we were walking, sort of ramrod, stiff back, you know, and one incident stands out, on one of these, I don't know where we were going, walking somewhere, and there were some white boys along the road who hurled some insult, you know, nigger or something, you know like that, and I have a strong memory of my grandmother sort of stiffening and telling me, you know, "See nothing, say nothing" loudly so they could hear, you know.  So, and, you know, and it took a long time to figure out how to interpret that, you know, but basically it was a situation where striking back or arguing with them was a, you know, would simply make the situation worse.  It was not going to, you know, was not a solution but that she wanted to assert, you know, her dignity, our dignity and press upon me a sense of dignity and, and resistance in, you know, in the face of this.  So it wasn't that she said it just to me, she said it loud enough that they, you know, "You are, as far as we're concerned, beneath our contempt," and with a, you know, a carriage and a, you know, a body language, you know, that, that, you know, that said that and that was, 'cause she'd grown up, obviously in a Jim Crow society, you know.  There was, you know, racial violence there, in other parts of the South, so it was a way of negotiating that and maintaining her own, you know, integrity and that she was communicating that.  So more than words or stories which there were those too but that's some of my strongest memories of her and, you know, she was a formidable lady.  She was a no nonsense kind of person and that was, you know, again, the strong memory and model of, of how to be in the world.
Story_ID: 619205
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, a couple of things.  One, you know, I'm in the rural South. I'm, there are family around but there, at some distance which, as a young kid, young boy, too far for me to walk. There're not that many other, you know, there are no black kids within, you know, walking distance, not like being in a neighborhood in the city or whatever and I'm an only child.  So a lot of my time was spent by myself as a kid and I had to entertain myself.  And so, sometimes, and some parts of that it was with my, you know, my pet dog or dogs actually, about three when I was growing up at one time or another, one at a time, a lot of it, it was in a rural area but fairly built up, part of it, of the rural, I say I was two miles outside of the city limits [of Danville, Virginia], what today would be called a suburb but, you know, there were woods and so forth and streams and so I did a lot of exploring, as I called it, into the, the forest out back, sometimes with my dog, sometimes alone.  So, I did a lot of daydreaming and watching the clouds and the, the changes of light during the day.  So those are the strongest images that I have of growing up, were really sort of quiet times of contemplation and exploration because my situation was not one in which I was, in a normal course of a day, you know, off playing with some other kids 'cause I'm thinking those were not, you know, close by and that would happen in school and in activities connected with school, especially later on, by high school [Southside High School, Blairs, Virginia], but in my earliest childhood, you know, that was not a part of my, so much a part of my growing up.
Story_ID: 619206
Speaker 1: Was there very much in the way of reading material around when you were by yourself?
Speaker 2: Not a whole lot, not a whole lot.  Some of my earliest reading were, there was a series of, do you remember these classic comic books, you know, which were a bit more than the usual comic book, I mean, sometimes they're historical material and there were, you know, much more, there were pictures like a comic book but a much more dense reading, you know, written stuff on them.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Classics Illustrated'.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, I used to get those and sometimes of, you know, either historical things or, you know, 'Tale of Two Cities' ['A Tale of Two Cities,' Charles Dickens] or something of that sort, that is classic books, and it was only when I was sort of preteen that one of my uncles, you know had, these books he had from college and actually a number of my older cousins on both sides of the family, then began to bring me books that they had from school.  So, as a result, I ended up, as a preteen, reading, you know, they had, I remember very vividly one book, 'The Story of Philosophy' which had, you know, Plato, Aristotle, you know, and I remember especially Ralph Waldo Emerson and I really was attracted to Ralph Waldo Emerson and the idea of nonconformity, you know, and--
Speaker 1: This is preteen?  You're--
Speaker 2: Yeah, as a preteen.
Speaker 1: So you're reading Will Durant's, is that a 'Story of Philosophy' by Will Durant?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know I'm not certain even the, no it wasn't that 'cause, it wasn't, it was actually the, a compendium of texts so the original text, as opposed to, you know, somebody writing about it.  And, and I was fascinated by that.  So, because, I mean, it was difficult enough anyway being in a rural area but at the time, and through my high school years [at Southside High School, Blairs, Virginia], the public library, of course, was segregated, the main public library.  There was a small, sort of annex that black people could use which, in my memory at least, was about as big as this office and probably fewer books than I have now.  So there was no, sort of, you know, I mean I talk to people now who, you know, grew up in cities or, you know, different in the North, go down to the public library.  I didn't know nothing--much about a public library until I was, I was in New York [New York] and working during the summer and I'd go to the Brooklyn Public Library and I thought that was the greatest thing in the world, amazing, you know, all these books, you know, that people just walk in and you can borrow and take out.  That had not been a part of my growing up at all.  The only library was the one at school, which is also fairly limited and certainly in terms of reading material, it came via, you know, luckily my older generation, just ahead of me who were going to college and would pass on stuff that they had had.
Story_ID: 619207
Speaker 1: Okay, I was asking you about sights and sounds and smells but we actually started talking about reading but are there any sights and sounds and smells that pop out?
Speaker 2: No, I mean, it's--I mean, I guess when I was saying about, you know, exploring the forest, I mean, the smells of the forest, the sights of skyline and, where I lived was a, the house we're in was sort of down a hill, there was quite a bit of, I guess, an acre or so of property around it and there was sort of a long expanse looking up, you know, long, I mean it wasn't that long but it seemed to as a kid, up to the road.  It was way set back off the road and, and so watching the cars go by, looking at the sunset, I used to love watching the sunset there, especially in the summer, and the, you know, changing colors of the clouds since the sun was setting.  There was a delicious smell after a rainfall so those kind of things.  So it's part of the, a kind of rural environment and, and I guess sort of being able to focus on that as opposed to, you know, if I had had a bunch of buddies playing baseball or something, I wouldn't have noticed but I had a lot of time and a lot of, in which I just contemplated, you know, and looked around.
Story_ID: 619208
Speaker 1: Now do you remember what your mother [Catherine Fitzgerald Holt] or grandmother [Carrie Price Fitzgerald] told you about your father [Grover Holt] being in the war [World War II, WWII] when you were real little or did you just not even miss him (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they didn't tell me anything.  I didn't, he, what I, I must have been about ten or so.  I remember sitting out in the yard and he would, he would tell stories and, and I'm not exactly certain what the situation was but it's likely, as with all boys, I was enamored of soldiers and fighting and being a soldier and marching and, and probably I was out there doing some of that and he would show me, you know, how to do it right, how to, you know, shoulder your rifle and that kind of stuff, you know, a toy rifle. But he also was telling me, you know, that he hated the [U.S] Army and, you know, stories, basically, of a segregated--he was serving in a segregated, you know, service at that time and, and so there--on the one side, it was adventurous because he was actually in the Pacific and he was in New Guinea and, and, during the war with a truck battalion, you know, service, you know, battalion.  And so, I remember asking one time, do you think, you know, getting involved in fighting, he said, no, but I, I saw a lot of action, you know, he was, you know, in a support unit.  So, but it was, you know, the kind of stories we know now very well about treatment of black, you know, troops in a segregated service.  And so, for some reason, that was kind of shocking to me 'cause I, you know, the war, you know the Army and the war were sort of separate from the world I lived in, you know, the segregated South.  I mean, somehow that was, you know, supposed to be, that kind of stuff was not supposed to be a part of that, you know, that experience.  So I was, I remember being very, you know, sort of taken aback by his, you know, the passion which he talked about, you know, the treatment during the war.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I can relate to that myself and there are a lot of other people that grew up during that time expected to hear, you know, stories about, that you see in the movies or, and black soldiers didn't have those kind of stories.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no.
Speaker 1: So, so can you remember being excited to see him for the first time or did you, do you have a memory of that, when he first came back?
Speaker 2: You know, I, it's a very, it, I have, could have been, had to be two or three, I don't know.  I remember him coming back and giving me one of those, sort of submachine guns, you know, toy gun that had a, that you turn something that sparks, you know, it's one of those early, you know, before cap pistols, at least it wasn't that kind of thing and, and I was running around the yard, you know, shooting everything in sight with this gun and I'm not certain he was on leave or whether he was back permanently at that point but it wasn't any sort of big memory of his returning but rather these, sort of, vignettes of, of seeing him, and I'm not certain what the circumstance was, whether he was discharged at that point or whether he's simply back on leave--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I wouldn't have been more than three.  Possibly, I was two.
Story_ID: 619209
Speaker 1: I was asking, was there, do you think there was a reason why you didn't have any more brothers and sisters and you were responding.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that I, my mother [Catherine Fitzgerald Holt] had, I know she had some miscarriages, that they attempted to have more, more kids.
Speaker 1: So it wasn't intentional, you know or--
Speaker 2: No, I mean I think they may have put it off, the situation was that my, both of my family--my, my parents, you know, were working in these menial jobs, basically, in their early youth, trying to make ends meet.  My father [Grover Holt] worked in the cotton mill and one of the stories he told me was about the day he decided, he came out of the cotton mill and he was sick of it, he was not going to do it anymore and he went off to barber school.  He became a barber later and I think, and, with the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], he was able to, you know, pay for schooling, he went off to Richmond [Virginia] to take a six month course or whatever it was to be a barber and came back and set up practice which, of course, takes a long time to build up a clientele to make ends meet and that was a period in which we, it wasn't a farm but we raised a lot of the food that we ate.  So there's extensive garden, corn, beans and so forth, farm animals, you know, hogs and chickens and so forth, a lot of stuff like that to make ends meet and so I think they postponed, and my mother had a parallel thing. She became a beautician, and she did house work and I remember her, in fact, I was old enough to know her going off to clean people's houses and then she went to school, to become a beautician.  So I think under those circumstances they probably postponed, I don't know this, I didn't talk to them about it, postponed having more kids, it just, for economic reasons and then later, 'cause that's when I remember that she had a miscarriage, that later they tried to have kids after this period in which they were trying to establish themselves economically.  So, I mean they were fortunate in that they didn't have to pay rent.  I mean, they had a, you know, inherited this house from my [maternal] grandfather [George Fitzgerald] but still, it was, you know, it was quite a struggle (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 619210
Speaker 1: Now what about school now?  Did you like school--I guess you must have liked school 'cause--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I loved school and probably in part because I was alone, as an only kid, and that was my social life was to be at school, you know, with other kids. And, and I, you know, and my family, my mother [Catherine Fitzgerald Holt] and father [Grover Holt] insisted that I do well, apply myself, and, in fact I remember my father making me a desk, you know, to study at, you know, with his own hands.  So, you know, so I was successful in classes at, you know, it was a social life that I didn't otherwise have, you know, playing with other kids and so forth.  So, school was great.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you have, were you particularly interested in any one subject over another?
Speaker 2: Well, not until high school. I mean, basically I was just doing, you know, in elementary school [Mount Freeman School, Danville, Virginia] I was doing what--I liked to read and that would continue after school, so that was, that was good.  In high school, I had a wonderful social studies teacher who taught history and he loved the world history and he just made it come alive.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what high school is this?  This is--
Speaker 2: This is Southside--
Speaker 1: Southside High School.
Speaker 2: Southside High School, which was in Blairs, Virginia, which is a small, you know, post office, basically, in the county.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's where the--okay.
Speaker 2: So, so I guess in terms of a passionate interest, that's where I developed it was with Mr. Hennet [ph.].
Speaker 1: This is, I assume, a segregated high school in Virginia?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I, the first integrated school I went to was Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], as a graduate student.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was segregated schools throughout.
Speaker 1: We still rolling?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, yeah, so, so Southside High School--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --segregated and as all schools in Virginia were in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, the, in my high school years, of course, was the controversy over it, segregation and implementation of the Brown decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] but that didn't happen until I was out of school. I graduated in '60 [1960] and so they integrated, I forget what year, but sometime during the early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Let's go back to grade school for a minute. Now was Ms. Williams [ph.] your favorite teacher, the little teacher you were talking about?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wouldn't say she was my favorite teacher.  She was one of, who most impressed herself on my, my memory and imagination.  Probably a Ms. Allen [ph.] who's my, sort of middle, middle grades there which was what, I guess, fourth, fifth grade, was a very sweet lady and the next one, they're all women teachers, the next one was Mrs. Cobb [ph.] who did the sixth and seventh grade and Mrs. Cobb was fairly stern and sort of forbidding.  So, so in elementary school, I think, Ms. Allen was my, my favorite.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, all right so, at, so this high school, did you have to, how did you get there?  Was it within walking distance or--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, it was. I did walk a few times when I missed the bus.  There was a bus, you know, service, as was the case with the elementary school too. The bus, you know, in fact, the same bus served both of them and so it was a long--you got to school very early because the bus had to go, you know, a circuitous route to pick up various other kids and if you missed the bus, then you, either my father had to drive me if he was home or a couple of occasions I actually walked and hitchhiked to school, which was possible in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay, about how far was it from home?  What do you think?
Speaker 2: Probably twenty miles; that was substantial.
Speaker 1: Yeah, pretty good, good hike.  So, okay, so, this, about how many students did you have in high school with you?
Speaker 2: My graduating class was ninety kids so I, maybe extrapolate from there, you know, they, and they had eighth through twelfth grades.  So, so probably four hundred kids in the school altogether, I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay, so pretty small?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: And they were coming from all over, of course, I mean, you know, I mean there was another school in the county called Northside [Northside High School, Gretna, Virginia], interestingly enough, but between them, in those days, between them they covered the county and Pittsylvania County was the biggest county in Virginia, is the biggest county in Virginia.
Story_ID: 619211
Speaker 1: Well, well did you get involved in social activities in high school [Southside High School, Blairs, Virginia]?  Were you considered like a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Like what?
Speaker 1: Well, like various clubs and did you run for student body president or, you know, did you--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --were you a popular kind of guy in school or--
Speaker 2: You know, the first years of high school, I was still, you know, pretty much a loner and very studious and so forth and then the last couple of years I was, I played football and I was captain of the football team and being a kind of scholar athlete, I sort of stood out because of that.  I was elected head of the student body, president of the student body, that kind of thing.  So, that came sort of in the last years of my high school.  My first years I was much less.  I was involved in, there was, also a teacher there, another favorite teacher was a Ms. Stitt [ph.] who was, taught foreign languages, she was not only great in teaching foreign languages but she was a great, in teaching drama and so she would put on these plays and, and that's when I got interested in theatre and I was, you know, cast in these various plays and so, that was a big part of my--
Speaker 1: Could you remember what plays you all did?
Speaker 2: Oh, we did Moliere, 'Imaginary Invalid' ['The Imaginary Invalid'] and I played the lead role in that.  We did, you know I can't remember some of the other things we did.
Speaker 1: It sounds pretty high class stuff, Moliere--
Speaker 2: Oh, oh yeah--
Speaker 1: --in high school. Yes, that's great.
Speaker 2: --no she was, they're all comedies.  I mean, she loved comedies, she loved to laugh so, the loudest laugh in the audience would be hers but, so that's, you know, one of the strong memories of high school's.
Story_ID: 619212
Speaker 1: Now do you have a recollection of people talking about or reading in the news about Barbara Johns and the students in, what do they call it, oh, Farmville [Virginia], going on strike against the State of Virginia?  That would have happened while you were in high school [Southside High School, Blairs, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  There were--I don't have a strong recollection of conversations about it.  I mean I knew about it and it was one of, I mean, it was in Virginia but it was one of many of the, you know, conflicts, you know, around the South, pretty much aware of (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, it's pretty far from Danville [Virginia] too--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, I'm sure you're aware--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, so, you know, one knew that was happening and people were upset about the adults, upset about it.  You know, actually, again, in, we weren't thinking about it that much.  I mean, as kids in the high school, we were, you know, thinking about, you know, your girlfriend, you're thinking about the football game, thinking about the, you know, that community itself.  We're really pretty much closed in on ourselves.  By my senior year, my junior, senior year, things were happening around, including, I remember there was a sit-in in town around Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company] and this is after, Durham [North Carolina] is not very far away, Durham and Greensboro [North Carolina], so those were sites of early, you know, sit-in activities--
Speaker 1: Rights to sit-in, yeah, students from North Carolina A and T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --sat in, that was '60 [1960], the year you graduated?
Speaker 2: My, my graduate, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was that in the springtime or the fall?
Speaker 2: It was February and there, and then later in the spring there were, there was picketing of the library, again, the white library 'cause, you know, segregation and eventually a lawsuit in Danville against the city for the, in federal court, for the segregation of the library.  So that was all beginning to happen in my senior year, just as I was, my mind had already, you know, was already in it to leaving and to, you know, going off to, and during the summers I was, at that point, I was leaving and working in the, in New York, in Brooklyn, staying with my [paternal] uncle.
Speaker 1: At that point in your life, what was your sense of the history of our people in this country at that stage in your life?
Speaker 2: Pretty limited, actually, 'cause it, you know, had never been a part of the curriculum in school, there wasn't that much, at least available to me in terms of reading material about it.  I would say that I learned more about the history of African Americans after I left high school and in the context of the Civil Rights Movement and parallel to that in college 'cause I went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  And so, then as what, I went to school at seventeen, seventeen year old, eighteen year old, I began to learn about African American history.
Speaker 1: Did they not celebrate Negro History Week [Black History Month] in school when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: I don't recall. They may have but I don't recall actually.  It's very likely they did but, you know, it was, you know, just one of the things that they did that wasn't, you know, particularly significant.
Speaker 1: Do you remember at community events singing the Negro National Anthem ['Lift Every Voice and Sing'] or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I, again, that's something I learned years later in my college years more than, than when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: So I think it's good to check, you know, I just ask these kind of questions at this point, high school, what was going on in a Virginia high school, it's so close to--
Speaker 2: I think, I think, you know, there was a lot of caution, you know.  It's a- again, obviously a segregated high school, a sense of, you know, that if you stepped out of line, you know, one could be, you know, get into trouble in terms of the teacher and the administration.  There were some programs but, you know, I think this was more generally true than people, you know, sort of today, and sort of nostalgia recognize.  They talk about, you know, the black colleges [HBCUs] and stuff being important to the Civil Rights Movement which they were but they also forget that a lot of black college administrators, you know, cracked down on students who went off to protest and to be involved in demonstrations, expelled them in fact.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the president [Felton Grandison Clark] of Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] did that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --he expelled all the students.
Speaker 2: I mean, and Albany [Albany State College; Albany State University], I mean, that was one of the things happened in Albany, Georgia.
Story_ID: 619213
Speaker 1: So, you know, you take that back to the public schools, there was a lot of caution on the part of teachers and the ones who didn't, stood out. Like my history teacher, who also taught civics, I remember very distinctly, took us, his class, and this was my senior year, to, you know, as part of our civics instruction, to see a trial in the court over in town, in Danville [Virginia]. And, you know, it's very interesting because the first time I've been in a courtroom, I hadn't gotten in trouble so I hadn't been in court and, of course, it's segregated because, you know, blacks sat on one side and whites on the other and I remember asking him, I said, you know, why, you know, why we all just sitting over here.  I mean, it's interesting that I in fact posed the questions since I've lived all my life in a segregated society but somehow in the, it's like the [U.S.] Army thing, you know, in the court, somehow didn't expect it to be different and so I actually got up and walked over and sat in the white side and he was very nervous, but he was also very proud.  I mean, he was an interesting guy and then, of course, the, the, what do you call them, the bailiff or whatever, came over to me and said, you know, you can't sit here, you need to sit over there.  So I got up and went back but I was testing it and he was, you know, said, "I'm glad you tested it." But, you know, that was unusual.  I mean, most of my teachers probably would have jumped out of their skin at that, you know, they get into trouble and be reported back to the principal and maybe the superintendent of the schools or something like that.  He also took us to, I mentioned the, the suit about the public library, he took us to federal court to, you know, to observe one of the sessions of, where they, the case was being argued about this suit.  So, so part of my education, that was part of my education more than, more than big assemblies or any more explicit kind of program in the school itself [Southside High School, Blairs, Virginia].  It's in these kind of, I don't know, you might call them insurgencies where, you know, especially around this particular teacher who would, you know, in the context of what would be ordinary, you know, field trips but, of course, they were, what was involved in them was the beginnings of the attacks against Jim Crow.
Speaker 2: Okay, was this a teacher, Hennet [ph.], the one you were talking about?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Hennet, and Hennet was interesting because, actually, yeah, another part of it is, as I think about this and I remember it, I had him early on, probably, I think, world history or something in which I remember one of the, his lectures that I remember most vividly was when he was describing Hannibal crossing the apps--Alps and he was, you know, very animated and, you know, this was just, I was just fascinated, you know, with this idea of, this black general, you know, attacking Rome and so forth.  Then he went off, he got a Fulbright [Fulbright Scholarship] and went to Nigeria and while he was in Nigeria, he actually wrote me letters about his experience, very extensive letters about Africa and so forth and so that was a bigger part of my education than anything that was happening in the classes, you know, and I'm very sorry, you know, my, my family house burnt down some years later so a lot of that stuff is, is gone, but he wrote me these stories, you know, these, these accounts that he experienced and that led me to seek out, I can't remember the name of the guy, the author now but, a series of books that were done on different parts of the world and one was done on Africa, 'Inside Africa.'
Speaker 2: Oh, the John Gunther--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, Gunther, that's exactly right, and I read Gunther's, 'Inside Africa' as a result of his experience in Nigeria in writing these letters and that was one of my reading experiences early on in high school.
Speaker 2: That's great.
Speaker 1: And then he came back, of course, and then I took other classes with him and that was in that context that, in teaching civics, that, you know, we, you know, encountered both the segregated courtroom on one hand and the, the federal suit against the segregated library [in Danville, Virginia] on the other, that was during my senior year.
Speaker 2: So your senior year seemed like it really was important, I guess, in terms of your outlook?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, no, he was, he was undoubtedly the most important single influence in my (simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 619214
Speaker 1: Heretofore, I was thinking, I didn't ask you about popular culture influences and, you know, movies, television.  I know I used to think that, this show, 'The Andy Griffith Show' was curious, later on, I didn't think about it when I was watching it but later on, this is a little town in North Carolina, no black people in it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And where are they at?  Everybody's happy, a nice little town but where are the black folks and this is during a time of, a lot of the conflict in the South and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, no, no, no, it's, it's, again, at the time, one sort of takes it for granted, a lot of stuff.  When I teach courses now with--you know, kids obviously have grown up in a whole different environment and impress upon them, you know, that when I was growing up, you know, black music is, is the American music, you know. It's ubiquitous and it's the face of American popular culture to the world. But when I was growing up, you didn't hear black music on the radio.  I mean, there was a black radio station that played from about six o'clock to twelve o'clock and they were, might play, oh I, actually, they went off the air at six o'clock. No, it was the opposite, and they might play, you know, some black music.  You--as I was growing up, occasionally then would maybe hear Nat King Cole once in a while but basically the, the main instruments of popular culture were reflected of Jim Crow society, basically, and that, so as opposed to later on, as an adult, where you couldn't get away from black music, you know, or black faces, you know, on television or whatever, it was, you know, as if it was invisible.
Speaker 1: So you had a television growing up, did you?
Speaker 2: We got a television relatively late, I think in the late '50s [1950s] and, you know, and the same thing.  I mean, it was, you know, basically, I guess the, one of the virtues of, there were some programs that sort of opened up a wider world somewhat.  I mean, including, even ironically, these days, to think about it, the Disney [Walt Disney Productions; The Walt Disney Company], you know, programs that sometimes had history, you know, intermixed with, you know, they're, they're basically a pretty, simple stuff and, and some of the, the drama programs that, you know, were interesting so, but most was Westerns and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Now did you go to the movies much?
Speaker 2: There was a black movie theater in Danville [Virginia] called the Ritz, in fact, no, no, I'm sorry, the Rialto [Rialto Theatre], that was down the street.  You know, by this time my mother [Catherine Fitzgerald Holt] and my father [Grover Holt] were, you know, had their respective shops as barber and beautician, and my grandmother [Carrie Price Fitzgerald] had, you know, was out of the house and I would go into town sometimes on a Saturday and I'd spend, you know, time in the movie and, and I was, you know, but they knew the people, the proprietors and so forth and in those days, of course, you could go into the, in the middle of a movie and then you stayed through 'til the end and then see it back to the middle again.  So, it didn't matter when you went in and I'd stay there until they were ready to, you know, stop work and go home.  So I spent--those are the strongest memories I have of being in the movies and they would also play some, the black themed movies that were coming out during the early mid-'50s [1950s], you know, with Dorothy Dandridge and, you know--
Speaker 1: 'Carmen Jones'--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and those kind of movies.
Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: I'm not certain I was able to see 'Carmen Jones' but some, you know--
Speaker 1: 'Porgy and Bess.'
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't--those were big productions, I don't--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but, but there were various ones, you know, that, that they ran as well as, of course, the regular Westerns and so forth and so I remember seeing, you know, those in that movie. And then on other occasions I'd gone to the segregated movie which was the other, you know, there were a couple but there was one in particular a few blocks away where, of course, we sat up in the balcony but then, I forget what years that were, that was, but pretty soon we basically, you know, would not go to a segregated movie anymore.
Speaker 1: You didn't like the experience there in terms of--
Speaker 2: Well, it began, whereas at first we sort of took it for granted, then, you know, it was, I guess a kind of an awakening that this was insulting.
Speaker 1: Now the broadcast of the Civil Rights Movement on television it kind of, it like kicks in around the time you all get a TV set and how did, did, I've heard that some of the stations down south would actually censor the news.
Speaker 2: I don't remember seeing anything on TV about the Civil Rights Movement when I was growing up, not a thing.
Speaker 1: That's because they didn't put it on 'cause we can see it everywhere else.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  I didn't see anything.  Most of what I remember about the Civil Rights Movement was word of mouth, you know, people talking about something that happened, including, you know, what was happening in Durham [North Carolina] or in Greensboro [North Carolina].  I mean, it was by word of mouth. It wasn't, you know--
Speaker 1: Did you get the black papers at your house, at the barbershop?
Speaker 2: No, it was at the barbershop; we didn't get it at the house but, since they, you know, had Ebony and other, as well as the Baltimore Afro-American [Afro-American Newspapers] was what we had in Virginia and Jet.  So, and so there you got coverage but not in a local paper, of course.
Story_ID: 619215
Speaker 1: All right, so, when you were on the verge of graduating from high school [Southside High School, Blairs, Virginia], was history your favorite subject then?  Were you really interested in history?
Speaker 2: I was interested in history.  I had no notion of history, something I would actually do as a profession.  In fact, that came very, very late for me.  I would read histories, you know, on my own.  I was always fascinated, you know, by any kind of history.  I mean, I mean, not necessarily history about black folk but, you know, especially about wars and so, but it was not a subject that I was going to major in.  In fact, I was most influenced in, in those years was also the year of the Sputnik and the space race and science and I'd been pretty good in science in high school.  And so, actually when I went to college, I was intending to be an engineer and so I went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and I went to engineering school at Howard.
Speaker 1: So, how was it set up you were going to go to Howard?  Did you have good counseling or did, I mean, or did you decide--
Speaker 2: No, in fact the opposite.  It was very, my life was a life of accidents because, I mean I had some, as I said, you know, cousins who had gone to college and my father's younger brothers actually had gone to college to local, small local colleges in Virginia.  My uncle went to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], another went to Virginia State [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University], another went to--in Petersburg [Virginia]--to Saint Paul [Saint Paul's College, Lawrenceville, Virginia], one went to Johnson C. Smith University [Charlotte, North Carolina].  They'd not gone through the kind of application process, you know, that typically, you know, that became standard, you know, where you start way early and, and so forth.  My counselors, you know, I was a valedictorian of my class but my counselor gave me no information about, or counseling about, applying to school.  Somehow I thought, I guess, that I would do like Booker T. Washington, I guess, sort of, walk in and, you know, sign an application and go to school the next day and my uncle, who, he wasn't the youngest, but the next youngest of my father's brothers, came home in the spring and said, "Well, where you going to school?"  I said, "Well, I haven't applied yet."  "What, are you crazy?"  And so he, you know, put the fire into me to, you know, to start seeing about school and then actually the principal of my high school, who had connections with a lawyer who was an alumni, alumnus of Howard went about, you know, seeing if, you know, they could get me a scholarship to go to Howard, which they did.  And so, that's how I ended up at Howard but I hadn't taken SATs or anything like that and, and so it's through that connection, basically, and I had a good record and all that but it was really, again, accidental or serendipity.
Story_ID: 619216
Speaker 1: I didn't ask you about the barbershop experience.  Before, before we get you into Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], what was it like going to get your haircut and sitting around the barbershop with your dad [Grover Holt]?
Speaker 2: It was just, it was just fascinating and fun and probably I learned more about, I don't know, black community about, you know, just about everything, history, human relations, current events in the barbershop than I, than anywhere else.  I mean it's a place where a lot of people--I would often be there not necessarily to get my hair cut but simply waiting for my father to finish so we'd go home, or get a ride or whatever or to stop in and get some money from him to go somewhere and just sit there and listen to the conversations which were, and incredible debates about one thing or another, sometimes frivolous, sometimes very important stuff, a place where all kinds of characters pass through from the, you know, very stuck up, you know, high school principal or doctor to some guy who's just a, today we would say homeless. He wasn't homeless but, you know, the character on the street, you know, and talking a mile a minute and my father out talking everybody, you know.  So it was a, it was a fascinating, a fascinating place and I suspect I learned a lot in the course of that wasn't, it wasn't maybe explicit to me at the time but it, in retrospect.
Speaker 1: Do you have a, did you get a general sense of, from the barbershop people as to what they thought about what Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was doing, about what the Civil Rights was, Movement [Civil Rights Movement]--where it was going?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember any conversations about that, actually, which, it may very well have been but they didn't, they didn't strike me.  I mean, there was talk about, you know, Jim Crow, about, you know, the system and what the man was doing and, and about, you know, blacks needing to stick together to, you know, combat that in one context or another.  I don't remember explicit conversations about King per se and probably some of that, I mean I wouldn't, you know after I left home, I left high school [Southside High School, Blairs, Virginia], I was not, you know, in the barbershop that much or that is not a part of my experience so, so there may have been more intense conversations later on that I was not there.
Story_ID: 619217
Speaker 1: This is 1960 when you enter Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. Fall of '60 [1960]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were you excited?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, leaving home for the first time, on my own, you know.  I mean, I'd been prepared for it in some ways by, you know, work--leaving home in the summers to work in, in New York [New York] but that was still, you know, I was living with my [paternal] uncle so it was still not, you know, like being on my own.
Speaker 1: So you were living on campus?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was living on campus.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were your roommates like?  What were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well my roommate for the first couple of years was a guy from Thomasville, Georgia and so, so he was more, he was more provincial and country than me.  So, so he and I didn't actually hang out that much.  I actually hung out with sort of the, the guys from New York and other much more sophisticated, you know, but he was a great guy and, but, what I remember about him most strongly is that he looked at a lot of TV a lot.  I mean, I think he hadn't had that as much a part of his experience but, but I got involved with, the people I hung out with were people in the drama group, 'cause I got involved in that very early on when I was a freshman and debating group and, and that continued to be a big part of my, my extracurricular activity and--
Speaker 1: Wait, you mentioned the drama piece a little, I mean, the debate team a little bit earlier, I think.  I don't even know if we were rolling yet about John Blassingame [John W. Blassingame] being part of it--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --being the, well so, just kind of recap that for us.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it, John wasn't there when I first joined the debate group but he came, I guess, that was about my third year I guess as debater and he was an instructor at Howard.  This is before he, I'm not certain this is before he got his Ph.D. at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and, and I think I was telling you that John was a big favorite because he was a spendthrift and so we'd go on these debate trips, 'cause you'd go to other schools and, to go to, you know, conventions or conferences in which you'd, you know, do, debate meets, just like, you know, sports teams, you travel and participate in these events and stay in a hotel and, you know, so forth and so on and John was very generous in his spending habits so, and I think he got into a lot of trouble by the time he came home with these bills that he had run up but he was a lot of fun and, and closer in, in some ways closer in age to us, you know, the debate crew than were the, than the other, you know, directors of the group, so--
Speaker 1: Now was the, now this is later, of course, much later than the movie, 'The Great Debaters' depicts the debate team [at Wiley College, Marshall, Texas] but was there any, did you, were you struck by any similarities when you saw--
Speaker 2: Actually I haven't seen that movie.  I, I've heard of it and read about it but what I've read about it, I'm, it's, there were a lot of instance 'cause this is early '60s [1960s] and actually I wasn't on this particular trip but I remember my fellow debaters describing a trip they'd taken to a, to a meet that happened to be on the University of Virginia campus in Charlottesville [Virginia] and they say they were walking across campus and somebody yelled out at them, this is at the University of Virginia, 1962 probably, yelled out at them, nigger, you know, on the campus.  I say I wasn't there but I didn't encounter anything quite as explicit as that but among our venues was in Maryland, which was, you know, pretty much a southern state, you know, people don't think of it that way but it is and even places in New York, Pennsylvania, we were usually the only group of blacks there, you know, so that these other schools, there may have been blacks in the school but they weren't a part of their debate team.  And so one had a feeling of being under the microscope and that your performance, you know, and your, you know, capacity, intellectual capacity was, you know, under question and so, which gave us, of course, more incentive and we worked harder and we won quite a few debates, actually.  Like I remember we won the major prize at, at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] a couple of times and I won the best that year.  Also had the debates but then you had the, with teams, and then you had the after dinner speaking and you had, you know, public speaking and I won the first prize in that and one of my colleagues won the after dinner speaking prize.  So, so we were quite successful, actually, out of Howard in those days in these various competitions but there was, there was always a racial edge to them even in places, you know, in the North because we were usually the, the only blacks, you know, participating.
Story_ID: 619218
Speaker 1: Okay, now what about drama?  What did you do in drama?
Speaker 2: The drama was, you know, all within the, that wasn't a, with one exception, that was not a traveling situation so we performed on campus.  Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] has a, had, has had a long tradition of being, in drama, dating back to at least the, possibly the '30s [1930s], '40s [1940s] certainly, the Howard Players [Howard University Players] and, and in the development of both actors and of playwrights.  Howard, Howard Dodson [sic.] was our, he was a significant poet, playwright, was our director when I was there.
Speaker 1: Dodson?
Speaker 2: Dodson, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, was he related to the Dodson [HistoryMaker Howard Dodson] that's at the Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] now, what all?  The same name?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think, I don't think so anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: Was that Owen Dodson?
Speaker 2: Owen Dodson, I'm sorry--
Speaker 1: Okay, there we go.
Speaker 2: --yes, I'm sure you're right, I'm sorry, that's right, Owen Dodson.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.
Speaker 2: And so it was, so it had, you know, a rich history and one had a feeling of being a part of a rich history.
Speaker 1: Yeah he's written about the history of blacks in theatre and everything.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  So, so that was, you know, an experience with, you know, on the campus and in the city.  I mean, people came to the campus to see productions of the, of the Howard Players.
Speaker 1: Were any shows you remember that, in particular that you were in that you were really--
Speaker 2: Oh, I had the lead role in a play, 'Blood Wedding' by Garcia Lorca [Federico Garcia Lorca], so a Spanish play and, and that was, I guess because it's one of my first, you know, and lead roles, was a very strong memory but they did, you know, Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], they did, you know, a range of things and later when Ted Shine came, he, who was himself a playwright, we did a lot of black, began to do much more black, you know, plays and productions.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there is a transition point in there somewhere where black drama groups, and even community groups, were doing, they were doing like William Inge and all that sort of thing and then they started doing black theater, and--
Speaker 2: Exactly, which was about '63 [1963], actually, or right, you know, the, the cusp of the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know the cusp by the Black Arts Movement and we're aware of things, really.
Speaker 2: Right, and by the time you have, a little later on you have the Negro Ensemble [Negro Ensemble Company] in New York [New York] and so forth.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's exactly, he formed in '65 [1965] and, right.  So, so Ted Shine, now he's, he's like a playwright from Texas, I think--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --originally.  He's, a lot of his work is done in black theater.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so he was there during those years.  I mean, not when I first got there but I forget, one or two years after I got there.
Speaker 1: Did you have any roles in the Ted Shine plays?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, no, no.  I was, I was, he cast me in all of them.
Speaker 1: Did you all do 'Contributions' [Ted Shine] or 'Shoes' [Ted Shine] or, some of it I'm familiar with but I--
Speaker 2: No, he, the production, he did a production I think, one of his things, much later and I was, I was around but I wasn't involved in theater as much at that point when he was doing those productions.  Some of the earlier things I was in with him were, he did musicals and some other, you know, kind of shows so they weren't black, you know, theater productions.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's, I never, you know, when I think of him I think of his own work--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, you know, he, you know, he did more of that later but not initially.
Story_ID: 619219
Speaker 1: Here you are an engineering major, you're taking drama, debate team--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and, you know, you're a pretty versatile engineering major.
Speaker 2: Well, that, you know, that was part of the story.  I, so, as you see, I'm not an engineer now (laughter) and part of that was, you know, integral calculus, but part of it was that through, with experience, it was clear to me that what I really enjoyed and what I most, you know, got a charge out of, and was good at, were in the humanities, more generally, and, you know, and in the, what the verbal arts and so forth, the writing and speaking and so forth and whereas my classmates, you know, their spare time, they were in the radio club taking radios and I was off debating or in drama and so the handwriting was on the wall, you know, okay, maybe this, maybe there's a story here or lesson here that, you know, this is not, I mean I love science but actually engineering had a lot, much less appeal to me and, and I began to have the notion about, you know, you're probably going to be a mediocre engineer. You might be able to do something good, you know, in humanities but not as an engineer.
Speaker 1: Now tell us about, was it the summer of--
Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 1: --sixty-three [1963], I guess you got involved in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, which also is, by the way, when I left engineering and went into, actually at that time, I went into literature.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: After that and the, so that was sort of the coup de grace, I mean, the, the Civil Rights Movement in terms of, you know, I knew what my interests were but now to make it a different career choice.
Speaker 1: Had you decided to become a history major at that point or--
Speaker 2: No, and I still hadn't decided to be a history major.
Speaker 1: Did you consider drama or--
Speaker 2: I considered drama but I was too cautious that, you know, there still were not enough, you know, role models of people who actually made a living in drama for me to, you know--they, you know, like catch on, they were teaching in the universities or something. They weren't out on Broadway and so, so I, I opted to do literature and I think I mentioned earlier, before we were taping, that Sterling Brown [Sterling A. Brown] was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] in those days and he became a big influence, his--
Speaker 1: The famous Sterling Brown--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the author of 'Slim in Hell.'
Speaker 2: Yup, yeah, he's, he's just great and a great person too, so, so I was attracted, you know, through the, so the people around more to literature as something that I would, you know, literature and drama within literature, I mean, so, so dramatic, not as an actor but as a student of it.
Speaker 1: Well tell us about, what was your impression of Sterling Brown?  He's one of the historical figures that comes down to us.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you know, he's, he was, obviously very talented and stuff and had this, this capacity to write, you know, this poetry, actually, with a, with a fairly wide range, some with the kind of cadences that were, you know, formal and dramatic and some like 'Slim in Hell' or 'The Ballad Of Joe Meek' [Sterling A. Brown], which was one of my favorites, that captured, you know, kind of popular speech, ordinary speech and made it poetic.  So, the kind of things you might have heard in the barbershop except made much more, you know, you know, cultivated and, and poetic.  Personally, it had some of the same qualities.  He was a great storyteller, you know, very, sort of expansive and, and warm and, and, you know, bring students to his house and, you know, he'd tell these stories and, you know, and so a very different personality than the other professors or teachers that, you know, that I encountered at Howard or later anywhere else for that matter and also the sense that, you know, it mattered that what, you know, whether it was literature or history or whatever you were engaged in, it mattered in not simply as a way of making a living but in the world and, and our understanding of the world, and our view, our, our knowledge, I mean our capacity to do something in the world and that was, you know, not so much any explicit preaching but just in his, his example and how he talked about things.  His, his imaging, enthusiasm about what he was, whatever he might be talking about.  He may be talking about Faulkner [William Faulkner] and, or he might be talking about his own, reading his own work.  He might be talking about Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] or Mark Twain. He loved Mark Twain and my introduction to Mark Twain was through Sterling Brown, for example, and a different kind of appreciation that I might have had if I, you know, come at it from a different angle, I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there seems to be black people that have a problem with Mark Twain because he uses the N word and, but they don't, I don't think they read the whole--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, I mean, the context in which the N word is being used and, of course, that is part of, you know, the discourse on this part of how both white and black people talk.  And so, no, I mean, and that he, and also that he had an ironical, you know satiric use of all that so, to basically ridicule it in the way he was using it, that is ridicule various racial ideas and beliefs.  In fact--
Speaker 1: At Howard, my mind is racing now through all these different, you know, super figures at Howard that people have talked about in the past.  You may not have encountered them, you know, but Howard, was Howard Thurman there at the time--
Speaker 2: Not at that time, no, no, but, I mean he may, it's conceivable he was. I forget when he left. He may have been there early on 'cause, I mean, there were stories of, but I didn't, you know, encounter him.
Speaker 1: William Montague Cobb, I think is his name, the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he had retired by--I mean, he wasn't, he was in the--
Speaker 1: Okay, he was supposed to have been a universal genius that nobody could fathom, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 619220
Speaker 1: Was Mordecai, who was pres- who was president?
Speaker 2: Mordecai Johnson was president [sic. James M. Nabrit, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Mordecai, yeah.  He was supposed to be quite a genius too.
Speaker 2: Oh he was, he was sort of the personification of the, of the, not just the university president but a, you know, this leader and iconic figure, you know.  I mean, there's lot of, you know, controversy or rather complaints about him too.  I mean, he was sort of a tyrant, you know, to hear it from the faculty and undoubtedly was.  I mean, a lot of those black schools [HBCUs] were run like, you know, as Ralph Ellison describes it, like plantations.  I mean, but, but he was also in the outside world and his, you know, conflicts with the [U.S.] Congress and so forth to defend Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], to defend, you know, black education and--
Speaker 1: There seems, now I've interviewed some people, they were like deans at Howard and such in those days and there is a drama around the change from the plantation style running of the black colleges to some more modern type and there's a lot of tension there because the white colleges didn't have so strict a governance, I don't think as the black colleges did.  Is this pretty much right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think, I mean, what, in some ways one could argue that it, it took these kind of strong figures, I mean, male and female, to, to both manage those institutions and to get the resources for them that the same kind of personality that they enabled them to do battle with the Congress or to do battle with the state legislatures or whatever, you know, or with their board of trustees, then when that face was turned to the faculty, it's the same face so, it's a stern and hard, you know, tough folk.  And so, and it's not so much to defend them but just to explain, you know, that the ones who are going to be most successful and the qualities that make them successful operating a black institution within a Jim Crow environment are going to make them difficult to deal with in terms of the faculty that they interact with.  They were strong willed folk and, you know, and they're not going to change personalities as they go, you know, turn their face from one, from the outside to the inside, so.
Story_ID: 619221
Speaker 1: Okay, well back to '63 [1963] now.  SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] had been formed in 1961?
Speaker 2: Sixty [1960].
Speaker 1: Sixty [1960], okay.
Speaker 2: February of '60 [1960].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Or actually not, it was April of '60 [1960] that they were formed at Shaw [Shaw University, Raleigh, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: At Shaw University, right, yeah, okay.  So, by '63 [1963], there was activity. SNCC was involved in deep activity in Danville [Virginia], right?
Speaker 2: Yup, right.  That's when I became involved with SNCC was through the, the Civil Rights Movement is being organized in Danville in the spring of '63 [1963] which is parallel to, of course, the, the attention was on Birmingham, Alabama and King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Fred Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] and shortly after or actually about contemporaneous with the activities in Birmingham, Reverend Campbell [Lawrence C. Campbell] and Reverend Chase [Lendell W. Chase] began organizing in Danville, same set of issues and city employment, desegregation of facilities, restaurants and other facilities, issues of job discrimination in the main industry there which was Dan River Mills [Danville, Virginia], blacks were employed but in menial positions, school desegregation, a whole range of issues.  And so they had, you know, like in Birmingham, street demonstrations, sit-ins, so forth, and this all came to a head in early summer.  I mean, they've been demonstrating since May and then I was returning home from school, from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], to basically drop my bags, do my wash and then go off to New York [New York], again, as I usually did, to earn some money to go to school and heard on the radio, in fact my mother [Catherine Fitzgerald Holt] was listening to the radio, called me downstairs and they were actually at a live broadcast of a demonstration in the evening of June 10th in Danville where demonstrators were, some people had been arrested and they were demonstrating, demanding their, you know, release and they, they caught them between the, in an alleyway between the jail and the courthouse and the usual scene, turned high pressure hoses on them, waded into the crowd with billy sticks, beat people and we listened to this on the radio, live, and I remember, you know, looking at my mother and, and what's most striking to me now is that we didn't say a word. We just both went off to bed and I think she knew what I was going to do and I knew what I was going to do.  The next day, I went over to the church where they were gathering and, you know, join the demonstration to go back, you know, to the courthouse in the daytime to, you know, to protest.  And so from, you know, then I was hooked from then on I was--
Speaker 1: Well what happened when you all went back to the courthouse?
Speaker 2: Well, they, you know, they didn't arrest, they didn't arrest us or anything--
Speaker 1: Not a repetition of the same thing at the courthouse?
Speaker 2: No, they, they, you know, I mean we didn't know what was going to happen but it went and the courthouse was, you know, these long set of steps and we, you know, both marched around the jail, showing support for the people inside and also, you know, paused for a while on the steps, said a prayer, that kind of thing and then marched back to the church.
Speaker 1: Now who led those demonstrations?
Speaker 2: It varied.  I mean, there were a number of, well not a number, there were about three or four ministers, the key ones I mentioned were this Reverend Campbell who had a small, actually a large but, you know, a kind of what we would call their storefront church, all Bible Way [Bible Way Church of Our Lord Jesus Christ, World Wide, Inc.], and then a Reverend Chase who had a much more sort of what we would call a more middle class congregation that was closer to downtown and that's where, in fact, was the place from which all the demonstrations started was from his church on High Street [High Street Baptist Church, Danville, Virginia], and not far from my father's barbershop, in fact.  And so, different ones would lead it at different times but anyway, SNCC came in to, once all this activity was going on--these, you know, these demonstrations--came into help organize and train people in nonviolence and so forth.
Story_ID: 619222
Speaker 1: Who were the, did you know the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] people who were there at that time?
Speaker 2: I didn't know them before then.  One of the people was Avon Rollins, was SNCC's main representative, he was a field representative, he's from Tennessee, still in Tennessee in fact.  I just saw him at a, again, at a, at a SNCC conference celebrating the fiftieth anniversary of the founding of the organization in Shaw [Shaw University, Raleigh, North Carolina], at Shaw last, last month and a number of other people, Cordell Reagon.  In fact, all the main people in SNCC came through there at one point or another but Avon stayed, you know, for considerable time, several months, where some others came and then went, you know, but, but some of the main, the principal people in SNCC came through there at one time or another.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  What was, how long did you, were you involved in that struggle?
Speaker 2: Well, basically, it was, in Danville [Virginia] it was mainly just that summer and, you know, there were several other iterations of the demonstrations, large and small.  I went to jail, you know, twice that summer, once for a short stint and then another time for a good chunk of the summer, actually, about four weeks in July after a big demonstration that we had.  In fact the demonstration that, in that case, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] led it and he didn't get arrested, he led the demonstration and then he was going on to Washington [D.C.] to organize the March on Washington.
Speaker 1: Oh that's, that's right about that time, yeah, that July.  Did you go to the march?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  We took a group, like I took a group up to Washington with the idea of having a demonstration before the big demonstration on the 28th.  We had a demonstration at the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] with a group from Danville and ironically when we got there, Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] was leading a demonstration from Mississippi on one side of the justice department and we were on the other side of the justice department.  There was a lot of debate, actually, about being in the march because we were not really certain, you know, what kind of march it was going to be.  I mean, we were pretty militant at that point and wanted, you know, a lot of us were arguing, you know, that if you're going to go there we should be sitting in, we should be stopping traffic, we should really, you know, force the federal government to confront what was going on in the South.
Story_ID: 619223
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The March on Washington, 1963, then you said there was some debate as to whether you all should be in it or not because of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, it's, I remember, you know, debates, debate, discussions and, around SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] in Danville [Virginia] and that it was going to be too non-militant, it was sort of a setup, you know, with the various influences and, of course, then that resulted in that, well the end of that was the flap over [HistoryMaker] John Lewis' speech--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and whether, you know, he would talk about marching through Georgia like Sherman [William Tecumseh Sherman] (laughter) or not and also most importantly, that the FBI's [Federal Bureau of Investigation] role in the movement was not that, on the side of the angels. I mean that the FBI was in fact often too closely allied with, you know, local law enforcement and was certainly not protecting--they were more allied than we realized now, looking back, but, but even then they weren't, you know, providing protection and couldn't be relied upon and that was the justice department's [U.S. Department of Justice] responsibility, ultimately.  So, you know, that, of course, got smoothed over because they wanted Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] on their side rather than as an enemy, that is the civil rights top leadership.  And so there was some kicking, kicking back on that and that was one of the reasons that took the group and that Moses [Robert Parris Moses] had the group picketing the justice department the day before the, the big march, was to make that statement and, in fact, that was part of, that was the compromise for our little group, that okay, we'll participate but we're going to do our own march the day before, that to, you know, to underscore local issues and other issues and, and even, you know, looking back on it, the march was, you know, it's a great event, you know, historically but actually as a participant, during the course of the day, I got a bit, you know, alienated from it because it, it, it seemed to be too much show.  It was not like a demonstration that we had been coming out of, you know, in the South, I mean, even, you know, in Danville or Mississippi or other places.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was a, we interviewed James Bevel [HistoryMaker Reverend James Bevel] before he got in real big trouble and he was telling us that it was his idea, initially, in the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] to have that, to do that and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That was the earlier conversation.  There was a conversation about it as early as I can remember, I mean, in June and certainly July, people saying, you know, there's going to be this big march and we're going to take this show to Washington [D.C.].  What we'd been doing locally, we're going to do it in the nation's capital and we're going to stop traffic, we're going to, you know, lay in the streets, you know, really militant kind of, and, and I think, I remember James Farmer saying something of the same sort, you know, early on but then it all got, as they built a bigger coalition, they got much more cautious and much more instrumental, actually, in terms of showing support for the president's legislation as opposed to attacking the system of which the federal government was implicit, was complicit with.  There's a different orientation than what was originally, happened.
Speaker 1: Well who were the major players on the other side that wanted to mild it down and give it the support--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I wasn't involved in that 'cause that's really taking place, the leadership council in D.C. 'cause they're bringing together, you know, the church groups, the labor groups, you know, and others who are all part of that leadership council as well as the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], you know, Urban League [National Urban League], all the major players in the civil rights leadership and those folk were all over the map in terms of, you know, well it's the appropriate approach.  Some of them are used to wheeling and dealing and, you know, trying to get, you know, legislation passed by applying public pressure but not too much, you know, not to alienate the [U.S.] Congress or alienate the president but to enlist them on your side.  I mean in retrospect, it's not, you know, it was not, it wasn't a foolish, you know, position to take but coming from where we were coming, having just stepped out of jail and having been beaten and stuff, you know, we didn't want to hear that nonsense.  I mean to us, it was nonsense, you know, that we want to really confront the system and so that was the reason for the, and so people were really, you know, I remember saying, yeah, you know, let them do it, we aren't going to be a part of this.
Story_ID: 619224
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now were you actually beaten when you were arrested?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, I was, beaten with a billy club, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, we didn't get to that part--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --really, okay.  Now you spent four weeks in, is it a story worth telling about how that happened?  How you ended up getting arrested?
Speaker 2: Well, I was, you know, basically, we never got arrested unless we're planning to get arrested. You know, like the first demonstration that I described, you know, it was, you know, contained and, you know, we demonstrated, came back, came back to the church [High Street Baptist Church, Danville, Virginia], these we set out on, that we were going to confront the system and the authorities and we're very likely to get arrested, went prepared to get arrested, you know, sort of a joke.  Do you have your tooth- your toothbrush with you, you know, that you're going to be in jail tonight, so, go prepared and don't carry anything you want stolen or whatever, you know, you're stripped down.  And so, the first time I went, you know, and we knew we'd get arrested 'cause we were not going to disperse when they told us to disperse and the, the second was with a big march and also then I had this, you know, nonviolent training, Cordell Reagon and other people from SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] had been in Danville [Virginia] and, you know, how to go limp and all that which was all new to me, and so basically I, you know, if you're going to arrest me, then you're going to have to do the work.  I mean, you're going to have to carry me and, and finally on the outside, I remember the police chief coming up on a guy, you know, was, was picking me up by my belt buckle and he said, no, no, there are a whole bunch of people looking at this and I want you to, you know, take him by his legs and his arms and not, you know, show any sign of brutality out in public.  Got me in the jail cell, of course, and he pulled out a billy stick and started beating me on the head, you know.  So, so that's how that happened.
Speaker 1: So were you all at the courthouse again in Danville. Is that where--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was at the courthouse and then in the, you know, they took us to book us in the courthouse, then across the street to the city jail and then the second time I didn't get beaten there but we went out, they took us, so many of us they couldn't hold us in jail, they took us out to what was called a city farm which was sort of on the outskirts of the town where they made people work and like a set farm, you know.
Speaker 1: It was called a workhouse.
Speaker 2: A workhouse, right, and we refused to work because we said we hadn't been convicted or anything, you know, we're being, normally before you're convicted, you're held in the city jail, you know, but, and some people out on the farm were people already been convicted of a crime.  We said, we aren't going to work.  And so that was a big conflict and we stood together and refused to work.  In the process of that, they identified me and a guy named Matthew Jones, he was from SNCC, wrote a lot of the freedom songs in SNCC and was the Freedom Singers later on, he wasn't then, as leaders of this group.  And so they separated us and took him and me to South Boston [Virginia] which was several, about thirty miles away in a separate jail and there put us in a tight cell, I mean separate tight cells to hold us and as it turned out, and we went on a hunger strike.  As it turned out, fortunately for us, I mean about that time they were bailing everybody out and so we were bailed out.
Story_ID: 619225
Speaker 1: So, you know, nothing happened beyond that but so, you know, it's about that time, coming out of that experience and then being confronted with this notion of a march that's basically going to be, sort of like a picnic, and of course, you know, you get two hundred thousand people, I mean some of them were seasoned, you know, veterans of the civil rights demonstrations, I mean we're just ordinary folk, I mean, which is, you know, fine.  You're incorporating more people into supporting the movement but they weren't people who had gone through what we had gone through.  So on the face of it, it was, you know, it made sense to have that kind of march but, at the time, and given where we were coming from, we were very hostile to that and during the course of the day, I was feeling, you know, that, you know, this is just a, I mean this is just a show.  I mean, there were, you know, actors, I mean, Marlon Brando was there and, you know, Sidney Poitier, I mean, you know--
Speaker 2: Charlton Heston.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, all that kind of stuff, right, Charlton Heston of all people, you know, and, you know, so anybody could be, you know, sort of, join in and show their, you know, how, how liberal they were or whatever.  And so, I'll never forget, I mean at a certain point when we marched down--. Also they, you know, would control the signs.  They didn't want any sort of, you know, signs that, you know, were, you know, too militant or too, you know, outlandish.  Some people did make their own signs anyway but I remember one guy had a sign said, "What would you do if a dog bit Caroline [Caroline Kennedy]," referring to Kennedy's daughter, but mostly they passed out these signs that said, jobs and freedom, and, you know, so forth, that's the message they wanted.  They wanted to very much control the message.  And so at a certain point I just got alienated from it and with another person who was a part of the movement in Danville [Virginia], we went off and sat by the, by the Potomac [Potomac River], you know, and while the speeches, so I didn't hear King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] speech and all that because, basically, I had enough and so I still, you know, it's ironic, I mean I look back on it and people celebrate. Listen, I was there but I wasn't there.  So I was there through the early part of it which was down around the Washington Monument [Washington, D.C.] and various people spoke.  I remember them announcing that W.E.B. Du Bois had died, for example, and then they had the march to Lincoln Memorial [Washington, D.C.] and at that point I sort of, I peeled off 'cause also they put the bigwigs and so forth up front and all these sort of people--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: --who had not been involved. I don't mean just the leadership. I mean other people, you know, that were sort of, the elites and the sort of people who had been involved with the movement, I mean people, you know, out of Danville were sort of forced to the back and I said, "What the hell is this?"  I mean, so I cut out and just went over to the, and sat on the bank while it was going on and came back basically when it was over and we got the buses to go back home.  So that was just a sense of, you know, some of the, the alienation that many people, a number of people at least, people involved in the movement felt about the march [March on Washington].
Speaker 2: Some interesting stories, another side of them that march that we, you know, we don't have a lot of stories about, so it's--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, and, you know, I sometimes think about it now. It's sort of ironic. I watch film, you know, of the speeches and stuff and note I'm right over there out of sight, not even listening to this stuff, you know.  So it's kind of ironic.
Story_ID: 619226
Speaker 1: So when you, you came back to resume school. Now this is your last, is this your, this is your, you're going into your senior year aren't you?
Speaker 2: Well, because I changed my major at precisely the same time, I ended up taking two additional years because I'd been an engineer up to that point and I'd become dissatisfied with it and was thinking about changing but hadn't made the jump and with, after that summer, I said, well, you know, I'm not going to, you know, stay in something that I'm not really committed to.  And so I went, I changed my major and so that meant that I had to, I ended up with actually a double major 'cause I had so many science courses that I could take a, you know, a degree that had science as well as humanities 'cause I had enough credits.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what were your two majors?
Speaker 2: It was, ended up being English and math, ironically, because I had enough credits in those, 'cause leading up to engineering, most of the, before you start taking engineering courses, you have to take, you know, chemistry and math, several, you know, math up to integral calculus and chemistry, biology, et cetera, so, so I had accumulated that and ended up with a double major but with an English.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well Sterling Brown [Sterling A. Brown] was clearly one of your favorite teachers in the English department. Any others?
Speaker 2: There were some, frankly I can't remember their names now; it sort of fades.  I mean, now, I mean he sort of was the major, and he wasn't actually there my first, when I first moved into English, it was only later that I encountered him 'cause he was, he had had a medical leave. He was away for much of the time I was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] until my senior year and then my first, 'cause I did the master's [degree] too after that, and my master's year.  I ended up with a master's in, in English literature from Howard.
Speaker 1: Was John O. Killens [John Oliver Killens] there at that time?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, so a number of, and some of them were visitors that I had courses from but Sterling was there, you know, came in the last years.
Story_ID: 619227
Speaker 1: Any other, any students or any incidents at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] that stand out before we move you from Howard?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the movement changed everything.  I mean, one, I got, you know, Howard was the place where a lot of the, certainly the leadership in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] were, you know, still at Howard.  I mean, so Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], you know, H. Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin], Courtland Cox, Ed Brown, a whole bunch of folk who were, you know, as well as many others who were, either were at the time or became, you know, sort of major folk in SNCC, were at Howard at the time and I hadn't known them before I was involved in the movement and, you know, became involved and there was a group called NAG, which was the Nonviolent Action Group, mostly made up of SNCC people and, which I was a part of for a while, and so we, the militancy we had shown in terms of Jim Crow then we began to mobilize in terms of the way the institution itself was being run.  So we began to demonstrate, and this is the beginnings of the student movement, I mean, becomes famous with Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] but it started much earlier than the, you know, the Free Speech Movement in Berkeley.  I mean some of those people had been involved in the movement too, they were the Civil Rights Movement, but we demonstrated against the, at Howard, because it had a lot of federal funds, everybody had to take ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], not simply the people who were going to go through and become, you know, officers but also, you know, every freshman had to start phys ed [physical education] or anything else, you had to take ROTC which, at this time, as the Vietnam War is beginning to heat up, you know, people, people started taking it for granted before but began to protest it, you know.  I mean, why should we be the cannon fodder for these officers to be trained so, 'cause a part of every week, you'd assemble and they'd march you around the football field, you know, in formations to give them training, you know, how to direct troops and stuff and, you know, arms training, you know, which was, actually that was kind of fun, shooting an M1 and stuff like that 'cause they had the old guns, you know, and--
Speaker 1: World War II [WWII] guns, M1, right?
Speaker 2: It was, it was in World War II or Korea [Korean War], but anyway it was an M1 and also they're trying to recruit people too, you know.  I remember going to the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] where they were trying to, you know, as, you know, promising young officers, 'cause the first two years were required and then the second two years you could, you know, were optional and that's for the people who really wanted to be officers.  Anyways, we started demonstrating against that and protesting that and using the same techniques as, out of the, you know, Civil Rights Movement and protesting, you know, how the university was run.  I mean, we talked about it earlier, that the university--black universities [HBCUs] sometimes run like plantations, I mean so, and so at this point there were enough people, you know, who were accustomed to not taking, you know, authoritarian, you know, directives that we--so some of my last year there was, you know, spent in various mobilizations against, within the institution.
Speaker 1: I don't know if you said that, I didn't ask you about yet, and I don't know where it fits into Howard's story but you attended E. Franklin Frazier's funeral.
Speaker 2: No I didn't attend the funeral. The funeral, I remember the funeral happening because the chapel on campus and they had the services and so it stuck in my mind especially later on when I, I mean at the time I didn't realize what a powerful figure he was and later I, you know, came to know that, of course, I mean it was important but, and I remember that I was on, I was a freshman and they were having his funeral and, you know, and I didn't go into the chapel.  I mean, you couldn't get in the chapel. It was crowded.
Speaker 1: Okay, I just thought I'd ask about that since you mentioned--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I never actually met him, obviously, or anything like that but he was part of the institution and considered something of a militant, you know, actually, within the faculty.
Speaker 1: Now what about Rayford Logan? Did you meet him during this time?
Speaker 2: Yeah I met him, but I didn't take classes with him at the time 'cause I was, you know, again, I was in engineering and I didn't actually take any history classes at Howard, ironically.  I came back later to teach history at Howard but I didn't actually take any history classes. I took literature and so forth and so Logan was there but I actually met him when I came back to Howard years later to teach and he had come back out of retirement to, to teach a few courses.
Story_ID: 619228
Speaker 1: So, you graduate in '65 [1965] then, right?
Speaker 2: Right, because I had to take an extra year because I changed my major and then in the summer of '65 [1965], and this is, of course, was right after, you recall, right after the Selma [Alabama] demonstrations which we had, demonstrations in Washington [D.C.]. I didn't go to Selma but we were, you know, ringing the White House day and night, protesting what was happening in Selma and we had, and then at the graduation, Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], actually president, came and spoke, gave the commencement address at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and my folks came up, of course, to my graduation, and my father [Grover Holt] was very proud, you know, he said the first time he'd ever seen a living president, you know.
Speaker 1: Is that the speech where he really just--
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was the speech that leads to, you know, that, "Freedom is not enough, that you need to make changes" [To Fulfill These Rights]. I mean, the speech that was actually influenced by the Moynihan Report ['The Negro Family: The Case For National Action,' Daniel Patrick Moynihan], which was, ironic, I write about this in my recent book was well received and my father said, "Best speech I ever heard a president give" 'cause he was saying, you know, if you read the speech, that we got to do more, the government has to, you know, invest in education and job training and so forth and so on and not just give people, you know, rights but give them really means to, to realize those rights and his famous image that he had that you can't, you know, knock off the chains of a person and expect them to run the race, just like somebody who's never been chained.  So it was a very well received speech but it was, also the time he was escalating the Vietnam War and most people weren't paying much attention to that but a lot of students, especially the radical students or the more militant students and SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], were already involved in antiwar activity even as the Civil Rights Movement was, you know, still in, you know, the sort of top of the agenda.  And so many of us, you know, not many of us, a number of us protested at the, you know, had signs on our backs and stuff like that, protesting Johnson's speech.  So, again, it's an irony that, you know, here's a speech that my father, lived his life to, you know, to hear a president say, and here I am, you know, protesting this guy because he's, you know, escalating what we were considering a racist war.
Speaker 1: So did, well did you find, did you and your father talk about it at some point?
Speaker 2: Yeah but, you know, not, you know, it was live and let live.  I mean, I understood his position.  I mean, I could, you know, could see, you know, precisely where he's coming from and I think by that point he began to understand, you know, that he had this militant son who was not always going to see things the same way he saw it, you know.
Story_ID: 619229
Speaker 1: Two more things about the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] era, I guess.  Now, did you participate in Freedom Summer in '64 [1964] at all in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: No, no, I wasn't in the Freedom Summer.  That, I was, I stayed in Washington [D.C.] that summer and I, actually I was working at the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.] 'cause I needed to earn some money to stay in school [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  And so--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was wondering if, you know, the previous summer, all the time in jail that, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the previous summer, what happened--
Speaker 1: --what happened to your finances?
Speaker 2: --by the end of the summer, there was some discussion and I was wondering well, you know, am I going to be able to make it, you know, and can I go back to school and actually was talking to some people about that and lo and behold, obviously they'd been talking elsewhere, because SNCC and I guess some other groups had come up with some money that had been donated by people to give scholarships so that people could go back to school and that was a lifesaver because, I mean I also worked, I went and worked at Safeway [Safeway Inc.]. I think it was as a bagger, as a checkout person for a while and some other jobs.  So between working and that little scholarship they gave me, I was able to go back to school.  And so then the next summer, if I was going to finish and that was very important to me and to my family, I knew I had to work.  So I worked that summer and didn't go to Mississippi 'cause I remember Stokely, Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], who was, you know, trying to get me to come down and I said, "Well, you know, I won't do it this year, I'll do it next year."  Then next year actually, when I graduated, I did go and work with SNCC.  I worked over in the, I went to Cambridge, Maryland, which had been one of the other hotspots of the movement.  Again, I was trying to decide between going to Mississippi and going there and I went to, so I had to go to Cambridge because, you know, SNCC didn't always pay, you know, it didn't pay well and didn't always pay at that.  And so, I figured that if I went there, by that time I was driving a cab in D.C. as a way of, you know, earning money which has, gave you a lot of flexibility, especially as a student, that you could drive at night, on the weekends, whatever, by the time you could, you know, do and it was quite, you know, you could earn a fair amount of money, if you played it right.  So I figured I could always, I had a license, that I could always come back to Washington from Cambridge, earn a bit of money and then go back and support myself.  So I decided to go to Cambridge and, and that's where I spent the summer of '65 [1965].
Story_ID: 619230
Speaker 1: What were some of the events in Cambridge [Maryland] that happened?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, ironically, a number of them.  I mean one that was, after all that had happened, after the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] and all that, they still had a segregated swimming pool, which was an issue because kids would swim in the, what was called the Choptank River and there were jellyfish and other kinds of things that would sting people and they would, you know, every summer kids would drown, swimming in that river.  So, it was not a small issue that they couldn't use the public swimming pool.  What had happened is that with the Civil Rights Act of '64 [1964], as happened in a lot of parts of the South, they privatized the pool.  It had been a public pool which had been built with money collected from black folk as well as white folk and now they privatized it.  And so we had demonstrations there and, what we would call, swim in.  We never got anywhere near the water. They arrested us and took us to jail.  Also during that period, there was another sort of offshoot of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] trying to organize farm workers who, and this is the big, Eastern Shore is a big agricultural sector of Maryland and they use migrant labor to harvest the crops who would travel up from Florida, you know, every summer and, of course, you know, with atrocious living conditions and pay and so forth and so we're trying to unionize them, so we're trying to organize them.  So I participated in that part of the movement as well as another group of, it was around that area too was a big fishing industry and canning industry and those folk were trying to unionize and organize so we participated in those activities.  So there was a lot of that, you know, pretty packed summer actually, come to think of it in terms of various activity but leaning more toward labor and issues and unionization than, you know, traditional civil rights issues, you know, access to public accommodations and so forth, even though that was part of it too.
Story_ID: 619231
Speaker 1: So you went back to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] in sixty--in '65 [1965] you're working on your master's degree, right?
Speaker 2: Right, I went, that fall I went back to, and there, a couple of things happened.  One, I got called up for the draft, at least I wasn't drafted, but I was called up to take the physical. And at that point I determined that I wasn't going to go and in fact I consulted a lawyer trying to figure out how to respond to the physical.  And so, he figured it wouldn't be a problem because I had an arrest record, in fact, some that had not been settled 'cause there had been, one case from Danville [Virginia] had been appealed to the [U.S.] Supreme Court and, but these guys were getting so desperate at that point, the guy interviewed--he took me to the side to interview me, "Well what's this about the arrest record, you know, what happened?"  He said, "Well, you hadn't been convicted or anything, you know, no problem we'll take you anyway" (laughter).  So, so, and so I went back to school 'cause the, the 2-S deferment was still, they hadn't, later on they did away with that too but then you could still get a deferment for going to school.  And so, a combination of things, the movement in Cambridge [Maryland] had pretty much sort of quieted down and so I decided to go back to school and, and to Howard to get a master's.
Speaker 1: So how did you decide to, did you major in history for your master's or what?
Speaker 2: No, I continued, I continued in literature.  In fact, I wrote a master's thesis on Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], Shakespeare's plays. 'Cause I'd been, you know, again was very interested in drama, I'd been in Shakespearean plays and, and I finished it that year and during that year I determined, in fact I got married and had a kid and determined I need to get a job and I went to work for the poverty program.  So, and I went to work for the poverty program with the idea of working on migrant, seasonal farm worker problems.  So, what, my experience in Maryland, you know, I was very much, you know, conscious of that problem, the issues and so I went (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's pause.
Story_ID: 619232
Speaker 1: Now how did you meet your wife?  It's a--
Speaker 2: My wife was working in the movement, with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] in Cambridge. That's how we met.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, you know, we told our kids later we met in jail because we were arrested in the same demonstration and the way they had it arranged, they didn't actually separate the men from the women in the holding cells and, anyway so I worked for the poverty program and with the migrant, seasonal workers.  It was very funny, my first interview with them, you know, they were sort of, these were, most of the guys who directing this were old labor guys who would come over to work in the, OEM [Office of Emergency Management], the agency, and then it got down to the part that I was arrested, "What was this for," and I said, "Oh, hell, here it comes," you know, it's going to be a problem but, of course, this was wonderful to them that I get involved in the stuff around migrant farm workers.  So, because I got arrested going on a, onto a camp.  One of the things we did was try to organize them going onto a camp where the migrants were and, migrant workers were, and we'd been arrested for trespass, and so that had come up.  And so, so that gave me an up.  For once, my arrest record gave me an up in terms of getting a job and I worked for that for a couple years, '66 [1966] to '68 [1968].
Story_ID: 619233
Speaker 1: And then, by the time I decided to go back to school, but I didn't want to spend my years as a federal bureaucrat and so I went to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and at Yale I went, since I had no history, I went in American studies and the course of that, you know, I, you know, was gravitated toward history and actually wrote a dissertation in history, that's the dissertation on South Carolina.  So, thereafter, I was identified as a historian.  I got a job with history departments and thus became a historian.
Speaker 2: Well, Blassingame [John W. Blassingame] was there when you got to Yale?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Blassingame, I think the second year I was there he came back.  He was, he had been at Yale but was off writing his, the book on New Orleans ['Black New Orleans, 1860 - 1880,' John W. Blassingame] and actually he was working at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] with a Louis Harlan [Louis R. Harlan] on the Booker T. Washington papers and then he came back to Yale while I was there and, it's very funny, so I'd known him first as a debate coach and now basically kind of a mentor because he was on my dissertation committee and I owe him a lot because when I got ready to do my dissertation, I mean, you know, as often as the case, you're trying to figure out well, where are you going to get, I was going to do it on black leaders in the Reconstruction, where am I going to get information on these guys and Blassingame was a wealth of archival savvy and so you go and you look up his [U.S.] military service records, you look at pension files, you look at this, you talk to this guy and basically he gave me a roadmap for figuring out the dissertation, so, so I owe him quite a bit for, in terms of that.
Story_ID: 619234
Speaker 1: Let me go back a little back into '68 [1968] before you, now you were, before you started graduate school at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], that year had been an eventful year.  That was the year that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated and the year that Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] was running for president again and, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, he decided not to run for president again.
Speaker 1: Yeah, decided not to run, right, right, and--
Speaker 2: And the poor people's march.
Speaker 1: --Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon], Poor People's Campaign, right.  A lot of things are going on so, what, do you remember what you were doing when Dr. King was assassinated and how you felt about it?
Speaker 2: I was landing in D.C. airport, National Airport [Washington National Airport], it was then called, not Reagan [Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport, Washington, D.C.], returning from Memphis [Tennessee].  A part of my job, in terms of the seasonal farm worker program, working out of Washington [D.C.], was to go out and visit, you know, different programs, sometimes to set up programs, sometimes to evaluate them or simply to monitor them and in this case, there was a program in Fayette County, in Tennessee, I had not been involved with it that much but then sort of the rotation, I had to go visit it just to check up on what was happening and monitor it and had been set up actually by people who had been involved in the tent city back in the, '59 [1959].  Some people tried to register to vote in Tennessee, Fayette County, got a, you know, thrown off their farms and, out of their, you know, sharecropping contracts, and had set up a tent city, had nowhere to live as a result of that. And some of the people who had come from that had organized these training programs, retraining programs and education programs and so forth, adult education, and so I was just visiting, you know, to monitor the program and then had flown back to, to Washington and as I remember, I got out the plane, on the way home, got in the cab and the guy said, "Did you hear about Dr. King?"  I said, "What, what about Dr. King?"  He'd been shot, and then by the time I got home, walked in the door, my wife met me and said, you know, "He's dead."  So, and so it was just the irony that I, you know, was coming from where he had, you know, where the event had occurred that I just left.
Story_ID: 619235
Speaker 1: Did you ever have any personal interaction with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and all and--
Speaker 2: No, no, I mean, in Danville [Virginia]--
Speaker 1: SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] or in--
Speaker 2: The closest it came to it was, you know, I mentioned that he led that march in which, the last time I was arrested in Danville, and he had come, actually the leaders had tried to get him to come to Danville for a long time and he'd come, stopped in Danville on his way to Washington [D.C.] because they were meeting to organize the March on Washington, that is the group, you know, the leadership group and so he was just there overnight and before he came, there'd been a sort of buildup that he's going to, you know, help us lead a march because, you know, movements went through their ups and downs and so we, it was sort of a down moment in the movement.  A lot of people been arrested, you know, and was sort of a pause and we wanted to try to get it restarted and King was going to be, you know, bring that kind of attention, bring people out and so forth and so would he lead a march and his, he and his lieutenants, or mainly his lieutenants around him said, you know, "We can't get involved here, can't be going to jail here, we got to get to Washington and tend to business," you know. And so a group of us from SNCC practically barged into his, where the hotel where he was staying and basically pleaded with him that we really need you to lead the march, into, you know, to keep the momentum of his movement here going and he agreed.  So this was sitting in a hotel room, you know, so that's as close as I got to King.  I mean, I wasn't, you know, I wasn't, I was with the group but I wasn't, you know, the major spokesperson for the group.  In fact, Bob Zellner who was in SNCC was the one who, he almost came to tears, pleading with King, that, you know, you really got to, we've been carrying this, you know, this struggle on, people have been arrested and so forth and people have, you know, suffered and we really need you and, and King relented.  I mean, his, the people around him, I've forgotten who was with him at the point, I don't think [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young was there but, you know, were not, didn't want to have any part, Abernathy [Ralph Abernathy] was there and didn't want to have any part of that but he, to his credit, said, "Okay, I'll lead it. I'm going to have to not get arrested at the, you know, lead it and then step out of line at some point along the way and you guys carry it forward but, but I will do that."  And he gave a speech at the church, you know, typical King speech and I mean it was just--actually, Abernathy was the one who gave a speech that was really so, just had everybody on their feet and then King spoke and then we pull it out of the church and took this march.  That was, only time I'd been anywhere in his, you know, proximity.
Story_ID: 619236
Speaker 1: I've heard that SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], or some SNCC members used to refer to King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] as the lord, you know, and his, because of the lofty position he had in the movement and the, I don't know, some of the--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I mean, there was a lot of--
Speaker 1: Differences--
Speaker 2: I mean some of it justified but basically it's like a lot of other things.  There was a lot of respect as well 'cause the man did, he did go to jail. He did, you know, show courage and, and stuff and determination and, I mean, SNCC was an organization that emphasized, you know, mobilizing, not just mobilizing but organizing and grassroots work and pushing, you know, the people themselves, not spokespersons standing up, you know, yeah--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well those were two different kinds of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very different, organ- yeah.
Speaker 1: I think the general public doesn't really understand what the difference is.
Speaker 2: Right, very, very different but, you know, so there was a, key differences and it led to conflicts about strategy and tactics but even while saying the lord, people also respected King.  I mean, that's, which I think also doesn't come through that, you know, they seem contradictory but the two could coexist.
Speaker 1: There's a little rivalry, you know, about them.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, no doubt about it and, and, in fact, respected King more than some of the other people around him, I think, is probably a fair assessment.
Speaker 1: I think there was also a caption of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] as being slick, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, it was, those acronym, I mean, they call it slick and, you know, for those of us who grew up in the South, in the black church, I mean, there's a bunch of ministers, you know, and, you know, ministers, you know, black ministers were, you know, at least a lot of them, you know, were kind of, slick was a good terminology, term, you know, in all kinds of ways for it, you know, they're sort of, you know, fast and loose in getting ahead and ego driven and so the notion of like a Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] stepping back so that, you know, the local people could step forward, you know, is counter to training as a minister, you know.  He wants to speak, push them back so he can step forward, so, so different culture, it's an entirely different culture, the organization, you know, and looking at it from a long distance, you know, objective, you know, viewpoint, both were needed.  I mean, it's, you know, you needed people out of the black church in order to mobilize. I mean, I ran into this in Cambridge, Maryland.  I go up to the minister at the local church there trying to get him to, you know, support the movement, because it's a key center; that's the one place you can get a whole bunch of black folk together, in the church, and reach, you know, a broad cross section which often people didn't realize, and not just the, you know, the, the respectable folk but the unrespectable folk would also be in the church and its imprimatur was, you know, important in terms of organizing a community but, you know, I'm not going to have the same, did not have the same gravitas as a minister who could speak his language coming to him to, you know, to use his church for a meeting, for example, and stuff like that.  So, so both were needed but they were both very different kinds of cultures, orientations.
Story_ID: 619237
Speaker 1: Now, well back to your thesis.  You wrote about Reconstruction in South Carolina.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What did you learn about black leadership in the South that you didn't know before in terms, you know, in terms of when you were going through this history?
Speaker 2: Well it was, you know, a totally, I mean, just about everything, it was totally revealing about aspects of the black community and certainly historically but even some of it carrying forward.  What you had in South Carolina, what attracted me to it, was a state that had a black majority, 60 percent, population majority, and a black political majority for a good part of the 1870s and Reconstruction and the largest number of black elected officials during that period.  And so the question for me was well, you know, what happened?  How did they function and, you know, why, ultimately why did it, you know, fail if they had, you know, I mean, in terms of a democratic system, you know, that that black political majority.  And so the more I delved into it, you know, as I tried to figure out, also was trying to figure out, well who would be elected.  I mean, how did they get elected?  Who were these people?  And as I delved into it, you know, and did a digging into the background and, you know, who was coming out of the slave background versus those who were free, which turned out to be a major issue and being free in South Carolina carried with it a whole, you know, basically it was a class difference of people who had come up, had recently been freed from slavery as opposed to those who had come up, you know, as, in a free population because they tend to be people in skilled occupations for historical reasons and they tended to organize among themselves their own community, some of them were much better educated, some of them actually had been, you know, to the North or abroad to be educated, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is that a novelist kind of relationship with the master where he's a son or relative--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, some of them were either, not always directly, you know, the children of my, as my [paternal] grandmother [Lillian Walton Holt], children of slaveholders but the children of the children of, and so, and had formed a community around, you know, their own interest, their own institutions.  Often, sometimes and, and in tension with, you know, the black community and keeping their distance from the black community of slaves and, but at the same time, the younger generation of them, many of them had gone, as well as some people came from the North, out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], New York [New York], Boston [Massachusetts], who had come up through the abolitionist movement and had been radicalized, you know.  Some of them, of course, had served in the, in the [U.S] military and had been radicalized by that experience.  So it's not just that, you know, your origins dictated who you were but, of the combination of those things.  And then, as I looked at the politics, you know, the politics reflected some of that complication.  I mean, people who were demanding land reform who were closest to, you know, that slave experience, and people who were much more about civil rights and more consistent with the kind of Republican mentality at the time with, you know, and besides the economic development and so forth but not in terms of empowering, you know, the people, economically the people coming out of slavery.  So some of the major conflicts were over things like that.  Areas of agreement were things around education which all of them could coalesce around, both within the public education as well as private efforts.  And then ultimately, the conflicts with white Republicans who were coming, yet, from a different perspective.  And so, the, what I found and what the book ['Black Over White: Negro Political Leadership in South Carolina during Reconstruction,' Thomas C. Holt] sort of emphasizes, much to many people's surprise was, there wasn't so much the fight with the, you know, ex-Confederates and the conservatives and the Democrats, that was the major downfall, or rather fights internally of these people coming from different, coming at it from different perspectives and, and their power grabs and power, you know, relations that weakened, you know, this black majority and contributed to the downfall of Reconstruction so that was--
Speaker 1: So those are basically the factions of the freed slaves, the so called free people (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, less freed slaves than slaves and people coming out of a free community, North and South, who were, 'cause there were a lot of free people from the North who came south to work as teachers and, with the Freedmen's Bureau [Bureau of Refugees, Freedmen, and Abandoned Lands] and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then became politicians.
Story_ID: 619238
Speaker 1: So, after your master's [degree], did you decide to go immediately and work on a Ph.- well you didn't, you went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], right, Howard to teach?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, after my Ph.D., you mean, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, after your Ph.D., okay, so you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to, I was, I was recruited at various places, San Diego and Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] and Lorraine Williams [Lorraine A. Williams] at Howard called me and I guess she, in fact, I think John Blassingame [John W. Blassingame] had a role in that, called me and said, you know, "Come down and, you know, talk to us," and she, at the time, had gotten a, I think, a Ford grant [from the Ford Foundation, New York, New York] and was bringing in a number of young people into the department at Howard and by that grant they were able to reduce the teaching load, all the things that had been distancing it for the teaching at that, you know, where you took about, teach about six courses or something, you know, and had no time to do research or, you know, publication.  And so, and so she was very, you know, persuasive and I, I liked the idea of going to a black school [HBCU] and, you know, basically sort of, in the parlance of the day, give something back.  And so, so I went to Howard.  I turned down the other offers and accepted an offer at Howard and worked there for a few years and then, and then I was recruited to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay, so was, that went, Rayford Logan was on the faculty there?
Speaker 2: Rayford Logan had come back as, sort of out of retirement as a important figure.  He taught, I think, a few courses but not a, you know, not a heavy load but just, he was a presence in the department which was--
Speaker 1: I think I'm trying to think, [HistoryMaker] Al-Tony Gilmore, was he--
Speaker 2: Al-Tony, he was, he was among my group that came in that, he may have come in the year before me but of the young people who were being hired, using this, this Ford money.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Allison Blakely, in Russian history, and then a couple others.  Michael Winston [Michael R. Winston] was there.
Speaker 1: All right, so, what was that experience in teaching like at Howard and did you--
Speaker 2: It was, it also brought in a number of young Ph.D. students, too, which did not have, I mean, they had a graduate program but a lot of people, you know, worked, it was, they're working and going to graduate school, somewhere in the government, so it was a different kind of thing than people who were fulltime supported with a fellowship.  And so some of them came in at that time too.  Rosalyn Penn [HistoryMaker Rosalyn Terborg-Penn], for example, was one of the students at that time who went on to write important stuff on, and Sharon Harley on black women's history and they were in that class and so the graduate part of it was very interesting, there were some good people, interesting people.  The undergraduate, I mean, Howard was beginning to experience a problem that was true of a lot of, I think, schools at that point where, when I came into school, you know, most people still went to black colleges and a few people were going to Harvard or Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] or wherever.  By what's, '72 [1972], you know, the best black students were being, you know, recruited at the, you know, prominent white institutions from Harvard to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] to, you know Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] or wherever, and, you know, Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], Ohio State, whatever. And so the result was that the students coming into Howard were often less prepared.  I mean, it's mixed, of course, but, so I ended up sometimes having students who really needed considerable remedial work in terms of, you know, just basic reading and writing and stuff like that.  So it was, it was tough in that respect.  I mean, you came with one expectation and my image of Howard was my classmates back from the '60s [1960s] who were, you know, and that group of people would be now at, at a Harvard or at a Yale or wherever, not at, at Howard, for the most part.
Speaker 1: So, was that dramatic difference and you could really tell--
Speaker 2: It was a dramatic change within those few years and I was quite surprised.  I mean, and that's not to, that's not, you know, it's to say that in a class you would have that mix, there were also still people like my classmates from the early '60s [1960s] who were, choosing to go to Howard because, again, in the same way I came there to teach, a black school, you know, wanted to build up a black institution and so forth and get a black, you know, education, in a black environment.  And so there were a number of very sharp people, many of them, actually, from the Caribbean or Africa, 'cause Howard always had a significant proportion of foreign students in its body and that still was true in the, in the '70s [1970s], interestingly enough.
Speaker 1: Okay, now Cheek was new president, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was president then.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] James Cheek, right, all right.  Let's see, well, so you stayed at Howard how long?
Speaker 2: Just three years, well no, four years.
Story_ID: 619239
Speaker 1: Now did you work on any significant work when you were at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] or--
Speaker 2: Well I finished up the book, my dissertation and I, as I was leaving Howard that was going into press.
Speaker 1: That was 'Black Over White' ['Black Over White: Negro Political Leadership in South Carolina during Reconstruction,' Thomas C. Holt]?
Speaker 2: 'Black Over White', and I began the work, in fact I had a leave, NEH [National Endowment for the Humanities] grant to go study in Jamaica, the book on Jamaica ['The Problem of Freedom: Race, Labor, and Politics in Jamaica and Britain, 1832 - 1938,' Thomas C. Holt], excuse me, on the British West Indies and, you know, there were a few people on the faculty who, you know, also had some knowledge of the Caribbean, which was useful and so I went and lived in Jamaica for, I guess about six months, then in London [England], working on the British West Indies book.  Again, it was on the post-slavery experience.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is a post-slavery experience then?
Speaker 2: Right, so, again still on emancipation.  So I was taking from what I was doing in the U.S. to, to the, a broader Caribbean.
Speaker 1: That's the same period of time pretty much.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it's earlier because slave emancipation is earlier in the British West Indies, so 1840s to 1860s.
Speaker 1: Did they have similar problems?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of similarities, of course, you know, very different set up.  I mean, it's a colony, colonial relationship as opposed to, you know, the, being part of the nation as in the U.S., a federal state relationship but that has some parallels.  They had something that looked like, was familiar to me from the Freedmen's Bureau [Bureau of Refugees, Freedmen, and Abandoned Lands] in terms of the post-slavery experience.  You know, people hired to, what they would call, special magistrates, to administer the laws and manage the transition from slavery to freedom in Jamaica, just like the Freedmen's Bureau did in the U.S.  They had some similar conflicts between, 'cause it's never been a free population in Jamaica and the ex-slave population in terms of politically, the orientation of politics after slavery.  So there are a lot of, you know, signposts that were similar in both places but it was a sugar economy, it was, you know, and there were a lot of differences as well.  So, so I got drawn more and more into, you know, at first I started out thinking it was going to be a comparative study, in fact, but the differences were so great in many respects that it, and I was drawn to just figuring out what was happening within its own context, though with a comparative perspective in mind, so--
Speaker 1: Is there a heroic figure that emerges from this Jamaican history that I should know about?
Speaker 2: Yeah, William Gordon [George William Gordon], Will- William who was the hero of the rebellion, Morant, it was called Morant Bay Rebellion in 1865 as well as Paul Bogle who was a local leader in that rebellion.  I talk about them in the book.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, but my real emphasis is on the, the ordinary folk, the, you know, not the elites so much and the heroes as the, you know, how they managed and adapted to moving out of a slave economy into a, a free economy--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --an initiative that ordinary people took.
Story_ID: 672098
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please restate your full name (laughter), spell it for us--(simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: Thomas, Thomas Cleveland, as in Cleveland, Ohio, Holt [HistoryMaker Thomas C. Holt], H-O-L-T.
Speaker 1: All right, and sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It's 30, November, 1942, and it's in, outside of Danville, Virginia, Pittsylvania County, actually, officially, I guess.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a professor at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: In history, right?
Speaker 2: History, right.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is the 1st of May, 2018.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're on South Michigan Avenue in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: All right, HistoryMakers' headquarters and--
Speaker 2: That's right--(simultaneous)--.
Speaker 1: --we're completing an interview we started May 27th, 2010.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So it is now eight, almost eight full years later (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So--
Story_ID: 672099
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We were talking about, we were discussing your research in Jamaica concerning the Morant Bay rebellion and you were telling us about William Gordon [George William Gordon]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and, you want to finish up the discussion about him?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This is research that you started in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I started the research actually, how long, I started that research back in the '70s [1970s] the first time I went to Jamaica in '75 [1975] to do research.  I went to Jamaica and then I went to London [England] and then I made subsequent trips back, you know, to both of those places and, you know, the Morant Bay is sort of, not exactly a climax of the book ['The Problem of Freedom: Race, Labor, and Politics in Jamaica and Britain, 1832-1938,' Thomas C. Holt] because it, but it was a famous rebellion of the Afro-Jamaicans living in the eastern part of Jamaica, let's see, roughly, roughly thirty years after slavery had been abolished in the British West Indies--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: This is like 1865, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, and so roughly also parallel to the same time you having the abolition of slavery in the U.S. in '65 [1865], Civil War was ending and it was significant because it was all the, the threads that had been sort of unleashed with the abolition of slavery sort of coming to a head, if you may, not a great metaphor but, so basically, you know, the economic conditions, the social conditions, the political conditions that had started out, hopeful in many, in many respects, in terms of both the British policy, in terms of, you know, for the first time Jamaicans, Afro--Afro-Jamaicans were elected to the assembly, held political office much like in the United States and had voting rights and were finding their way, economically, some of them as small farmers, independent from the big plantations, many of them, of course, still left on the plantations.  And then, various crisis of international and local led eventually to things falling apart, basically, in the early '60s [1860s] on all fronts, political, economic, social, and so that was their rebellion of, actually, these were small, some were plantation workers but most were small holders, land holders, who were being overtaxed, being treated very badly in the courts and had various legislation that was, you know, constraining them in various ways and, and so they went to the courthouse to get justice and, they ended up with a shootout and the general uprising which was put down very brutally by the governor, Governor Eyre [Edward John Eyre], his name was.
Speaker 1: What was his name again, you said?
Speaker 2: Governor Eyre, E-Y-R-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 672100
Speaker 1: George William Gordon was a, a freeborn Afro-Jamaican who had taken up the cause that had been, he's a member of the legislature and had been very supportive of the, the rights of the small holders as well as the laborers.  And so, the governor [Edward John Eyre], seeing him as a political enemy, used the rebellion as an excuse to arrest him and execute him and he, of course, later is, when Jamaica wins its independence from Britain in the 1960s, he's one of the, the national heroes of Jamaica--
Speaker 2: A martyr.
Speaker 1: --Paul Bogle, Marcus Garvey and George William Gordon.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so, he's probably less well known than, obviously, Marcus Garvey was well known in the U.S.
Speaker 2: Right, so few of us really know his name now but what he went through is similar to what a lot of, I mean, when I, when you read about the Haitian Revolution--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know, the, everybody's jubilant at the end of slavery and when the, it looks like that they've, they've acquired freedom but then trying to make the economy and the system work--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --without a trial period is a, I mean, you're kind of winging it, right, you're sort of?
Speaker 1: Well it's not so much that is that the, you know, the, the forces that were allied against them--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --that is the former slaveholders on the one hand, to some extent, eventually, in the case of Haiti, of course, there was a kind of alliance of the, what we would call the Western nations--
Speaker 2: The whole world.
Speaker 1: --including the U.S., France, you know, Great Britain, you know, you know, in fact Great Britain and France had been the ones they had rebelled against and all of them are allied to, to make it very difficult for them to survive, economically, cutting out, very, not unlike the treatment of Cuba in the twentieth century where they cut off, you know, trade and so impoverished the country and so it wasn't simply, you know, so much their own doing--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --as, in fact, the, the pressure from, internationally.
Speaker 2: I think, I think trying to figure out how to run a country is probably tough enough without having--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the opposition of the entire--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --world against you too.
Speaker 1: Right, I mean, if that had happened to United States at the time of the American Revolution, and people refused to buy its cotton and its tobacco and its indigo and other things they were producing, then they would have been in the bad shape.
Speaker 2: So, the founding fathers would have, would not have been seen as so smart had the whole world--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --boy- boycotted 'em, right.
Speaker 1: Well, the revolution might not have lasted or might have held.  So, but Britain didn't choose to, you know, boycott the U.S., for example, after the American Revolution.
Story_ID: 672101
Speaker 1: Now, so, is, is your, what did you learn and do you think that, that your study of this has lessons for emerging African countries today, I mean, the countries are still trying to get--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --get a fix on how to--
Speaker 2: Well I would certainly, you know, lessons, per se, 'cause things are yet different again in the twentieth century and certainly the mid-twentieth century when most of the African nations emerged into, you know, after, after colonialism was ended but the broad strokes, I mean, that basically you have to have some kind of economic base in order to support, you know, the population, you can't really survive in isolation, I mean, no country does.  And so, so those, those lessons are about the same as, from the period of Haiti and, and to some extent, it didn't happen with Jamaica but, you know, in terms of the kind of pressures on the, the, this franchise, I mean, the people who are in the countryside, it was very much the same.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.  So, so you were doing this research in the '70s [1970s] and it ['The Problem of Freedom: Race, Labor, and Politics in Jamaica and Britain, 1832-1039,' Thomas C. Holt] finally was published, I think, in the '80s [1980s], right, is that true?
Speaker 2: Yeah, on, actually, no, it was '90s [1990s], actually--
Speaker 1: Nineties [1990s], okay.
Speaker 2: --it took a long time--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --ninety-two [1992] it finally came out and I had, I guess, three different trips to Jamaica and, and even, actually, two to Jamaica and one more to, additional one, to London [England] to do research for the book.
Story_ID: 672102
Speaker 1: Now you were at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] from '73 [1973] to '76 [1976], right, is that about right?
Speaker 2: Let's see, Harvard, no, I was at Harvard from seventy--no, '76 [1976] to seventy--to eight--'79 [1979], I was at Harvard.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was at--
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976] to '79 [1979].
Speaker 2: --I was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] from '72 [1972] to, to '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: Okay, Howard, okay, all right.  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Howard University was my first job, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were at Howard when you started working on this research--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was--
Speaker 1: --in Jamaica?
Speaker 2: --finishing up the, the first book ['Black over White: Negro Political Leadership in South Carolina During Reconstruction,' Thomas Holt] which had been my dissertation on South Carolina and Reconstruction there and, and then I had always been interested, in fact, I had gotten interested in Jamaica when I was, you know, in school, in graduate school but it was such a big project that luckily my dissertation advisor warned me off of trying to do it, you know, then, as a student.  And so, and, of course, given how much time it took, it was, that was wise.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now, well tell us about, how did you, were you, were you recruited by Harvard, what happened in seventy--
Speaker 2: Oh, Harvard, yes, I was recruited--
Speaker 1: Great.
Speaker 2: --in fact, I was in Jamaica doing research for that book ['The Problem of Freedom: Race, Labor, and Politics in Jamaica and Britain, 1832-1039,' Thomas C. Holt]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the first time I was in Jamaica and got a, got a call to come up for an interview and, in fact I was in Jamaica getting ready to go to London [England] with my family and so it was kind of a, you know, inconvenient to do it but I came up for an interview at, and then continued on to, to London to complete that research.  And then, things worked out and so I went there in, the following fall.
Speaker 1: So, so were they recruiting you for the history department or the African American studies--(simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: It was actually a joint appointment--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --with the, the primary department recruiting me was the African American studies program--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but it was a joint history appointment with the African American studies.
Speaker 1: That's 1976?
Speaker 2: That's 1976.
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976], and was Ewart Guinier in charge of the department then or--
Speaker 2: No he had, he left then--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the, Eileen Southern--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --had succeeded him as the department head--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --of African American studies then.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  Well, how did you like Harvard?  And how would you compare it to Howard, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, vastly different (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, I, you know, we have to ask these questions.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, it's, I, you know, it, there are good things about it, I mean, it was, being in Boston [Massachusetts] in some respects, although there was a lot of racial tension in Boston at that time.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: The, especially in South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts], but it was, I met very interesting people and, and certainly it was good to my career but I was not, you know, sad to leave, actually, when, when I was then recruited to University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Story_ID: 672103
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I mean, did you have any second thoughts about going to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in the first place after, I mean--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: --after being at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --no, no, I think it was, it was the right thing to do in many respects at that time.  I mean, I, I think I'd done what I could do at Howard at that point and in terms of my own professional growth and development, I was, Harvard was certainly a better place to be.
Speaker 1: Hm, yeah.
Speaker 2: It was, and there were some great students that I encountered there, so that was, you know, really a big, big plus.  Had, you know, some success in terms of teaching and so forth, so, and made some progress on, on my work, so--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did you have a lot of support at, at Harvard for your research projects?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: More so than Howard?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had more money (laughter), so, yes.  Yeah, no, that was, that was, that was clear.
Speaker 1: That's what I'm getting at, too, is just, is the dynamics of like what, what makes the difference between a Howard and a Harvard in terms of, because you get, you get, you have a tradition at Howard of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of historians.  We mentioned all the great people that were there that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and, but I have to say that in all the stories I hear about Howard, people who stay there a long time, they have to struggle with administration and other--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --other things that lack of money to do what they want to do and resources and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: I mean both as a student, 'cause I've been at Howard as a student, obviously, and, and as a faculty, you know, it was, I mean especially as a student it was, you know, really a dynamic place.  I mean, it was during the, in the '60s [1960s] and, I mean, you know, you still had people like, was taught by Sterling Brown [Sterling A. Brown], for example, and any of a number of people coming through so it was a, a great place to be.  In fact some people, I didn't realize how, you know, in some ways famous or, you know, accomplished they were, until after I left and I read, read about them later (laughter), you know, as a student.  And then when I came back, there was a nice, you know, lively cohort of, of new faculty but that was, you know, part of, 'cause they were trying to rebuild and they, it had, they, Lorraine Williams was head of the history department, had succeeded in getting some money from Ford [Franklin L. Ford] to, to reduce the teaching load and, so it was a, it was great to be there then, too, and Washington [D.C.], I love Washington, so--
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you went back to Howard as a--
Speaker 2: As a professor, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, so this is the position you just--
Speaker 2: So, but, you know, there, the, you know, the things that affected all of the HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] of, many of the, you know, really great students were now being recruited by places like Harvard and Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and, you know, Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] and so forth.  So, whereas, when I was a student there, you know, that was one of the, the place to be for a young black academic student--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 672104
Speaker 1: Any stories from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] that you want to share with us before we, tell us how, how you went to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, I guess the, those years the, one of the things that happened, I guess at Harvard was the, I remember debate about the Bakke decision [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978].
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: In fact, it was a debate in which, the lawyer, Dershowitz [Alan Dershowitz], was one of the people on the panel who was, of course, I didn't particularly know who he was at the time, he was, I mean, you know, quite famous, obviously.
Speaker 1: That's before he had his, his television show--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, so, so, and, and Professor Walzer [Michael Walzer], a number of other people, so it was a, you know, it, in terms of an event, that sort of was galvanizing attention and debate, you know, that was one of the events during my stay there.
Speaker 1: Now this is Affirmative Action debate, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Allan Bakke sued--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, the first, first major challenge of Affirmative Action--(simultaneous)--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right.  He sued, was it the University of California [University of California, Davis, Davis, California] or--
Speaker 2: University of California at--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you know, I forget which one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, and there was a kind of a mixed decision, actually, that sort of trimmed the sails in some sense of, of Affirmative Action policies that universities had adopted.
Speaker 1: So, yeah, so it kind of boxed universities--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --into a certain set of guidelines--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: --that they had to, they could still do--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --some Affirmative Action but it had to be within certain parameters, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  And so, so that was probably one of the more eventful things.  Also my first, one of the things, too, which carried over to the University of Michigan later was beginning to, had protest on college campuses for their investments in South Africa and so there were a few of those that happened while I was in, at Harvard and--
Speaker 1: Was Harvard heavily invested in South Africa?
Speaker 2: I don't know whether they were heavily invested but they had, you know, significant, I mean, they have significant investments everywhere and they had significant investments there and were resisting, I think not only moving those investments but the idea that they would have to, having, exercising the kind of social consciousness, you know, in terms of how they, you know, put their money.  So, and many places were, you know, arguing on that basis that, you know, I mean, the finance is separate from moral issues and, you know, so.  So--
Speaker 1: So that's how they, they saw it at Harvard?  I mean, really, they--
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure, yeah.
Speaker 1: --finances, yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean, not only at Harvard, other places as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, is that, could we generalize that's how the rich really see their--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well some do, obviously, some, some, you know, are, you know, think about other things and how they use their money.
Story_ID: 672105
Speaker 1: Now did, was there a, was there a, when I think of Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in those days, there was, oh, Allen Counter [HistoryMaker S. Allen Counter] was there then.  He wasn't in history but--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --he was the brother that went to Suriname and Tony Brown covered his journey to Suriname to talk to--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --remember the, 'I Sought My Brother' ['I Sought My Brother: An Afro-American Reunion'] the PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] special?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, right, right, yes, right.
Speaker 1: I know that he was on the campus, I'm trying to think of who else but there's always, there are always interesting people on the campus.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And I don't know if you have the time, I always imagined that if somebody's at Harvard you're, you're going to see all these people.
Speaker 2: No, it's a big place, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Yeah, you're not going to.
Speaker 2: I mean, the person I knew, I mean, [HistoryMaker] Martin Kilson was there and, of course, Guinier [Ewart Guinier].  I mean, Guinier was sort of not really there at that point, he was, but he'd, you know, come to some things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he was like semi--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --retired, and out of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and a few other, you know, few other people.
Speaker 1: Now did, did you have a good relationship with Martin Kilson?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, he was, he was quite generous and welcoming, so--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --at that time.
Story_ID: 672106
Speaker 1: Was the African American studies department, were they under a lot of pressure in those days or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they were.  It was, I mean, as usual, the pressure points would come around hiring and, and the, you know, efforts to grow and develop the program and, and some of it, the university was, you know, I think in the wrong and some of it, the fault was with the leadership of the program itself, so--
Speaker 1: Yeah, see I'm thinking a lot of the programs were started in the early, late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s].  Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I think, was, I don't know, '69 [1969], '70 [1970], something like that, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was about the same time as many of the others, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Yeah, and, and as, as evidenced by the Bakke case [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the country was in a conservative mode--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and a lot of gains that African Americans had made were being rolled back--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --you know, and I, you know, including black studies' departments were under, they were catching a lot of heat.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were under some pressure.  I'm not certain at that point they were being rolled back so much but there were, you know, tensions about, you know, their mission, you know, their curricular and their leadership.
Speaker 1: What were the discussions at Harvard about that?  I mean, do you remember what, what discuss--the discussions were about?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  It was, that is in terms of specifics, you know, but in general it was questions around the credibility of a degree in African American studies, for example, questions about, you know, how it's going to mesh with other units.  For example, I had a joint appointment with history which was one model for those kind of programs and, you know, that is there, you're vetted by a traditional apartment--department, as well as, you know, African American studies which some people resented and, and also would lead to conflicts 'cause if you're trying to, and that continues to be the case, you're trying to make an appointment, say, in economics, maybe less and more difficult than, say, in history or some other programs.  So, so those kinds of, kind of, you know, internal conflicts, they were not so much large ideological ones, although that did occur at that point in time but rather just how you're going to manage this, how you're going to sustain it, how you're going to develop it and so it's at that level of, of conflict but always it, you know, the issue would arise in context of, who you're going to hire, by what criteria, who you're going to promote, those kinds of things.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did people tend to, I mean, I can imagine with that kind of setup that some people, if they came in through African American studies to another department would try to make sure they got in that other department--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --you know, seeing that is more permanent--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and more career sustaining than African American studies.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that was a problem--
Speaker 1: Is that, is that--
Speaker 2: --and that was a problem from the point of view from the people being appointed as well, I mean, that certainly in terms of the, you know, the longevity and the, you know, and the status and in the profession as well as within the given university--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --it was better to be, you know, you know, had been vetted by and be of, you know, in history as well as in African American studies or in political science as well as in African American studies.  So that was, and at the same time, there was resentment but, you know, you know, why do we have to be, you know, at the (unclear) of this, of this discipline, so, of this other department which inevitably was prompt--you know, predominantly white--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so that was, so those were some of the difficulties, I think, that arose and not just there, I mean, in general.
Story_ID: 672107
Speaker 1: So we- were students, I mean, enrolling in the classes in African American studies at a--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --pretty high--
Speaker 2: Now, that was the other thing.  You know, at all these places that, you know, that generally many of them began '69 [1969], '70 [1970] and early '70s [1970s] and there was, you know, intense interest on the student body, I mean, many of them came out of student protests.  Now the protests often were related to university policy and national policy.  I mean, it was, the Vietnam War and other issues as well as civil rights.  And so, there was intense interest in those programs at the start which could not be sustained, I mean, basically, you know, in time, people turn back to, you know, business as usual.  And so the, the populations in classes that had been hundreds of people, say, at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] or at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] too for that matter, they're not going to be, you know, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty and so that's seen as a, as a failure but, you know, you're beginning from a, a level that was simply not sustainable and that was created by this, you know, great interest that people had at that moment and it was kind of a generational affect.  And so, a lot of places struggled then with, you know, justifying themselves, well, look, you know, you used to have hundreds of people, you know, demanding this thing, this program and now, you know, you just have a handful of majors and therefore you must be doing something wrong, you know, but if you compared it to somebody taking, you know, some other, you know, program of the same, you know, size and, you know, if that had been the comparison, then you're not being, you know, seen as unsuccessful.  So that was through the '70s [1970s], I think that was a big problem.
Story_ID: 672108
Speaker 1: You think that, well this is not just about Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] but about African American studies in general, do you think that African American studies, when you were teaching in those departments, was it fulfilling a mission of providing an alternative look at--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a subject like history or psychology or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think undoubtedly, I mean, with, with all the variation 'cause everybody didn't do it the same way, I think that was certainly the case and it was kind of an easy mark because how much, you know, history was being taught, I mean, for example, African American history at any of those places was, would be quite limited.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I remember [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin's story, you know, about, he was being recruited at Harvard, this was years before I came there, and he interviewed with some dean who says, well, you know, "Is there enough material for you to actually fill out a semester?", you know.  Here's a man who just wrote this, you know, the book on African American history and you know, it's absurd, you know.  So, with that kind of attitude and, you know, orientation, almost anything you did was going to be, you know, a improvement.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think a question, a question to the interviewer would be, "Have you read enough of this material to be able to interview me," you know--(simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: Make a judgment, right, right.  So, yeah, so it was, you know, and, you know, one of the problems, problems in, in the sense of issues that have to be dealt with within programs themselves had to do with, given their origins, which was actually out of a political movement and the idea that you're gonna serve the community, many of them were torn, many programs were torn, especially in the early years, between how do you fulfill that mission to the community as well as, you know, be intellectually, you know, you know, rigorous and respectable and so forth.  I mean, it's not necessarily impossible for those to, to work together but it's very difficult.  And so, so that was, you know, I would say the first ten years or so of the African American studies programs that was, you know, attention around that because it's a fulltime job just to do, you know, you know, your work as a scholar, as a program in teaching and so forth within, you know, the university without taking on, you know, these other issues which as commendable as they were, you know, somebody working, you know, in terms of volunteer work or something or, or some other mission outside the university but still has to get tenure, I mean, so you're still dealing with the structures of the university and its expectations.  And so, and so it's not only, you know, people torn programmatically but I think internally because their sense of themselves and what their mission was, was to do something more than sort of the, the routine.
Story_ID: 672109
Speaker 1: So what, now did you do any, did you conduct any major research when you were at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: I was doing research, basically, still on--
Speaker 1: On Jamaica, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --on Jamaica, that's what I had been doing when I, when I came to Harvard.  I didn't get a lot done on it, at least when I was there, I mean, I had some other projects as well because I had collected a lot of material when I, in fact, we even, when I was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], the, the black politicians in other states, 'cause I did the first book on South Carolina ['Black over White: Negro Political Leadership in South Carolina During Reconstruction,' Thomas Holt] but I had a huge amount of material on Louisiana and some of the other places.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the Reconstruction politicians--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the other states.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, I, you know, did some work thinking I might, you know, publish something on that, in the end it didn't, it was just, you know, too much, I mean, to do both things and so, so I didn't but I was, you know, I gave some papers and so forth, you know, based on that material.  Then years later, Eric Foner actually was at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], you know, came out with, you know, a general Reconstruction book as well as with some, you know, he had collected, begun with the material that I had and then added material on the, the office holders in the other states, some of which I, I had collected already.
Story_ID: 672110
Speaker 1: And also there was a project that started, actually, at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and in fact Howard was responsible for it and ironically I want to start thinking now about going back to it because, you know, we mentioned all these, you know, people who had come through there, I mean, and if you go back not only, I was there in the '60s [1960s] but if you go back to the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s], late '20s [1920s] even, I mean, it was incredible, you know, the folk who were gathered at Howard, I mean, Alain Locke [Alain LeRoy Locke] and, I mentioned Sterling Brown [Sterling A. Brown] who was still there when I was there but E. Franklin Frazier, I mean, Frazier died the year I came to Howard--
Speaker 2: Hansberry [William Leo Hansberry], you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --I remember his funeral on the campus in fact.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And Ralph Bunche had been there, you know, briefly.  And so, actually, I started doing interviews of some other people, not those people, but some other people, Harold Lewis and, and it started because Lorraine Williams asked me to write a, they were celebrating the Freedmen's Hospital, 'cause then it was becoming the Howard University Hospital [Washington, D.C.], and the Freedmen's Hospital, of course, had been started when Howard was started as a place to, you know, serve the black population, the freed population, primarily.  And so, I did, in fact I did a pamphlet on it with [HistoryMaker] Rosalyn Terborg-Penn and, who was a student there, and we did research on it and in the process of doing that I interviewed some people, some of the people had been at the medical center, and got interested in that, that generation that had been there.  So--
Speaker 2: The first generation or--
Speaker 1: No, no, the generation in the, in the, interwar period--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --'cause they were the ones, some of them are still alive and I was interviewing them--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: And so, and now looking back on it, I mean, it's a fantastic, you know, group of people and--
Speaker 2: You're talking about when Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew] was there and--
Speaker 1: Charles Drew.  In fact I interviewed his widow for this, that project, 'cause he was head of the, he was at Freedmen's and then head of the medical department and, and some other people who were--
Speaker 2: Jack White [Jack E. White], Burke Syphax?
Speaker 1: No, I didn't, I didn't--
Speaker 2: Well he didn't do it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I didn't get them but--
Speaker 2: You didn't get them, okay.
Speaker 1: But Cobb, Montague Cobb [William Montague Cobb]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Montague, yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: So, so I'm now, I guess, maybe it's age, but I'm really fascinated by those people and that, that era and that, sort of that, I mean, I don't want to romanticize it because there were a lot of tension among, that's what came out as I talked to the people, the people fighting with each other, but it was, you know, it was just a hotbed of intellectual production and, at that time.  So, anyway, that's one of the things that I had collected some of that material and did some research, in fact, at the Rockefeller archives [Rockefeller Archive Center] in Tarrytown [sic. Sleepy Hollow, New York] because they had fantastic material on, 'cause they gave grants to people on a lot of those people.  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, I, look, after doing all these interviews, I mean, I've heard the stories of these doctors, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that's like running names, John Clark [HistoryMaker Dr. John Clark, Jr.], Montague Cobb and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --playing a violin and the, the bone collect- collections and all that, I mean, it's fascinating, it's fascinating how the--
Speaker 1: Merze Tate, who's actually also there when I came back to teach at Howard, she was quite something.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it's a, it's quite a history--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: --it's quite, quite a history, yeah.  A lot of drama and, you know--
Speaker 1: So, so anyway, one of the things I did at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was begin to do a little bit more on that, then I dropped it and I, you know, I'm going to go back to try to write, do something with it.
Speaker 2: I hope you do--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --yeah, I hope you do--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --'cause you seem like you're on the right track with it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's a powerful history and we have a lot of testimony in this archive about--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --all the various figures--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know.
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: Then you can be my, one of my resources.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We interviewed Jack White's son [HistoryMaker Jack White], you know, he's a journalist--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: --you know--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: --and he told us his father's story and Burke Syphax's grandson--
Speaker 1: Yup, yeah.
Speaker 2: So, it's a lot of, a lot of history.
Speaker 1: That was quite a generation.  You talk about the greatest generation, that was, that was really a pre-World War II [WWII].
Speaker 2: Charles Drew's daughter we interviewed way back there too.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she's, you know, she's president of a community college up in Maryland [sic. Southeastern University, Washington, D.C.] at the time we interviewed her--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, no, I didn't know that.
Speaker 2: She was, yeah, [HistoryMaker] Charlene Drew Jarvis.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah, okay, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: She's got a, she talks about her father, I mean, Charles Drew is almost like a superhero--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well--
Speaker 2: --when you talk to the people of that era.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well.
Story_ID: 672111
Speaker 1: At any rate, so, well, how, how did the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] lure you away from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Offered me a job (laughter).
Speaker 1: With bigger pay (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, yeah, right, not so much that it's just that the, I went there with tenure, so, you know, so it was, which is a big, you know, change, step from Harvard.
Speaker 1: Well some professors, you know, labor their, most of their professional life with no tenure.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, so.
Speaker 1: And so they offered you tenure--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --from the, from the beginning?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, so that was part of the lure.  I mean, and, and there are a couple on the faculty, people that I, you know, had known in graduate school, Barbara Fields [Barbara J. Fields] was one of the people who was there already and I'd known her at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and so it was attractive as a change.
Speaker 1: Okay, so University of Michigan is, you start there in 19--
Speaker 2: What is it, 19--1980, yeah.
Speaker 1: Nineteen-eighty [1980].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was hired in '79 [1979] but I had a research leave--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and so I arrived on campus in 1980.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So, now Barbara Fields was featured in 'The Civil War,' I remember her right?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: In the Ken Burns--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --film about the Civil War, so she was there.  Who, who else was there?
Speaker 2: Well the other person I knew from Yale was there was J. Mills Thornton who's from Alabama, had written on Alabama, Civil War era, or actually, pre-Civil War era.  Harold Cruse was there, I didn't know him before, but he was quite a figure.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Harold Cruse--
Speaker 2: And, and the other, I guess our luminary there was Ali Mazrui who's the, you know, African, Kenyan, actually originally.
Speaker 1: Yeah, again, he's associated with a national league broadcast documentary ['The Africans: A Triple Heritage']--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, he did that fantastic broadcast on Africa--
Speaker 1: --about Africa, yeah.
Speaker 2: --right, one of the first of that kind, actually.
Speaker 1: Now this is, did Harvard have an African studies department?
Speaker 2: They didn't have an Afric- it was, what was it, was it Af- no, they didn't have an African studies department.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They had an African historian whose name is slipping my mind right now--
Speaker 1: But the reason why I ask, of course, is because University of Michigan has African studies--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana], Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin], these are all seemingly Midwestern schools that these African studies departments--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I don't know where they're--wherever else they are.
Speaker 2: Well, now some, like at Michigan, there was African American, African and African American studies--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which was quite a coup because the two programs have different histories.  African studies is actually older, I mean, and associated really with the old hands and old Africa hands in some ways people like Melville Herskovits [Melville J. Herskovits]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] has African studies, right, 'cause--
Speaker 2: --at Northwestern, right, which is, you know, was the premier place and, Adekeye [Adekeye Adebajo], that's who, that was who was at Harvard.  And then, for the most part places might have a person teaching African history.  Oftentimes they were white scholars for a variety of reasons, among them, at least in those days, you needed, you know, to get to Africa, right, or you need to get to places like London [England] or whatever to do the research.  And so, until you began to have much more foundation support of various sorts like Ford [Ford Foundation, New York, New York] and Rockefeller [Rockefeller Foundation] and so forth, you didn't have that many African Americans doing African history or African studies.
Story_ID: 672112
Speaker 1: Now, I may have asked you this in the, previously, but did you know William Leo Hansberry?  Was he still in the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No I didn't know him but, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I know he was at, yeah.
Speaker 1: But he would have been the pioneer in African studies (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were, there were a number like him, you know, who were, very early on--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he would have been the--
Speaker 2: --but they're pretty rare.
Speaker 1: --the, the African American pioneer--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --in African studies, him and E. Franklin Frazier on a smaller scale, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he didn't really do African studies but the, the support structure for doing that field was such that you weren't going to have that many African Americans doing it until later, and then it begins to blossom.  So, by in the '70s [1970s], you're more likely, if you had somebody doing African studies or African history, particularly, there were either going to be a white American or an African so there are people who were recruited from Africa, often people who had studied in, in London [England] at one of the, you know, the English universities.
Speaker 1: Now what about Joseph Harris [Joseph E. Harris], would he, would he have been considered a--
Speaker 2: Well, he was another exception, I mean, he was, in fact he was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  He came to Howard just as I was leaving, actually.  In fact, I went on leave the year he was hired.  In fact, I was very much involved in trying to get him hired.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, so, yeah, so you can, you know, name a few and then, you know, that's, so that, so in the end it created some tension between, if you're trying to combine them in one program because of the orientation of typically the Africanist whether they're white American or African were somewhat skeptical of African American studies and so you're, it was rare to bring them together.  So, Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] was fortunate in someone like Mazrui [Ali Mazrui] who was sort of a major public figure, I mean, world figure, actually, so, and who, you know, always understand what was going on with African American studies but he was very sympathetic and he was a, you know, he's a gentleman.  And so, he sort of bridged the gap, many other places did not succeed in doing that, including Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], so, so, so in many places you had, you know, African, Afro-American studies as a separate field and, you know, it's like many other fields of history, if you don't have your, you know, if you don't have the parallel, you know, like having a history department with American history but no European history.  I mean, you know, so, so it was a problem and that was one of the problems confronted by, you know, less noted, you know, from the outside of, you know, forming and running successfully these programs.  So you'd have people in, in some places, African American studies doing African history but who don't have the credibility with, you know, the profession and it extended to the profession too because some of the professional organizations were, you know, skeptical of this, this new thing and, and that showed up in various tensions there.  In fact there was a separate professional organization of African historians that was formed, oh, not African historians, Africanists that was formed because of that, that tension.  So, so that's all part of the, you know, university politics that's (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's, I went to the African Studies Association conference in Chicago [Illinois] in '74 [1974], I think, and I was so surprised not to be able to find any African Americans there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, well.
Speaker 1: There are usually, there were white scholars--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and continental African scholars.
Speaker 2: Right, and it was even worse in some field like anthropology, for example, which typically, to be an anthropologist, I mean at least, you know, that had not always been true but in the period, that period, you know, your credentials were that you, you know, you went somewhere and you lived there for years, not just, you know, to go like a historian and do some research, like I did in Jamaica and then bring it home but to actually live in communities and have, you know, relations with, you know, communities and that's, you know, part of the development as a student and then later as a, as a professional and the facilities, support systems for, you know, African Americans who do that, I mean, you know, it's only a select group that actually manages to do that.  Oftentimes people have traveled abroad before, who've had other experiences and also in terms of the, the kind of support they would get.  It begins to change in the '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s] with Ford Foundation [New York, New York] and other agencies that at least provide the financial support but it's a slow process, it was a slow process.
Story_ID: 672113
Speaker 1: Was [HistoryMaker] Robert Green there on campus when you were there, was he, or is he at Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], maybe he's Michigan State.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I don't recall him, no--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I probably, okay, all right, okay, at Michigan State.  He's an educator but he's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --real involved in the community.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I think he's at Michigan State, yeah.  So, at any rate, so how do things go at University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]?  What courses did you teach and--
Speaker 2: Well, it was, you know, hard to teach the, the basic course in African American history and then it was a two semester course there, 'cause they were on the semester system and I taught courses out of, basically out of our research on slavery, emancipation and, and Michigan was, I mean, Michigan was a very lively place, I mean, politically, and intellectually, I mean, much more say, than Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I mean, people think of Harvard as this, you know, pinnacle but people don't talk to each other at Harvard (laughter), you know, for the most part.  I mean, there are pockets who talk to each other but whereas Michigan there are, you know, all kinds of little groups that would form together, reading groups, discussion groups, I mean, it was, and then out of that came actually a program that I was involved with there which was focused on study of slavery and emancipation, we called it the, Postemancipation Project [Postemancipation Societies Project], that got some support from John D'Arms who was then head of the graduate program and others, as well as, and at the time, I was director of the African American studies program, after I had been there a few years, I became a director.  And so the idea which has now become conventional in some ways, that if you're going to do African American studies, it is actually an international and global enterprise and so one should know something about, and this was coming from my having studied Jamaica, know something about the Caribbean, something about, you know, Latin America, as well as Africa.  And so, at the time, there was a young woman there, Rebecca Scott [Rebecca J. Scott], who was, had studied Cuba and also later she studied Brazil, as well as another young man that I met actually when I was at, at Harvard, Fred Cooper [Frederick Cooper], who studied East Africa, mainly Kenya, and later actually extended to Uganda and some other places, but, so we got together to form this program of, you know, to mentor students, you know, by giving them the background and, and this broader background who were interested either in African American studies or in, you know, other areas of history, Latin American, African studies and that was very successful.  I mean, eventually, Fred left and, I left first and then Fred left and so the program was, wasn't dismantled but, you know it was--but nonetheless we, I think, made our mark.  So that was one of the exciting things about being at Michigan.
Story_ID: 672114
Speaker 1: And then there was a lot of political stuff going on as well, I mean, while I was director of the African American studies [University of Michigan Department of Afroamerican and African Studies, Ann Arbor, Michigan], there was a whole controversy around South Africa, yet again, and so one of the things, the students were, actually initiated but, in fact one of my students, who's now in Chicago [Illinois] here, [HistoryMaker] Barbara Ransby, was a student then at the time--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and so we thought one way of mobilizing people to support disinvestment, University of Michigan's disinvestment from South Africa, as well as a very general support and attention to what was going on there, I mean that was, Mandela [Nelson Mandela] was still in jail, of course, at that point, was to give Nelson Mandela an honorary degree.  So, which was, of course, quite controversial among the upper echelons but eventually, in fact, the year that I had this, the spring that I was getting ready to leave to come to Chicago they finally, the board of trustees voted to give Mandela an honorary degree.
Speaker 2: So you were at University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] from 1980 to, when?
Speaker 1: To '88 [1988].
Speaker 2: Eighty-eight [1988], okay.
Speaker 1: Well, actually '87 [1987] I left and then, again, I was on leave and then I came to Chicago in '88 [1988].
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: So, in the, in the spring of '87 [1987] was my last, and that's when the university voted to give, the board of trustees voted to give Mandela a degree.
Speaker 2: Now this is a time period that Mandela hadn't, you know, made any public, I mean, the discussion on television and in the news was being conducted by Bishop Tutu [Desmond Tutu], Allan Boesak--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, yeah, yeah, they were--
Speaker 2: --Steve Biko had been killed, Chris Hani who was later killed--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and they had a lot of the uprising in Soweto [South Africa] were on 'Nightline.'
Speaker 1: Right, no--
Speaker 2: We saw 'em every week, saw something, yeah.
Speaker 1: You're right, there was constant attention and it was very, a lot of, you know, national, international attention was on that issue.  So, I mean, the, the disinvestment was only just a way of mobilizing people around a larger issue of, one, of freeing Mandela and also of, you know, a settlement in, in South Africa.
Speaker 2: Now, did, did [HistoryMaker] Randall Robinson come to campus or anything or did you ever have him--
Speaker 1: He didn't come to campus then, no, I mean later--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and ironically later when Mandela was, was freed and he did the tour, he came to, you know, Detroit [Michigan].  I don't think, I don't think he came to Ann Arbor [Michigan].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And some people were saying, "Well, you should come back and, you know, give him his," 'cause, you know, when they give an honorary degree, they have their robe and all that stuff and, I said, "Well, that's done now, the point--"--
Speaker 2: That's interesting now that, that, is this the first time that you know of that a person received an honorary degree who wasn't there to get it, you know, I mean, maybe he was--
Speaker 1: Maybe not the first time--
Speaker 2: --in absentia, I guess.
Speaker 1: --that they, yeah, got it in absentia but certainly the first time they were in jail, I mean (laughter), he was still in, I don't know if he was in Robben's Island [sic. Robben Island, South Africa] then or not but he may have been moved from there by that time but, you know, he was in jail and so--
Speaker 2: I think I know--
Speaker 1: --that was the point, that was, you know, to, to raise the profile of this, and, and you know, I think, I mean, that and the general mobilization across this country as well as in other countries, you know, ultimately kept the pressure on--
Speaker 2: Okay, all right--
Speaker 1: --as well as what was happening in South Africa itself, obviously, so that finally they relented but anyway that was something I was quite proud of being involved with in--
Speaker 2: And rightly so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --and that was the faculty, student, alumni, others, you know, participated in that.
Story_ID: 672115
Speaker 1: So now what pried you away from the University of Michigan?
Speaker 2: Well, I was, you know, University of Michigan is in Ann Arbor [Michigan], you know (laughter), it's, you know, rather limited and, and I, I was single at that point, I mean, I was divorced and my son [Michael Holt], who was then my youngest, had, was living with me so I was committed to stay there until he finished high school and went to college and at that point I was ready to go, so, so, and Chicago [Illinois] was very, you know, attractive place.  I mean, that was a time when Mayor Washington had just been--
Speaker 1: Yeah, you just missed him, yeah.
Speaker 2: Just missed him by, actually, when I was hired by Chicago he was still mayor and then by the time I got here in that fall, of course he, you know, had died but I was very much looking forward to being in Chicago as well as, you know, the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], but the city was a, really an attractive place to come.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the place was really, it was really, well, Harold Washington was quite a political figure--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --and the attitude of the black community was just so high--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --when Harold Washington was alive and I'm afraid you got, you came here at probably the lowest ebb, you know, I mean, I remember the air was just taken out of the black community, anyway, when he died.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, oh yeah, yup, it was very sad.  So, so as much a city as well as, you know, need for a change but--
Speaker 1: So, so what position were you hired in at the University of Chicago?  Were you hired into the--
Speaker 2: History department--
Speaker 1: --history department, of course, but yeah--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --okay and you were, you were going to teach African American history--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: African American history and based on the same course as I was teaching at Michigan.
Speaker 1: Now, now who's the chair of the department here and what was, were there any, were there other African Americans on the faculty?
Speaker 2: Very, very few.  William Julius Wilson was in sociology, of course, and a couple other people that I can't, I'm sorry, I can't remember the names right now but they were not, I mean it was, very, very few, I mean, which is ironic given that Chicago, in its longer history, had in fact, you know, attracted and trained a number of major African American figures like E. Franklin Frazier, Abram Harris [Abram Lincoln Harris] and, you know, there are many others.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Allison Davis, I guess, and--
Speaker 2: Allison Davis, right, so, so by that time, though, it was far behind anywhere else in terms of recruiting either students or faculty and that was part of the challenge, too, of coming, but, so with the few people who were here, I began to sort of, you know, to try to mobilize, started a workshop [Race and the Reproduction of Racial Ideologies Workshop; Reproduction of Race and Racial Ideologies Workshop] which is still going, goes on at Chicago, African American topics which workshops at Chicago are, provide a way in which you can do without a lot of administrative, you know, effort, have weekly or usually bi-weekly meetings, students and faculty discuss papers and issues and the first one we had it was, you know, packed, people from all over the campus 'cause they were very hungry for this and, and out of that eventually came the, what had now, African American studies program there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when Dawson [Michael Dawson] came and he became the first, the first director of it.  So, and so it was, you know, it was also at that point, too, an intellectually alive place, so, and, so that was, that was some good years, first, first few years.
Story_ID: 672116
Speaker 1: So you were talking about the African American history workshop, basically, that you started--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --there [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], as soon as you arrived and--
Speaker 2: It was called the Race and Race--Race and Re- and Reproduction of Race Workshop [sic. Race and the Reproduction of Racial Ideologies Workshop; Reproduction of Race and Racial Ideologies Workshop].
Speaker 1: Race and--
Speaker 2: The Reproduction of Race which the idea is that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, race is made, it's, you know, it doesn't simply, you know, it's not inherent.  And so, yeah, so that was a good place--
Speaker 1: So race is an idea you're talking about, right--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, yeah.
Speaker 2: And, you know, it was broad enough that people, the idea was to be multidisciplinary which I had been, ever since Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] I'd been very much into multidisciplinary kinds of projects.  So we had people from English, people from, you know, political science, sociology, divinity school, anthropology, so all of them engage and, you know, so people were looking for a place 'cause they didn't have it within their own disciplines to have those kind of discussions, meet other people with similar interest and to learn from other people, so, so that was, that was exciting, it was good.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.  So, so did you, did you make contact with some of the black historians here in town, that the other schools have much of a--
Speaker 2: No I didn't, actually, that much.  I mean, I did like put them, my memories for names is bad but the, guy who was up at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] in literature, actually.  Leon--
Speaker 1: Forrest?
Speaker 2: Forrest, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Leon Forrest, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'The Bloodworth Orphans,' right?
Speaker 2: Right, and so, I made contact with him early on and less so at UIC [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] or, you know, some of the others although some people, not some of the primary faculty, but some other people would come to our workshop from Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois], Northwestern, I mean, especially some of the graduate students.
Story_ID: 672117
Speaker 1: Now in, in '88 [1988], now by this time you are on the editorial board of The American Historical Review and you had been on the editorial board of The Journal of Southern History, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, those were, you know, they were not major engagements, frankly, I mean--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --but, but, you know, I was one of the editors, I mean, one of the people who would discuss, you know, a few of the works and policy and so forth.
Speaker 1: Now one, one Chicago [Illinois] centered, I guess, article that you wrote was, 'The Lonely Warrior: Ida B. Wells-Barnett'--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --'and the Struggle for Black Leadership' ['The Lonely Warrior: Ida B. Wells-Barnett and the Struggle for Black Leadership,' Thomas C. Holt]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in 'Black Leaders in the Twentieth Century' [sic. 'Black Leaders of the Twentieth Century,' edited by John Hope Franklin and August Meier].  Tell us about how that, how that project came about and a little bit about Ida B. Wells in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well mainly that was, that was a collection of essays edited by [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin and Augie Meier [August Meier] and Augie had been the editor of my first book at the University of Illinois Press [Champaign, Illinois] and, and I just met John Hope, actually, I guess, a year before and so they invited me to, to do this piece and I had not done anything on Ida Wells before but was intrigued by the idea and so I worked up that essay.  So, so it was sort of a one off kind of thing but it did intrigue me about, you know, doing biography and, you know, and she was an amazing figure, so, it also got me into a little Chicago history, too, so, which I had not particularly done before (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Right, that's what I was thinking, you know, 'cause I think that John Hope Franklin had been the editor of a series of biographies, the general editor--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: They included Timothy Thomas Fortune, Ida B. Wells--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --John Roy Lynch and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I can't think of who else but I know those--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --three and there have been about five or six in the series that were written by other historians--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --yeah, but, yeah, she's quite a figure so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was quite, yes, striking figure, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and a lot of activities take place right around the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, I mean, certainly on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] and, and the mobilization with respect to both the Illinois politics as well as the anti-lynching campaign that takes her to, you know, far and wide.
Speaker 1: Right, did, did you, I know the Chicago Midway Plaisance is where the World's Fair [World's Columbian Exposition, Chicago, Illinois] was, you know, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: It just, and she had a, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, I wrote about that later, actually, in another book ['Children of Fire: A History of African Americans,' Thomas C. Holt] I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, it wasn't so much about her but she was working with Fred Douglass [Frederick Douglass] in terms of, they wrote the pamphlet to hand out to people, 'Why is the Negro Not at the Fair?' [sic. 'The Reason Why The Colored American is not in the World's Columbian Exposition: The Afro-American's Contribution to Columbian Literature'] and it was interesting because they had some tension between them at a certain point because she wanted to, you know, boycott, you know, what they called the sort of concession to them was they would have a Colored American Day at the fair, I mean, they had other groups that would have their day and, you know, people would come and they would have, whatever, you know, music and speeches and, you know, various kinds of exhibits.  And so, there was, it's controversial because a lot of the other people, including Ida Wells said, you know, "Why should we just take a day, I mean, it should have a much more, you know, permanent kind of exhibition for African Americans at this fair." Whereas Douglass was being more pragmatic, he says, "Okay, we'll take a day and we'll, you know, use it to protest and bring attention to our cause." And so, so they sort of parted ways for, briefly, on that, that issue, although she later conceded that Douglass was probably right, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, she was pretty tough (laughter)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah right.
Story_ID: 672118
Speaker 1: Do you find it interesting when, we often, you know, a lot of us never get past a Black History Month biography--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of a his- of a black historical figure.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We study a couple paragraphs about their life, isolated from the stories of the other people that lived at the same time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But do you think it's, I mean, I know you, you enjoy it when these figures are talking to each other and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --interacting, which they did, that's what they had to do.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: --and they had fights with each other, I mean so, I mean, that's what the stuff of history is, it's not just that they were, you know, necessarily all, not necessarily all on the same page at the same time and--
Speaker 1: That's right, a lot--
Speaker 2: --so there was, and so they, the Chicago fair [World's Columbian Exposition, Chicago, Illinois] was one of those occasions where, you know, people had different ideas about where they, you know, how they should respond to it and whether they could use it and what they can get out of it, so, so, it was, so yeah, I mean, the, the, it's not just the biographies but the biographies of other, I guess, collective biographies of these people engaged with each other that really intrigues me.  I mean, that's why, I was talking about the Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] project, of all those people who gathered at the same place and they are fighting tooth and nail about this and, as well as, you know, joining together on some other things and, and, you know, so you see the full person comes out.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a similar history with Daniel Hale Williams and Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: People that are bold heroes but they're like--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --where they were engaged they were like--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, no.
Speaker 1: --head to head, you know.  So, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He was another person who could be a difficult person (laughter).
Story_ID: 672119
Speaker 1: Now from eight- '87 [1987] to '88 [1988], you were a fellow both at John Simon Guggenheim Foundation [John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation], and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Yeah, those were just fellowships I had to--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause that's when I was on leave, I had left Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] 'cause I had those fellowships and then was coming to Chicago [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I was away that academic year, '87 [1987], '88 [1988] and then arrived here in the, in the fall of '88 [1988], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a writing process?  I mean, what's your process for writing history?  Can you, I mean, do you have to block out certain, write certain times of the day or how do you do it?
Speaker 2: There's, I think, no one, I need, one, I just need time and sort of space to think and, is one consistent thing.  Time of day has changed over time.  I used to work at night, I could only work at night, and now in my older age I get sleepy at night, so (laughter), that doesn't work as well as it used to.  I mean, I had to stay up, you know, practically all night, you know, and that was when I was most productive but being able to, you know, sort of block things out, also the one thing was consistent, even when I was a student, I'd find that ideas would come to me when I wasn't sort of trying.  So I'd be walking, I'd go work at the computer center in the library and walking home things would come to me and that's still true.  So, oftentimes like now, I live in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] and I walk along the lake [Lake Michigan] and then I get, you know, that's when ideas will come.  I mean, the actual work, of course, is going to take more time than that but in terms of it just, the, the kernel of an idea that then I can go back and work on.  It may take days, weeks, whatever, but the kernel emerges when I'm sort of least expecting it or at least trying, just walking along and looking at the birds on the lake or something, so--
Speaker 1: Okay, so have you had any good ideas that really just didn't pan out?  I mean, you couldn't find anything about, about how they work?
Speaker 2: Well, no, it's not so, usually it's something I'm working on and I already have material--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I'm trying to figure out how to, you know, to frame this, how to shape it, where does it go, so it's not, you know, an idea for a project, something like that, it's--
Speaker 1: It's an idea within the context--
Speaker 2: --how, something I've, you get immersed in something.  I mean, you do the research and then there's, you know, it's all over the place, all kinds of stuff and then, but to find that thread that you want to follow, you want to pursue, that theme, that idea, you know, so that's what I mean when I say, you know, and then you're walking and thinking about something else and then it comes to you or you see something or whatever.  So in terms of a, and you're saying, you know, what's the work process, that's, that's the core of the work process then you just, you know, you slog through (laughter) actually, you know, say, writing a book or whatever but, but the core ideas was there in the early moment.
Story_ID: 672120
Speaker 1: I mean, for example, you talk about the Chicago fair [World's Columbian Exposition, Chicago, Illinois] and I had that in my teaching plans at certain points and, you know, it was part of, you know, discussion and sort of in the back of my mind and then as I was writing the book, 'Children of Fire,' ['Children of Fire: A History of African Americans,' Thomas C. Holt] my last major book, and I was getting to how to deal with, you know, it was, in planning out that book, okay, you talk about the slave trade and slavery, you talk about the communities that form free blacks and so forth, all that was sort of, you know, sort of laid out in some ways, you know.  You may shift it or trim it here and there but to deal with that period after emancipation, you know, after slavery, up to World War I [WWI], you know, how to deal with that period in a way that's not, you know, sort of kind of cut and dried and it hit me that the Chicago fair would be a way, a place to start.  So the chapter that I wrote on that I started with the Chicago fair and that came to me by virtue, that's the kind of thing, you know, it came to be by virtue of, you know, as a site, when my guard is down and I'm just, you know, walking along and then it, you know, the idea comes and then, you know, it took a while to actually write the thing out but, 'cause there are a lot of threads that, you know, really in some sense pass through the fair in that moment, the Plessy decision [Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896], its origins, it's in that moment, some of the discussions, 'cause there were, you know, it's not just a fair on the Midway [Midway Plaisance, Chicago, Illinois], there, you know, things happening and churches around and, and conferences.  There was a conference on Africa, for example, at the same time.
Speaker 2: Here in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Here in Chicago, right, connected with the fair.  I mean, I mean, it wasn't on the fairgrounds but, you know, because you're having this fair you bring these people to have this discussion and so they're talking about de-colonization or colonization, de-colonization because that had just begun a few years before.  There was various strikes, there was a whole sense of an Indian [Native American], ending of the Indian campaigns in which African American troops had been involved.  Just a few years later, some of the people who were in parades, the black troops, marching down Michigan Avenue, to open the fair, you find them in Cuba, in the Spanish American War and then some of those in the Philippines, directly after.  So that was the way to connect the threads, so I could follow some of the people.  I could go find their military service records and connect them to a broader personal history but also in terms of what was happening at that moment that would have, you know, be a way of getting into and talking about, you know, that whole era.
Story_ID: 672121
Speaker 1: And one of the things that was, came clear in that era, that we're talking about earlier, it was a very hopeful era, I mean, despite, you know, all the things that were going on, lynching was it its peak and so forth and the highest number of lynching victims in 1892, just before the fair [World's Columbian Exposition, Chicago, Illinois], and yet people had this sense that, okay, you know, we are on the move--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were the new generation, born outside of slavery.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right, exactly.  It was, you know, that generation, some born the last years of slavery--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --many of them born just after.  Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] is born just after slavery.  Booker T. Washington, just before but, many, any number of other people, Anna J. Cooper, and they were here, they were at the fair.  I mean, Du Bois was over in Germany so he didn't come but they were here, all of them came here as well as, you know, Paul Laurence Dunbar, is just getting started.  George Washington Carver comes and has an exhibit.  You know, so, so that idea then, okay, I can use the fair to tell the story because all the threads come out, you know, all the roads lead out from here in terms of these people's personal lives.  Abbott [Robert Sengstacke Abbott], starts the Chicago Defender.
Speaker 2: Robert S. Abbott, yeah.
Speaker 1: He comes first to Chicago [Illinois] at the Chicago fair and then he comes back (laughter).
Speaker 2: I didn't realize that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: James Weldon Johnson is pushing carts, he becomes head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], or secretary of the NAACP.
Speaker 2: He's pushing a cart at the fair?
Speaker 1: Pushing, people have to be, you know, you know, you're pushing (unclear) carts, pushing people around--
Speaker 2: See I knew that Dunbar was handing out paper towels--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --and you make some money.  I mean, he was a college student.
Speaker 2: He was handing out towels at, in the bathroom--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right.
Story_ID: 672122
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you know, all these, you know, so, anyway, just as an example of how, you know, an inspiration actually, I guess as much as anything and its idea, the core of an idea forms and then, and then you have something to work with and you've got to put, you know, I mean, it's more a mundane kind of thing of putting together the facts and the, and so forth but the core of the chapter is that, okay, we will begin at that fair and then we'll see how all that, because thematically, it also, how hopeful people was--were, because otherwise, you think of it, well, like Rayford Logan wrote about that period, he says, then, then nadir--
Speaker 2: Right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Which is right in some ways, of course, when you look at it in terms of lynching, segregation, all these things, Plessy versus Ferguson [Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896], but for people living through the period, you know, all right, that's happened, that's a prob- so like now, you know, that's, we got problems but, you know, we're going to, we're on the move and, and so, I don't think that theme or that realization would have come had I not had that inspiration.  I would have written about it probably very differently because looking at it from one perspective, you know, it's a bad, bad stuff is happening.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now this is, correct me if I, well you already disa- yeah, it was called a nadir and, and people, I think, generally when black people think about their history, they think about slavery, Civil War, they think about something glorious but this period of time doesn't offer a lot of glory, it offers--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --so, I've even, I mean, some, I mean, I think a lot of, it's the period of time that black people know the least about.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, no.
Speaker 2: And they think back and say, we didn't do anything after slavery with, with this freedom or they have a general impression that somehow we dropped the ball or something.
Speaker 1: Yeah, no, no, it was a, it's a vital area--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You have to admit, but, but this is a, really a, yeah--
Speaker 1: --and as I point out in the book, you know, as I got into it I realize, black people were, you know, black Americans were more internationally conscious and experienced in that period than any time until the '60s [1960s].  I mean, you had people, mission- A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal Church] missionaries going to South Africa and, as well as to West Africa and in coming back you had African students coming to Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and places--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to study, you know, which you will see, again, at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and Fisk and so forth in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] but, you know, this was a period in which that was the beginning.  You had, obviously, I had mentioned this, the soldiers going to Cuba and to the Philippines and writing home to the black newspapers, "Oh, this place I might want to settle here," and they actually had that in mind and in fact there were some settlements in Cub- in Philippines and in Hawaii.  There were people, traveling and writing, you know, fiction, Pauline Hopkins and others, people like that--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, in which they were, you know, very much conscious of the larger black world whereas from a certain perspective and, frankly, much of the history that had been written before, you know, it was a very, you know, closed insular world because people were trapped into sharecropping, people were being lynched, people were, you know, being oppressed and segregated, they were being disfranchised, which is all true but other stuff was going on as well and, and not just, you know, elites, Du Bois' [W.E.B. Du Bois] and folk like that, but ordinary people were, you know, and so that, that was an exciting sort of finding and, that came out of that, that research and that writing.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But a lot of it started at the Chicago fair [World's Columbian Exposition, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 672123
Speaker 1: People in Chicago [Illinois], now I've lived here thirty years and, you know, I, of course I'm interested in African American history but a lot of people hear about the fair and know that Midway [Midway Plaisance, Chicago, Illinois] was a site of the fair.  I mean, they might know the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois] used to be part of the fair [World's Columbia Exposition, Chicago, Illinois] but people don't seem, they seem to kind of yawn.  This is a history that doesn't include us, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: And yet, it does.
Speaker 2: Scott Joplin, you know, he's performing, not at the fair but in, you know, all these people coming up because the fair's a big deal and his music becomes, gets it sort of exposure at the, at the fair or in Chicago around, environs, during the fair and, you know, so, and that, of course, takes off, and then you have ragtime, which becomes, you know, a huge thing, not just in the black community but, obviously, in, in the theatrical community, generally.  So, you know, so all kinds of things happened, you know, in that, that two years.  It opened in, well actually, officially, it opened in '92 [1892] but actually it was '93 [1893] that it really got going but, actually, it was that summer, that spring and summer of '93 [1893] but since, you know, all the roads led to Chicago and then, you know, these people went off and did interesting things.
Speaker 1: Right, it's like the last chapter in Frederick Douglass' public life, basically.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, right.  I mean, that was from his, his last, the speech that he gave at the fair, Colored American Day was one of the last ones that, I mean, he would then publish it and he would give it again but it's, the core speech was at that, that moment; and then he was, he died shortly after.
Story_ID: 672124
Speaker 1: So, but you said the tedious part comes after you get, (laughter) you assemble it all together (laughter)--yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, but, you know, if you, you know, the scariest part is when you don't have an idea of what you're going to do with the stuff (laughter) and where you're going to take it, you know, and once you get that, you know, then it's, then it's fun actually.
Speaker 1: Now, at being at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], I, a friend of mine used to always tell me that the black historians in a normal situation they don't have any grad [graduate] student help, they have to do everything themselves.  Poor Benjamin Quarles [Benjamin A. Quarles] did all his research, all of his editing--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --all of his, himself and his--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, he was incredible, yeah.
Speaker 1: We interviewed his wife [HistoryMaker Ruth Brett Quarles] before she passed and she said she hardly ever saw him.  Benjamin Quarles would, was teaching a full load and then he was doing research--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and a full load was a full load in those days.
Speaker 1: Yeah, all, at Morgan- [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] yeah, and he, he's like doing all, he's producing all these books by himself.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and they are still the great books.  I mean, he's--
Speaker 1: Yeah, and so I'm saying this to lead up to like, what kind of, my friend said that we are, as historians, under that system, like riding a big wheel compared to somebody in a limousine.  So did you have, did you get the limousine at the University of Chicago?
Speaker 2: I got the limousine, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I've been, I've been blessed with, you know, actually at, well I actually started, I wasn't at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] but I started at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], I got great, you know, when I was doing the, the Jamaica book ['The Problem of Freedom: Race, Labor, and Politics in Jamaica and Britain, 1832-1938,' Thomas C. Holt], great research assistants, I mean, that is people.  In fact there's a chapter in that book in which I, you know, it still was in the back of my head, you know, there's some parallels here with Ireland, what's going on in Jamaica and Ireland, you know, because that was the famine and, and the whole problem of what you're going to do with this, the peasant producers there and so there's a lot of discussion, you know, and some of the same people were drawing on that experience when they were thinking about, well what you going to do in Jamaica.  Well, you know, I don't know anything about Ireland but I did have a student who did (laughter) and she helped me in terms of doing a lot of the research and pointing out stuff I should read and so forth and similarly, I mean, not quite that way but other students I've had at Chicago who had been just fantastic research assistants and so that, that extends your, what you can do and how long it takes you to do it, shortens how long it take you to do it.  So, so I've had the, you know, the benefit of that.  I mean, and I think my generation has had the benefit of that and frankly, the difference between being at a University of Chicago as opposed to being at a Morgan State, which, for all of its, you know, great qualities, like Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] had great qualities but, you know, you're, you're on your own.
Story_ID: 672125
Speaker 1: In 1990, you wrote 'The Political Urges of Alienation: W.E.B. Du Bois on Politics, Race and Culture' [sic. 'The Political Uses of Alienation: W. E. B. Du Bois on Politics, Race, and Culture, 1903-1940,' Thomas C. Holt] in American Quarterly, all right now, so, so this is an article, it's fifteen pages, I guess, is that what--
Speaker 2: I forgot how long it was.
Speaker 1: Was it longer than that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was short, it was--
Speaker 1: Yeah, short but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that came up as I was, you know, I had been doing work on Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] and it seemed to me that that was a theme that, you know, was not often recognized or thought of 'cause he's making a case that, which has come up in other ways, I mean if you're, in other speeches, I mean, of other figures, intellectuals as well as political figures, that despite the, I mean, in fact, you know, I come out the Baptist church, I mean, you know, preachers, you know, that, in spite of the, you know, being downtrodden and oppressed, you know, that out of that, you know, that as Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] says, "A stone of hope," that you pull out of that, you know, something positive and it strengthens you for the, for the fight ahead and basically that was the thrust of that, that article.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That Du Bois says, well, if you read him closely, the alienation and the, you know, disenfranchisement and so forth that we, oppression, generally, we've, we've faced as a people has also given us, what he calls second sight, an insight, you know, and a morality and a, that gives us actual strength as well as, you know, beats us down.  And so, and I guess, again, the resonance of that with what I heard in church (laughter) and other, what differently framed, of course, you know, framed in religious terms rather than political terms but nonetheless the same kind of message.
Story_ID: 672126
Speaker 1: Now in nine--from 1990 to '95 [1995], you held a John D. MacArthur--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and Catherine T. MacArthur Fellowship, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, what, what was that?  Was that to do with specific--
Speaker 2: No, those are the grants that the MacArthur Foundation [John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, Chicago, Illinois] is, I've forgotten when they started it, many years before I was, I guess sort of the--well, probably the fifth, sixth, seventh, (unclear) cohort that they gave these multiyear fellowships to basically free people up, not just academics but, you know, obviously people in, in other walks of life and the public sphere, to enable people to, you know, to do, continue and do the work that they were, might be engaged in and, of course, a lot of academics get it and so it's, you know, it serves a similar purpose with other kinds of fellowships we get but the fact that it's multiyear is what makes it particularly special.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So that you, so it enabled me to be able to get time off at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] because I could, you know, supplement, you know, my, my leave with that, and--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now did you use that, some of that time to finish your Jamaican research, is that when, that's when you need it--(simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that, I mean, in general, I mean, the Jamaica research and other things I was working on over the years since it is a multiyear, it covers any number of activities I might be engaged in, so--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I, I, it's just, from that conversation we were having last, the last roll, I think about Benjamin Quarles [Benjamin A. Quarles] having five years to just--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --write. Can you imagine that--
Speaker 2: Yup.
Speaker 1: --if you had that time, you know, wow.  It's just imag- it's hard to even think of, 'cause I, I never thought about what he was, how he must have done it until I interviewed his wife [HistoryMaker Ruth Brett Quarles].  She was saying well, he did, I said, he must have had some, no, still.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Burning the midnight oil.
Speaker 2: I must say, though, it helped, it helped me when I was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] to be in Washington [D.C.], he was in Baltimore [Maryland], of course, but being in Washington, be close to Washington because so much of the resources, I mean, so, for somebody like, you know, if you're in Chicago [Illinois] and you have, you need the National Archives [National Archives and Records Administration] or Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.] or whatever, you've got to get, you know, support to go there.  In fact, when I wrote my, finished my dissertation, and wrote the book on, on Jamaica, not that, on black, on South Carolina ['Black over White: Negro Political Leadership in South Carolina During Reconstruction,' Thomas Holt], the fact that I had taken a job at Howard, you know, meant that I was in Washington and it's a, you know, a bus ride to go down there on a Saturday and, you know, and do work, wherever or, whenever, other vacations or whatever.  And so, the, instead of having to get a grant or something like that to be able to do it like many of my colleagues--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah, they had to come to Washington, they had to pay their, you know, their fare, they had to pay their, you know, room and so forth whereas that is, you know, had bus fare.  So, so it made a difference and I suspected made some difference for Quarles.  That doesn't explain it 'cause he's, he doesn't have a whole lot of time and he, he was incredibly productive and very important work--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, I just--
Speaker 2: --that he did.
Speaker 1: Yes, it's hard to imagine.
Story_ID: 672127
Speaker 1: Now you--so the piece with the Jamaican, the, well the Jamaican based piece is called, 'The Problem of Freedom: Race, Labor and Politics in Jamaica and Britain' ['The Problem of Freedom: Race, Labor, and Politics in Jamaica and Britain, 1832-1938,' Thomas C. Holt].
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, published by Johns Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, Maryland]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in '92 [1992], okay.  What was the reception of that book, I mean, pretty much?
Speaker 2: It was well received, I think, especially with people who were working in that area.  It later got an award from a Caribbean, Association of Caribbean Historians.  I must say, though, you know, it was, for some reason I sort of, what, rubbed some of my West Indian colleagues the wrong way.  I mean, I learned later that, actually, when I got that award for it that it was mostly the, the pressure from and the work of the younger generation of scholars of the West Indies.  The older generation, I guess, somehow felt I was an interloper and had not paid my dues to be doing this, this work.  I mean, I, you know, how, you get some scuttlebutt of that sort.  So it sort of dampened the reception among people who otherwise, you know, might have welcomed the book but I was saved by the younger generation of folk who, you know, who said, you know, "Okay, this is, this is what we need, this is what we want." 'Cause I guess they didn't see themselves as competitors with me, and so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a, it reminds me of another situation.  A friend of mine did research, wrote a monograph on the Haitian Revolution and Haitian, over here, who was at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], a young man, saw it--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and to him it was a revelation then because of the emphasis--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that my friend put on the Haitian Revolution--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --it's a worldwide, a world changing event.  He said he knew all the stories in Haiti but they didn't, they just took it for granted, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, sure.
Speaker 1: --so they didn't think of it as, was that the similar kind of, they just didn't, it was, they knew about it but they didn't really focus on it?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't so much that, I mean, 'cause they, you know, there was a fair amount of work on Jamaica, it's one of the places that attracted a lot of attention, you know, for whether you're talking about slavery, emancipation, decolonization and so forth, that's going on, that's what it was called at the time, the jewel of the, one of the jewels at least of the British crown.  No, it was more, I'm not exactly certain how to describe it, I, you know, but--
Speaker 1: You're just not from there--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --it came across as resentment and the kind of, that I hadn't sort of paid my, my dues, had not, you know, hobnobbed with people and, I think, and made friends and--
Speaker 1: I know it's--
Speaker 2: I just went there to do my work.  I mean, I had a family, I had three kids, you know, and I had to go in, get the work done, get out, (laughter) I mean, you know, and somehow I guess if I had some drinks with people, other things, that sort of smooth things--
Speaker 1: I don't know, do you know Robert Hill [Robert A. Hill] who did the Garvey [Marcus Garvey] papers, yeah--(simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know Robert Hill, yeah.
Speaker 1: From what I've heard, unless you know something different, he had a similar kind of experience doing the Garvey papers.
Speaker 2: I wouldn't be surprised, I wouldn't be surprised, yeah.
Speaker 1: That people resented him for, you know--
Speaker 2: And, yeah, and the, 'cause I don't think it was intellectual, really, you know, that is, sometimes these things, you know, you're disputing somebody else or you're, you know, saying they were wrong or whatever but it wasn't anything like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was, it was surprising actually.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But in general the book I said, I mean, I still, just last year at the AHA [American Historical Association], it was honored for its twenty-five year anniversary of its publication and I was very pleased and flattered by, again, a lot of younger people who had read it and say, you know, that it inspired their work and, and so forth, so, so it's, it's getting its due later so I have nothing to complain about, but at the time it came out, you know, people were saying, "Eh" (laughter).
Story_ID: 672128
Speaker 1: In '94 [1994]--from '94 [1994] to '95 [1995] you were the president of the American Historical Association--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and, and actually did the keynote address at the conference, 'Marking: Race'--'Marking: Race, Race-making and the Writing of History' [Thomas C. Holt].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so this is, were you the first African American president of the--
Speaker 2: No, [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin was the first, I was second.
Speaker 1: John Hope Franklin, okay, all right.  So you're, you're following--
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: --you know, one of the giants in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: And so, well tell us about that being the president and--
Speaker 2: Well, usually those things, you know, the organization has an executive director and staff and so forth and so you're elected president and you're on the council but you come in for a year as president and, basically, it's sort of honorific, you know, ah, so, and, you know, so it's not going to take a lot of time because, basically, everybody else is just, you know, they're running the thing it's, the way it's, you know, it needs to be run and you get to maybe make some appointments with people and maybe have some program at the national, you know, meeting that you want to have, some topic you want to discuss and so forth, not for me.  When I came in, the whole, you know, hell broke loose because they were supposed to be meeting, usually, back up.  It's a very big, you know, organization.  It's all the historians and it's all the fields listed can belong.
Speaker 1: It's the biggest--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's the biggest.
Speaker 1: --history organization in the country.
Speaker 2: And typically, they would have about five thousand people at any convention, sometimes more, sometimes a little less, depending on where it is, and so they would have those conventions, there are only some places they could have it, mainly New York [New York], Washington [Washington, D.C.], San Francisco [California], Atlanta [Georgia], New Orleans [Louisiana] and Chicago [Illinois] because they have enough hotel capacity to be able to do that 'cause the other places, you know, some of the other associations meet in smaller places, you know, where they, you know, have sufficient hotel for, you know, if you have a thousand people coming, let's say, or two thousand even.  So, but they decided on trying to, you know, diversify a little bit more and they were going to have a meeting in Cincinnati, Ohio the year that I would have been the president, giving the presidential address.  Then it turns out this is a period in which, you know, the, it was very much politicized, the whole gay and lesbian rights and there were moves at the local level to try to pass ordinances, I mean, Atlanta passed something, you know, that made it sodomy, you know, I mean, it put people in jail, I mean, they were trying to exclude them from, in Cincinnati from any kind of protection of their, you know, employment rights and so forth and, you know, housing, whatever, the whole civil rights, I mean, were being denied by legislation passed in Cincinnati.  And so people were in uproar, I mean, not only people who were gay or lesbian but also, you know, other folk, you know, you know, they say, you know, civil rights is civil rights.  And so, the question was, would we still have the meeting in Cincinnati or we will boycott Cincinnati and we had a meeting of the board, you know, and so forth and it was very, in fact that was in San Francisco, very contentious and so forth and I had not been particularly, you know, clued into the whole issue and I was going to go there and see what people said but the staff had produced this whole, you know, briefing book, I mean, huge, and there was this long ride from San- from Chicago, it was in Chicago, to San Francisco and I went through, on the plane, this briefing book and I said, "These people are crazy," you know, I mean, this is atrocious, you know, what they were doing.  I mean, 'cause, and that was not only Cincinnati it was clear there was a whole lot of other places where it was, you know, one of these sort of under the radar kind of political moves of a, what we would call the alt-right today and I say, you know, we, we can't, we can't go along with this and I made that statement in the meeting and then back and forth and so, you know, people came around and they agreed that we would, we would withdraw which, you know, had financial consequences because of, you know, contracts with, you know, the hotels and so forth.
Story_ID: 672129
Speaker 1: So it wasn't an easy decision by any means as well as you have to then find another place (laughter) to meet and organize it and, and so forth and have new contracts and then there was a big meeting, and a contentious meeting, but the, you know, the overwhelming majority of the people at the meeting, you know, that is the members supported the decision that, where the board had made and so then we had to find a place and so I said, "Well, Chicago [Illinois]" (laughter).  I live in Chicago, let's have it in Chicago and sure enough the staff, you know, I mean, they had, the yeoman service, I mean, really amazing, got it organized right here, down here, the Hilton [Hilton Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] was where we had the convention but that wasn't the end of it because a whole lot of people who weren't at that meeting in general in the organization and usually, again, a kind of generational split, you know.  The old head said, "Well, you know, we shouldn't be, you know, boycotting over this kind of issue, you know, we can't, you know, get into politics and stuff." And so it was a very contentious issue and I got, you know, people very much opposed, I got letters, you know, I got letters of support but also got letters, you know, and at the same time we were having a problem with the person who had been for a long time the, what did they call it, the secretary, I guess, whatever, the title who actually was the head of the administrative part of the organization which was based in Washington [D.C.], on Capitol Hill.
Speaker 2: Executive director (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Executive director, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: And, Sam Gammon [Samuel R. Gammon III], and it had come that there was some real problems that had in-depth, having to fire him, you know.  It was not connected to the Cincinnati [Ohio] thing but all of this happened at the same time and who was president, Tom Holt [HistoryMaker Thomas C. Holt], so Tom Holt's going to get it (laughter).  And so, it turned out that, and this is not, was never, got to be public, that some of the previous presidents were so angry with where this organization was, seemed to be headed, this sort of radical, young radicals coming in here, which I was not, you know, radical, but, you know, come in here, you know, tearing up things, firing the director and so forth that they got up a statement that they were going to publish in The Chronicles of Higher Education [sic. The Chronicle of Higher Education], basically condemning me and the organization for what we were doing.  Luckily, all the former presidents were not on the same page on that, including my former dissertation advisor who had also been a president of the AHA [American Historical Association], C. Vann Woodward, and Natalie Davis, Zemon Davis [Natalie Zemon Davis], Davis, and so I got wind of it and so I wrote a rebuttal and, it's before Internet, at least before my, I was on Internet.  And so, I sent these FedEx packages out to all these people with a, you know, about a ten-page, point by point, you know, and, and they backed off, so it never got public, in fact, this is the first time it's becoming public, I'm telling you.
Speaker 2: Okay, so the organization didn't split up or anything like that or--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, it, it, it damped down and, you know, because, you know, it was bogus, I mean, with the, you know, the kind of charges were getting made, and there was a good reason, both for the firing of him and for, you know, boycotting Cincinnati [Ohio], I mean, you might disagree with it but it wasn't, you know, sort of some wild-eyed, you know, thing.  And so, people often ask me, you know, about, you know, would I want to be, you know, head of another organization like that and I said, "No, that's, I've done that, enough, I'm through" (laughter).
Story_ID: 672130
Speaker 1: This raises a question in terms of the debate about this.  Do you think that historians tend to be more conservative or liberal on, on par these days, I mean--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: In general, they're more conservative, yeah.
Speaker 1: Are they?  Okay.  See I was surprised that they, they voted not to go to Cincinnati [Ohio], you know, in that respect, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, but that, as I said was, you know, the, probably if the meeting had been somewhere else it might have been different, I don't know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but there was a cohort of young people who flooded into that meeting and they were just, you know, supportive and so, so, again, it was a more generational split, I think, as much as anything to describe it.  It's not, I'm not absolute one way or another but, you know, and so, anyway, so that, you know, then a number of other organizations did the same thing over the coming years but we were one of the first to, you know, take that kind of step and, but anyway, so as opposed to having a nice little sort of honorific, you know, easy time, I caught hell.  And so, you know, ate up all kinds of time and, you know, in terms of meetings and, it was, so it was an honor but, you know, I, I could, was glad when it was over.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I feel you.  This is, okay, now there's another American history organization, too, isn't there, I mean, there's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, there's, there's several, actually.
Speaker 1: --there, I mean, another big one.  It's not American, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, the Organization of American Historians--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --and that's only people who are historians of America.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, as opposed to the American Historical [American Historical Association], it's just people who are--
Speaker 1: It's, it's everybody, okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, who do history, period, and they, you know, Rome [Italy], you know, France, whatever, who are, in America but we have some foreign members but it's basically all the historians who live in this country--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --as opposed to historians who study this country.
Story_ID: 672131
Speaker 1: I think I'd be remiss if I didn't ask you about this figure, [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti gave me a copy of 'Plagues and Peoples' years ago by William McNeill [William H. McNeill]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, McNeill, right.
Speaker 1: And what, did you know him at the, at the university [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I met him a couple of times.  I mean, I didn't know him that well but--
Speaker 1: His concept was intriguing because he took a lot of the, the changes of world history and attributed them to disease rather than the actual political activity of war--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, yeah, yeah he did, yeah, he's--
Speaker 1: --which I, a lot of us have never thought of the affect the disease really has on politics.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a very influential chair.  He was chair of the history department [University of Chicago Department of History, Chicago, Illinois] long before I came--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and had this, actually, reshaped it in many ways because he had this notion of teaching world history and, I mean not a world history course but that you'd teach the world by having historians from all parts of the world on the faculty.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: I mean, most faculties are heavily American, I mean, just like in any other country.  If you're in Britain, it's going to be heavily Britain, British, and France are going to be heavily French but he wanted, in the American history, and Chicago [Illinois] is relatively small compared to say, Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin] or Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] or wherever because you'd have, you know, 'cause I had two people doing China, two people doing Japan, et cetera, et cetera. and so, and that was McNeill's idea that you, you know, if you're going to do history, you do it, you know, across the globe and--
Speaker 1: Okay, and he was, his book, 'The Rise of the West' ['The Rise of the West: A History of the Human Community,' William H. McNeill] used to be the textbook in a lot of colleges, I guess, for--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was wondering if you knew him or came across him.
Speaker 2: No, we were on various committees of one sort or at one time or another, sometimes in conflict, actually, but (laughter), but, not, you know, I didn't--
Speaker 1: So do you think that was a good idea, his approach to teaching?
Speaker 2: Oh no, it was consistent with my own sense of, 'cause, you know, mine was both multidisciplinary but also when I was, you know, getting into African American history, I was thinking, well, you know, one should, as, with the work that I did, one should be aware of at least and teach and, you know, everybody can't do everything but, and if you're going to have a program, have people who know something about Brazil, know something about West--British West Indies, et cetera, et cetera, that enriches the program to the extent you can do that, it enriches the program, it enriches the conversation because, you know, rather than being, you know, just narrowly focused on, you know, the U.S. and, I think, you think about things differently if, in fact, you have that, you know, broader perspective.
Story_ID: 672132
Speaker 1: In '95 [1995] and '96 [1996] you were at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] right, on a, you were a fellow that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for advanced study in behavioral sciences [Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, California].
Speaker 2: Right, that was another one of the research leaves where you, I had been at Stanford twice, actually, you know.  It's a beautiful place up on the hills, look--overlooking Palo Alto [California] and so it's residential, you know, center.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And, well, there's, so you spent your time doing research, basically, there--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: I'm trying to think of the, the civil rights historian is there--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: Now you're making me--
Speaker 1: I don't know why I can't think of his name right now--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You're right, no, right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --I can see his face, I interviewed--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He wrote on King and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he wrote about Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and, right.
Speaker 2: Right, and he's head of the King papers [Martin Luther King, Jr. Papers Project] in fact.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, right, well known.
Speaker 2: And I just can't, you know, recall his name right now but, yeah, yeah I know him, I met him there in fact.
Speaker 1: Okay, those who are watching this if they know anything about history, they know it (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 2: He'll be mad 'cause I can't call his name.
Speaker 1: We'll get it, it'll come to us in a minute but--
Speaker 2: Clay Carson.
Speaker 1: Clay, yeah.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Clayborne Carson.
Speaker 1: Clayborne Carson, right, right.  So, and, so did you do you any, any research that he had anything to do with or could he help you in any way or, or--
Speaker 2: No, no, I mean, it was just a, he was a friend.
Speaker 1: Just a friend, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Just a--
Speaker 1: --okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I mean, I've read his stuff, I mean, it was great, so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know he published the, around this time I think the paper, or the book about the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] files on Malcolm X--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --was published by him.
Speaker 2: No, he's done, that center's [Martin Luther King, Jr., Research and Education Institute, Stanford, California] done great stuff, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is a time when, in '95 [1995], well, okay, that, well that had been, that was out in '92 [1992], I guess, the Malcolm X book ['Malcolm X: the FBI File,' Clayborne Carson]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --the FBI files.
Story_ID: 672133
Speaker 1: Now you published [sic.] in '97 [1997], 'Negro State Legislators in South Carolina during Reconstruction' [Thomas C. Holt], right, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --this is a topic that, it seemed like a lot of people have written about this and, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so what--
Speaker 2: Well that was based on, basically, it was, I was drawing on the research I'd done for the first book, the 'Black Over White' ['Black Over White: Negro Political Leadership in South Carolina During Reconstruction,' Thomas Holt] which was, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and so it was really a kind of, almost a summary of, of the, of those findings for this particular collection.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it wasn't so much new research for me it was just putting it in a different form--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So it's a, it's a chapter in another book?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's a chapter in another book.
Speaker 1: So it's a summarization of what you had--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --already done?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now I guess I probably talked to you about this before, I guess, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --yeah, during the last interview and, in '98 [1998] you publish, 'W.E.B. Du Bois's Archeology of Race: Re-Reading "The Conservation of Races"' [Thomas C. Holt].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what did you find when you re-read 'The Conservation of Races' [W.E.B. Du Bois]?
Speaker 2: Well, the 'Conservation of Races' is one of his early essays which is often seen as different than his later ones.  It was, 'cause he was very, it's, it can be taken as sort of a kind of black nationalist text in some ways but at the time, more it was, you know, the notion that what seemed on the face of it, you know, a kind of separatist notion in the conservation of race which you don't associate with Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], at least in, in that period and, and this was when he was on the influence of the great Africanist, whose name I can't recall, Crummell, Alexander Crummell.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: And so in my reading of it, though, 'cause he had also just published 'The Philadelphia Negro' [W.E.B. Du Bois], you know, a study of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], 7th Ward, and in my reading of it, it seemed to me that that the usual characterization of it was somewhat off that it actually had, you know, elements of what, the kind of thinking that he would, he would develop later on in other essays.  I mean, this is before 'Souls of Black Folk' [W.E.B. Du Bois], for example, and many of the things that we associate with Du Bois and know him for were to be published later after this essay and, and so that was just, you know, sort of recasting his argument in a way that was not, 'cause he's accused of being a racial chauvinist, you know, and, but, and I think, though, at least my own reading of it, and closer reading of it was that the essay, that that's not quite right to categorize it that way because, and that would be surprising, given way would go later in terms of his writing but, so it was that kind of, you know, inside baseball dispute--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --about you know how Du Bois' thinking and what does it mean.
Speaker 1: So I, well, you know, I, just off the top I'm thinking it would be more about some kind of vindication rather than chauvinism, you know, in the sense that--
Speaker 2: Well, in some ways, yeah, I mean, that, that's, and, again, it had elements, I think what I was talking about earlier that one had to, to draw on the strengths of the race in order to, you know, advance and, and so the language seemed to be one of sort of closing in but actually it was to consolidate to move forward and not unlike some of the other writings, you know, like the 'Alienation' ['The Political Uses of Alienation: W.E.B. Du Bois on Politics, Race, and Culture, 1903-1940,' Thomas C. Holt] article that I talked about earlier that, yeah, so you sort of gird your loins as a race to, to advance and the ultimate goal is to be, as he would say in 'Souls of Black Folk,' co- co-contributors to the broader civilization but it had been interpreted as being sort of the opposite and so that's what I was trying to get at.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's like if you, you know, the, the more hell you catch you get stronger--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but others are afraid of the stronger part, what, you know, "We don't want you to get any stronger." And so, but, but, either, there's any, any lining, silver lining that all the hell we catch is, we can galvanize ourselves and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 1: --get, have a second sight and all that other--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --what he was talking about, yeah.
Story_ID: 672134
Speaker 1: You published quite, quite a bit, I shouldn't read everything you published, I guess--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --but, but now are you, I mean, not everybody does, you know, publish at the rate that you publish.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, I mean, how do you, I mean, you, you are a historian in more ways than just name--you know, beyond the name, historian, you're actually, are a historian, you know, actually writing history.  So is that, I mean, have you ever, I mean once you got, you know, president of the--and did you ever think, well, now, I can, you know--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --just relax and not--
Speaker 2: No, I mean, I guess two things.  One is, you know, in teaching, I mean, the students give you energy, you know, you know, in terms of, you know, in terms of that interaction, I mean, not only the undergraduates but, you know, the, primarily the, the graduate students who are doing their work.  And, and so, you know, you're inspired by some of the things they're finding and doing and the interactions there and the other is that, basically, why be in this business if, you know, 'cause that's where the fun is, you know, so, and to try to generate ideas into, you know, and to put them in print and share them.  So, and there are a lot of things I, you know, have done research on and thought about and so forth that I have not published, you know, 'cause publishing is, is not, you know, it's work (laughter), but, no, and I haven't published as much as many other people have done but, but it's, it's, I mean, sort of like you're saying, that's, you know, the meaning of being a historian is to, in fact, do history.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And, and there's, you know, I never run out of ideas of stuff that I'd like to know about myself; and if I know about them, you know, then I, I try to write them up.
Story_ID: 672135
Speaker 1: There's a quote here I want you to try to respond to in, 'The Problem of Race in the Twenty-first Century' [Thomas C. Holt], Harvard University Press [Cambridge, Massachusetts] published, you said that, "The contradictions and incoherence of a system that idealizes black celebrities in politics, popular culture and sports even as, as it diminishes, the average African American citizen, understanding race is ideology, you describe the process of consumerism and commodification that have transformed but not necessarily improve the place of black citizens in our society."
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But I didn't read it right but that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the, that was coming out of a period, I think when I talk about there's, I mean, ironically, we consider what happen, comes later.  You remember when Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was being, you know, talked about as a possible presidential candidate, you know, and at the same time there was coverage of, I mean, you know, he's this former general and so forth, but at the same time you have the neo-Nazi groups and Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] groups being formed on, not far from where, where I lived, across the border in North Carolina, there's some of the [U.S.] Army bases.  In fact, a black couple was attacked, I forget whether they're, they were injured, I'm not sure whether they're killed or not but, you know, by such a group and interestingly enough one of my colleagues at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], a young woman, has recently, you know, written a book about that period, among other things, leading up to the Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] bombing.  Actually on Army bases you got a lot of the beginnings of organization because a lot of them were people coming back from Vietnam and, anyway, but that contradiction was, again, sort of thing like I was talking about the fair [World's Columbian Exposition, Chicago, Illinois] earlier sort of galvanized what, you know, how do you square that, put that together.  You know, here's a man, seriously talked about as being president, and this is long before Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], and yet, on the other hand, you know, people in the very place he came from, which is the Army, are, you know, engaged in this kind of activity.  And so, so that's, was the core and then it spread out from there and to consider people like, you know, it appeared also in Michael Jackson at the peak of his career and Michael Jordan, you know, who are icons, I mean--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --appealing not only to, you know, black people but, you know, people more generally in the country.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Jordan could go anywhere he wanted to in Chicago [Illinois], right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  And so, it seemed to me that something's, you know, amiss here that needs to be explained of how this, you know, how this can be.  I'm not necessarily explaining that contradiction but the contradiction leads me to try to, you know, figure out how is race being produced and reproduced in our p- time.  I mean, we're a long way from slavery--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, those attitudes, that--
Speaker 2: --we're even a long way from Civil Rights Movement--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and so--
Story_ID: 672136
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you have any insights as a historian about that because I've, I was trying to explain to someone the other day that I've interviewed people who were students at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] who's back in the '40s [1940s] and early '50s [1950s] that could go--if they wrapped a turban around their head, they could go downtown and sit--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --in the front, the bottom row of any theatre--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, in the main floor--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --they didn't have to go to the balcony but if they didn't, they look like an American Negro they were sent to the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --or kicked out of the establishment.
Speaker 2: I mean, that was, that was classic, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, but the why, so it's not color so much--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --as it is, is, seems to be a particular antipathy towards our homegrown, African Americans--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or black people that is, is almost inexplicable, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I mean, yeah, I mean, that's what, that was the contradictions and, and confusions within the, this whole notion of, of what, what race is and what racism is and the, I mean, so part of what the book gets into is, you know, how, even something like consumer culture, you know, where, you know, we produce ideas and images and, that, you know, not unconsciously but certainly shape our world view and that, and can shape positively in some ways and can shape it negatively and that, what I was really trying to explain was, you know, the terrain on which, you know, race plays out at this point in history, which was the late, you know, 20th century, going into the 21st century and that you can't explain it anymore by, you know, what we, you know, have historically turned to, slavery, segregation, you know, blah, blah, blah, 'cause now it's a new, a different day and it's taken different forms.  And so, so it wasn't a solution, per se, but it was to, you know that if you're going to arrive at a solution, you need to, you know, view the thing as it is now and not be trapped, you know, thinking of it in the terms that you would have applied, you know, fifty, even fifty, even twenty years ago but certainly, you know, because of all of those changes, I mean, you didn't have a, you know, a four star, a five star general in the [U.S.] Army, you know, in the 1940s or, or 1890s or, you know, so forth, you do now and yet when it's, that problem is not gone, had not left--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --had not been solved.  So, there are, obviously, other routes, other, you know, dynamics going on here and so, we need to think about it differently.  So that was, that was all of this.  I mean, it was just an intervention at that level.
Story_ID: 672137
Speaker 1: So, do you think that kind of racial thinking is just essential to American thought, I mean, by and large, or what?
Speaker 2: No, 'cause I mean, it's not just Americans, one thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, I mean, I think they're, you know, see an older kind of explanation would have been, okay, you have slavery and, obviously, you know, people are, you know, stereotyped or thought of and have actual behaviors because they have been enslaved, okay, so that's a problem, and you'll get a few generations, that's what people think about after Civil War.  You have a few generations down the road, all that, some of the people actually we're talking about earlier, at the time of the Chicago fair [World's Columbian Exposition, Chicago, Illinois].  You know, we're only thirty years out of slavery--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 2: --so what do you expect, you know, things are going to get better because, you know, it just takes time.
Speaker 1: We'll improve ourselves and make ourselves--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, and the same argument was made about segregation, Jim Crow, you know, okay.  Once you're, you know, in that and people go to the same schools and are, you know, in the same spaces and so forth, live in the same communities, you're going to get all past all that, that old stuff.  And then, you know, I think when I was writing that, that was about eight--1990s, whatever, you know, okay, you know, where are we now and how do we, you know, analyze this moment, you know.  What tools do we bring?  What do we think about?  What are the factors of shaping this environment because we still have some of those same, and it's not that, you know, it's the same thing, it's actually a different thing because it's in a different moment and, and a different support system and a different world, in fact.  So, one could expect, in the 1890s in a world in which Europe has taken over, you know, the world, colonialism in Asia and Africa and elsewhere that, you know, that's going to shape a set of possibilities.  I mean, that's what Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] would have said, you know, okay.  And so we've got to get past that if we're going to do, you know, bring justice and equality and so forth and democracy but each of that, getting past, we still have some of the same injustice and lack of democracy and so forth and racial thinking.  So, so that, you know, so that was what that, you know, that was actually began as a series of lectures at, again, at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Skip Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] had this program of bringing people in to give, annually to give lectures at that time and he invited me to come to give a series of lectures and so that's why I was, that's what I was thinking about at the time and so that's why I wrote those essays.
Story_ID: 672138
Speaker 1: Now tell us (unclear)--when did you get, come with the idea for 'Children of Fire: A History of African Americans' [Thomas C. Holt].  Now this is a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --this is, yeah, was it, was it conceived as a textbook or what?
Speaker 2: Yeah it was.  It was supposed to be, I was contacted by Mr. Hill [Lawrence Hill]--
Speaker 1: Hill and Wang [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: At, who had published Augie Meier's [August Meier] and, and Elliott Rudwick's book, 'Plantation to Ghetto' ['From Plantation to Ghetto'] which, along with Franklin's [HistoryMaker John Hope Franklin] book, 'From Slavery to Freedom' ['From Slavery to Freedom: A History of African Americans'] were the two main, you know, textbooks, I mean, the Meier and Rudwick book was a shorter book and Franklin's was a doorstopper, in fact later got to be two volumes, and so they want to replace that, the, the Meier and Rudwick book and I said, okay, I'm, you know, and so that's my ideas about a short book, African American history.  I mean, not as long and detailed as Franklin's book and as these things happen, I got into it and then it, one year leads to another, it sort of stretches out and I, again, begin to have a different idea of what that book might be.  And so, the title actually comes from, was part of a, there was a priest in Brazil who, and it was in a collection of, of materials on Latin America and in that he was giving this, this sermon to these slaves, this is back in the, I think, seventeenth, seventeenth century, I think, and he's giving this sermon to these slaves and saying, basic--saying that, "You're the children of God's fire." And he is, basically, I forget the full quote, but, "He's made you stronger even as you are in the fire."  So that goes back to what I've been talking about earlier, I mean, I'm citing Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] and others that there was a theme that one finds in, you know, throughout black history, I mean, including from, you know, I mention my, my Baptist preacher, well there was another quote that I was aware of from a recording I had, a SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] recording on Albany, Georgia in which there's this preacher back in '61 [1961], 18--1961, during The Albany Movement who says something to the effect that, you know, he says, oh yes, I think it was, "The eagle stirs in a nest." You know, how, you know, preacher, especially Baptist preachers, you know, have a, you know, they set their theme, you know, with that, with a metaphor or a story, he says, you know, "That the eagle, when they once get the young eagles to fly, turns up the thorns in the nest and that makes them leave the nest and fly." And I said, you know, that's very much like that priest in the 17th century, you know, that, and that theme of, you know, what, what is oppressing you can make you, also make you stronger.  It can destroy you but it can also make you stronger and I say, "That's my theme."  I mean, and so, so it became, at first I was going to make it the, 'The Mark of Fire,' and the publishers didn't like that and there was another book that says, that had, oh, 'The Children of God's Fire,' was what it was but there was already a book that had that title so I just said, okay, cut out God's fire, just make it 'Children of Fire,' but that was the thematic and that, as you can tell, had been a theme sort of running through my head for a long, for decades and in some sense maybe even back to my childhood, listen to the Baptist preacher.  So, then you find it in Du Bois and you find it here and you find it there, you know, you keep running into it, so (laughter).  So the book is organized around that and, you know, I mean, there's a lot of other themes, obviously, in it but that's the core running through it.
Story_ID: 672139
Speaker 1: You talk about 'From Slavery to Freedom,' ['From Slavery to Freedom: A History of African Americans,' John Hope Franklin] and I know now, once again, this is my take on it, having read it as a student and now I'm old but looking back on it, it seems to me that [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin was trying to, once again, prove that black people could write, you know, academic history books and he--there's a lot of information in it, like says a doorstop--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But at the same time, it's sort of dispassionate, I mean, it's, it's so objective that it was hard for me to get fired up reading it, about anything, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --it's in it, you know.  Is that, I mean, how has the writing of, I mean, but I understand it was necessary for that day to get in the doors he was trying to get into and to get it as even an item to be discussed.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But how have things changed today from those days?  And how is 'Children of Fire,' ['Children of Fire: A History of African Americans,' Thomas C. Holt] different from 'From Slavery to Freedom'?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it probably does have a, a much more, 'cause I think, I mean, Franklin was impassioned, so (laughter), so, you know, if you know him, or knew him--
Speaker 1: Oh he, I know when he--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --he was appointed to the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --commission by Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --I mean, he looked like a different person--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: I mean, at least I had never seen that, that Franklin, you know.
Speaker 2: Right, no.  So, so it is, it's a bit of a, again a generational thing or style, I mean, that, you know, the historian has to be objective and sort of above it, you know, it can't be polit- overtly political and so forth.  I think that's changed.  I mean, there's still some of that there, I mean, that one has to be disciplined and one can't simply be a partisan.  I mean, you've got to follow the, you know, evidence and the data and whatever it is that you, where it leads and sometimes it's not going to, you know, support some, you know, some outside idea of what it should be.  I mean, I think the core thing, uniting say, me in my generation and Franklin and, and Quarles [Benjamin A. Quarles] and others generation, is that you want to find the truth 'cause anything else ain't no use anyway.  So, I mean, why go to all that trouble (laughter) for something that's not, that you don't really believe in, that you're not really, and not really going to help you, that, that facts will help you and that, you know, truth will help you and as they say, the truth will set you free.  I mean, so, I think that, that basic faith is there and that runs, I think, from, you know, Carter G. Woodson and, you know, and George Washington Williams and, you know, all through, Frederick Douglass, I mean, not a historian but he's basically writing, oftentimes writing history.  That, telling a lie is not, not going to help, so.
Story_ID: 672140
Speaker 1: But at the same time in terms of style, though, to let the passion show, to let the, you know--I think that's, probably it becomes more acceptable and, at least within bounds, as long as within bounds, you're not going to get a blowback from it or criticized for that, I think, today, as you might have been.  I mean, there was a point, you know, for example, when, and I think probably even when Franklin [HistoryMaker John Hope Franklin] was writing, especially African American historians, would be in reviews, basically, accused, basically a special pleading, it was written by an African American historian so you expect he's going to write a certain thing.  He's going to say that, you know, Reconstruction was good and slavery was bad.  Now when, U.B. Phillips [Ulrich Bonnell Phillips] writes, basically the, you know, in support of slavery that's the best thing that ever happened, somehow he's not biased, I mean at least in those, that time, you know.  So, the double standard was so, I mean, it's so blatant.  I mean, if you go back and read reviews of Du Bois' [W.E.B. Du Bois] 'Black Reconstruction,' ['Black Reconstruction in America: An Essay Toward a History of the Part Which Black Folk Played in the Attempt to Reconstruct Democracy in America, 1860-1880'] say, and that's 1935, I mean, I forgot when Franklin got his degree but, basically, he's a young historian coming out of that period.  So he writes the first edition of, 'From Slavery to Freedom,' [From Slavery to Freedom: A History of African Americans,' John Hope Franklin] it's '47 [1947], so a little over ten years, twelve years, separating Du Bois' and his book and the reception of his book and Franklin's text.  So, yeah, I think he's going to be shaped by, you know, well this is, you have to be, you know, I mean, that's the other thing, you have to be twice as good, you also have to be absolutely not showing any favoritism or whatever and bending over backwards to be accepted as being a creditable historian otherwise you're just a black historian who's writing out of your, you know, special pleading for your group and people would be praised, in fact, that some of the same reviews if they somehow bent over backwards not to be, seeming to be favorable to the black side of the story, quote, unquote, as if there were another side as opposed to just, you know, what the actual story is.  So, so I think that, you know, could help explain a kind of generational divide because when I'm coming along, it's in a, you know, in the context, after the Civil Rights Movement and I'm coming into history because of the Civil Rights Movement, actually.  I mean, you know, I hadn't thought about being a historian before that but, and so, you know, I'm inspired by something else and I have an audience that will respond to that and, and I won't pay the price for it, you know, you know, taking a stand.  In my first book, 'Black over White' ['Black over White: Negro Political Leadership in South Carolina During Reconstruction,' Thomas Holt], I mean, I'm pretty hard on some of the folk, you know, because that's how I call it like I see it and I think that might have been a problem in another generation, another thirty, forty years before.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a, I remember an article, Dorothy Sterling and Floyd J. Miller, I think, were writing about Martin Delany and they were criticized by one of the leading white historians for being black nationalists.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: And he didn't realize they weren't black and they wrote him back and said, "We're not, we're not black, we're"--
Speaker 1: "We're nationalists but not black" (laughter).
Speaker 2: We, we understand why, his ideas, you know--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --and why they were, but he said, "Well, we're not, we're not even black, we're white."
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  So the environment, which one is functioning, was just entirely different and that's--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So that's the main difference in today--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: --and not, 'cause, yeah, John Hope Franklin, even his writing seemed different once he's out of the--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --after a certain period.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: You know his biography of George Washington Williams is different from--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: --'From Slavery to Freedom.'
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: His introduction to 'Death in a Promised Land,' ['Death in a Promised Land: The Tulsa Race Riot of 1921'] by Scott Ellsworth is different from--
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.
Speaker 2: --'From Slavery to Freedom.'  He talks about his own personal experiences during the Tulsa riot--
Speaker 1: Yeah, no, yeah, right.
Speaker 2: --you know we did something that you, didn't even emerge in, from slavery--(simultaneous)--.
Speaker 1: Right, he talked about that much more those years later.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you wouldn't expect him to go in that kind, that much detail in from slavery to freedom but he mentions it in just a kind of a, such a passing way that you, you don't even get what happened, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, whereas I can start, 'Children of Fire' ['Children of Fire: A History of African Americans,' Thomas C. Holt] describing hearing this Albany [Georgia] preacher, this preacher talking and, and, which was formative both in my own formation as well as the idea that I'm, I'm going to be pursuing in the book.
Story_ID: 672141
Speaker 1: So how did you organize the book and, and what were your, what were your ideas on, on producing it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well one of the things that, I think is relatively unique about the book as opposed to other writings, I did not want a textbook in the kind of, you know, static way, okay, you do this subject, you do this subject, you do this subject.  I wanted to, you know, it to have a narrative flow and a theme and so the theme was one, you know, in terms of 'Children of Fire,' ['Children of Fire: A History of African Americans,' Thomas C. Holt] but the other inspiration was thinking about myself and my family and particularly my father [Grover Holt] and realizing, you know, that each of us had gone through different life experiences, I mean, sort of banal or obvious in some ways but, you know, in other ways not.  I mean, my father was born in 1917, grew up in a segregated South, went to World War II [WWII] in a segregated [U.S.] Army, went, served in the Pacific but lived through a period in which, you know, the Civil Rights Movement came to Danville [Virginia], where I was, you know, my town, and to see, you know, that through, died in, in 2000, the January of 2000.  So, and I started thinking about, well, what's, you know, history as he would understand it is going to be different and history as I would understand it, growing up, you know, born during World War II and going through these experience, coming of age during the Civil Rights Movement and all that follows from that, you know.  And I said, well, you know, why not think of history itself that way and think of, you know, somebody like, you know, a Richard Allen who becomes this major religious figure but his roots are in slavery in Delaware and itinerant preacher and how that had to have formed him and his generation and how similarly Frederick Douglass was one of my key figures, born in slavery in the, in the 1840s and goes to, you know, escapes slavery, goes to London [England], you know, becomes this major figure, is in Haiti as a council and so forth and so on, and then at the Chicago fair [World's Columbian Exposition, Chicago, Illinois], that span of life in which he's seen all these transmissions so people don't, so typically you'd have, you know, a book, slavery, free people of color, Civil War and Reconstruction, you know, and those kind of plots, but actually these people lived across those times, born in slavery but living through to see the end of Reconstruction and then with Douglass [Frederick Douglass], living until he's had all these ups and downs and then he reaches the year of his death and, you know, disfranchisement mentioning, all the things he worked for are going down the drain.  So, that gives you a, you know, try to convey that with a different view of history, you know, as people lived it as opposed to historians sort of divvy it up because it's, you know, you know, this happened, that happened, that happened as my student would have said, you know, "One damn thing after another," I mean (laughter) was, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, right, and they're not really linked.  Yeah, you're right, I mean, a lot, most of the history we read have Douglass appearing like he did in 'Glory' and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --waving at the troops or something--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or, you know or--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --doing and then you don't see him anymore.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: What do you think about what happened?  You know, we don't know 'cause he was, he's not there anymore.
Speaker 2: Right, right, and, you know, I mean, he's just an example, I mean, other people who also lived through that same kind of period and often in, and I guess there's other literature, too, about, you know, people living in generational accords.  Your generation, you know, you're not born at the same time but you were born within a frame that shapes you when you come of age, actually, shapes you and your view of the world, you know, sense of yourself and so forth.  And so, to follow that as the plot of history rather than this president was, you know, elected and then you have this and then you have that, and so that was the idea, try to, you know, as best I could, I mean, some periods are much, you know, what I'd begin with the slave trade in Africa and, you know, so that chapter's going to go through a whole lot but even there try to focus on individuals or people and families, you know, who experience what I'm trying to talk about and to, you know, to bring it out through their experience.  So, so that was, you know, so I say in the preface that, you know, I'm going to work through generations as best I could in terms of how the thing is and I, I made it a point, particularly, that I was going to write about the maturing of slavery and the Civil War and Reconstruction in one chapter 'cause that's how people lived it.  They, you know, at one point in, say, 1850, '57 [1857], you know, seems like things are just, you know, awful and this thing will never end and then three years later, Civil War breaks out and then you don't know what's going to happen, then there's Emancipation Proclamation, then there's Reconstruction, people are elected to [U.S.] Congress and the Senate, you know, I mean, think of somebody living through that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: You were just here, well, we lived through it, you know, with Obama, you know, all of a sudden, what, what happened, you know, that was--
Speaker 1: Then to wake up it's Donald Trump [President Donald John Trump] (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, and then you get to Donald Trump.  I mean, you feel like Frederick Douglass, right (laughter), you know, you know.  I went through all this great stuff and now, what?  So, but, that is the stuff of history and of people's experience and to try to, you know, convey that and get to that because, otherwise that, you know, one doesn't really get the flow of history.
Story_ID: 672142
Speaker 1: In terms of [HistoryMaker] President Barack Obama, what is your, I guess, reflection on his presidency, how it, how it happened and, and, you know, what it was like and what the aftermath is?
Speaker 2: Well, that's quite a bit.
Speaker 1: Yeah it is.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: He, I mean, like everybody else, of course, I was, you know, it was heady days and it was, you know, absolutely unpredicted, unpredictable and, and incontinent, I mean, for a historian, at least, looking at it, and it hasn't happened, the actual election, I was in Germany.  In fact I was in Germany during the period in which he, you know, he visited before, during the campaign and he was, you know, welcomed and so forth but, so it's interesting to see it, you know, through the eyes of people there, you know, what was going on and they were, you know, flabbergasted as everyone, everyone else.  I think it was the culmination of a lot of threads, I mean, I, you know, I don't have a coherent analysis of it but certainly it was generational in the sense of a new generation of people, white and black and Latino and others coming of age that made it, his election possible, and that's pretty obvious, I mean, that's from the statistics and the voting and so forth.
Speaker 1: The thing that intrigues me is the second election in, in the sense that--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, right.
Speaker 1: I mean, it does, it kind of stand to reason as a historian if you're, if you're an incumbent--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, he was fortunate the Republicans helped.  I mean, they--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in terms of who they nominate (laughter).  They were not very, not very astute.  And so, but also, you know, he's pretty smart, I mean, and the people around him were smart and, and, you know, incumbency of a president is a big thing and they use it very well.  So--
Speaker 1: I guess as a historian you would, is it right to think that if an incumbent usually wins--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --right, in a, and the presidency--
Speaker 2: So it would be the opposite, you know, be surprising in some ways despite the headwinds that he's against because of, you know, the opposition, implacable opposition but, but the first actually was the, you know, the one that, you know, really and clearly the turnout and the support and the, he sort of catches fire and he catches fire in a way that's, you know, people are hungry for something new, something different because of, I think, they accumulated, you know, angst and, and so forth, accumulated over the years, I mean, not just from the Republican administration but even before that.  I mean, but, I mean before Iraq War and so forth, I think there was a, a sense of, that played into, you know, this young guy who's going to, who comes from a whole--so all the things that made him stand out as different, actually helped, I suspect, as opposed to another moment they wouldn't have and he would never have made it out of the gate but in 2008, 2007, 2008, they did.  I mean, that's a, you know, a general gloss, I mean, people are going to be writing about him and studying this for years.  So his own political talent, the times and the generational context and the sort of mood of the country and of the world, actually, 'cause he really, response was, I mean I did a lot of traveling, I was in France and I was in Germany during that period and the reaction was, you know, also very, you know, electric, you know.  I mean, because of the time difference, as the final vote count in 2008, it was about dawn, just before dawn in Germany, in Berlin, and I was, you know, with my wife and friends and a gathering had been, you know, election party had been held and Virginia's vote came in which was, I'm from Virginia, you know, okay, that seals it, I told 'em but, you know, so it was just a, it was just, you know--but the enthusiasm in the room and so forth was just powerful.
Story_ID: 672143
Speaker 1: Do you think historians will, I mean, mainstream historians, the members of the American Historical Association, for instance, would, will look favorably on the, the administration of Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]?
Speaker 2: Well, it's going to help a lot with what came after him, so, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) In terms of, it looked better and better but I think, you know, there's a lot of criticism from the left and from, you know, others, you know, what wasn't, didn't happen and one of the virtues of historians, we're always doing it from the, you know, back, you know, rearview mirror, and so, you know, you'll see, okay, what did he do as opposed, compared to what somebody else did and what were the circumstances and so forth.  I mean, you can't compare him to, I lived through Lyndon Johnson's [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] administration, you can't compare him to those two years in which Johnson could get all kinds of stuff passed.  The years after, nothing happened, you know, because, you know, they, he hit the sweet spot at a certain moment.  Franklin Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt], the same thing.  So, you know, whereas Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] who was his hero, but was, you know, sandbagged and blocked on anything domestic for the most part.  I mean, there was a Peace Corps and some things like that but, you know, basically, anything controversial.  So, in that kind of comparison, which a historian would make, he was fantastic.  I mean, it's not the great society of a Lyndon Johnson but it's, you know, pretty darn close and, you know, so, and, of course, they'll pick it apart in terms of mistakes, he could have done more if he'd done this or done that but that's, you know, that's--everybody has to live with that kind of, you know, Monday morning quarterbacking.
Story_ID: 672144
Speaker 1: Do you think, I mean looking over the, the history that you've seen in your lifetime how professional historians write now, do you think the writing of history has changed fundamentally, and the reason why I ask is because, I mean, you know, if you watch, when you read old books and watch old movies, it seems to be a view of the, say the Civil War for instance, I mean, that's the major--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --thing, the interpretation, it seems to have shifted completely--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --from what was going on in the beginning of the century when, when you could put out something like 'Birth of a Nation,' ['The Birth of a Nation'] and people actually believe that's what--
Speaker 2: Right, right, sure.
Speaker 1: --slavery, Reconstruction was about, you know.
Speaker 2: Or 'Gone with the Wind.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Gone with the Wind,' right, right.  Nowadays you couldn't, you couldn't do that.
Speaker 2: No, no, certainly the, the, you know, the interpretations have changed.  I mean, and that's both, I mean the big part is who's writing the histories, I mean, so it's a much more diverse profession.  Also what's, you know, perspectives that change in any period and, and actually resources also change.  I mean, when Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] wrote, 'Black Reconstruction,' ['Black Reconstruction in America: An Essay Toward a History of the Part Which Black Folk Played in the Attempt to Reconstruct Democracy in America, 1860-1880'] for example, he didn't have, you know, access to all the kinds of archives that I would have a few years later or, or Eric Foner or, or any number of other people would have just, you know, available in state archives, not just national archives but, you know.  So, that kind of thing makes a difference.  Now, for the generation writing now, I, my students, I mean, a whole lot of stuff just on Internet.  I mean, they don't have to go nowhere (laughter), you know.  So, I save myself the bus ride that I would take to the Library of Congress up there, the archive in Washington [D.C.].  So all that kind of stuff is part of it.  There's much more of an international, I think, mindedness right now of our students who are working on things because there's much more travel and, and contact and foreign students and other kinds of things that have, as well as just what's written.  So all that will change how you perceive, even with how the, how you define the problem that you're trying to write about as well as the means by which you can address that problem and, and then it will change yet again.  I mean, that's, that's the thing, a generation from now they'll be saying, "What was Holt [HistoryMaker Thomas C. Holt] thinking about, you know, writing this stuff?" I mean, and they'll have something, you know, something else to say and, but that's the nature of the game, you know, you know, and that's, you know, in general, in general that's good as long as they still appreciate, like I can appreciate some of what Du Bois did even though he had limited resources in writing, 'Black Reconstruction,' you know, because he had some insight and, that was, you know, not dependent on the fact that he didn't have the archives or he didn't have, you know, this or that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Do you ever--
Story_ID: 672145
Speaker 1: Do you ever run into something that's completely wrong in an old history book that you know is just completely wrong--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --written by, you know--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, no, that happens, yeah, you know, and it'll continue to happen, somebody will (laughter), somebody might get beat too on something (laughter), that they got wrong.
Speaker 1: And today, we, we live in an age where what happened yesterday is lied about today.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, right, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, I mean, how is that going to muddle the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --field in the future for future researches?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess, you know, they didn't invent lying now so (unclear) lying for a long time (laughter) but it's true, you know, and I think it, perhaps more, cautions you more.  I have this kind of discussion in my classes about, you don't take things just at face value just 'cause they're written down and just because some famous person wrote it down or some official wrote it down and you have to contextualize and, you know, compare and, you know, and that's the nature of the analysis that goes into trying to get the record straight as best you can and sometimes stuff is missing, sometimes voices are missing that, you know, would, you know, add something to what you're trying to understand and that's one of the things, I think, with history, certainly, my generation and later is trying to find those voices who wouldn't have been heard.  I mean, you wouldn't have slaves commenting on slavery, for example, or if people who are, you know, ordinary sharecroppers, you know, you try to find as best you can, you know, how things were seen and experienced from their perspective and that was not necessarily the case, obviously.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I remember, I remember going to the ASALH Conference, Association of Study of African American Life and History--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I think it was Negro Life and History [Association for the Study of Negro Life and History] when I was there--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, yeah, of course.
Speaker 1: --what is actually being discussed, I mean, oral history is being discussed, is whether it's valid or not.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Where it's valid to even have somebody's oral history--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --is that it could be wrong, you know, well--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, just, yeah.
Speaker 1: Is that, but, but today--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The oral didn't make it, didn't make it a lie, could be a lie written down (laughter), so--
Speaker 1: That's right, people were, but that was a contention--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That was a contention in panel discussions.  They were saying, well, that's just oral, that's just what he said.  Well, you know, nowadays they say, well any source if it's, you know, an oral history would be oral history if it's recorded on something, right, I mean it's not a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --it's not a usable, I mean it's hearsay other than the fact it's written, I mean, if it has to be written, it has to be recorded in some way, right--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 1: --to be a resource--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in a historical, yeah.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: But that was actual discussion, you know, which is today nobody would--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, no, no that wouldn't be but, now, in fact, now, actually, you know, we're, we're all washing stuff, we're just, have all kinds of stuff, you know, because of the Internet and, and, you know, and various media and sorting through it, it's, you know, as opposed to having scarcity, you have an abundance and then, you know, how do you, you know, make use of it, as they say, can be the logistical and intellectual problem.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I know, I was really impressed by Annette Gordon-Reed's, 'Hemingses of Monticello,' ['The Hemingses of Monticello: An American Family'] yeah, 'cause she said, Sally Hemings didn't write anything--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --so I've got to write this book based on, you know, she surrounded that story with--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --information.
Story_ID: 672146
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite historian or, or a favorite, I guess, few historians--(simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Unclear), yeah, I mean, no I don't, actually I mean the number of people I like and appreciate but I can't say I have a favorite as such.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Do you have a favorite work of your own or favorite subject of history?
Speaker 2: I like, I like the, 'Children of Fire' ['Children of Fire: A History of African Americans,' Thomas C. Holt] book.  I mean, I think, you know, maybe it's because of the culmination of a long career in writing and thinking about the stuff but also in terms of just how I think it worked, at least from my point of view, how I decided to put it together.
Speaker 1: Yeah that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think.
Speaker 1: --thematically, I mean, it's powerful, I think.  I mean, I, the stories I remember, the most in history are those who made something out of nothing, you know, that seems like--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --sometimes you just, it makes you wonder, you know, but do you have, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there anything that you would do differently or change if you could?
Speaker 2: All kinds of things (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I try to, I try not to think about that too much (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, no, yeah.  As--I guess I'm not that vulnerable to that 'cause, I think, you know, that way lies madness I could, you know, I always, you know, in hindsight do it, do or say something different than I did, you know, so.
Story_ID: 672147
Speaker 1: This just occurred to me, I've never asked a historian this--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --before but is there any aspect of history, 'cause your job is hindsight--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --yeah, is there any aspect to history that you would have liked to have seen done differently, some, something that someone said or something that they did or something that, or had they done it at a particular time, you think it would have changed the course of what would--
Speaker 2: You mean the actual people in history--(simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, people, I mean, actual actions of people or of organizations in the past, that had they done something a different way, it would have, you know, benefited us as a people more, you know, if they had taken another approach?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I don't know, that's, that's a, that is a, that's a big question, actually, yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, do you think of a character like, had he only, if he had only done this or Garvey [Marcus Garvey] had only said that or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right--
Speaker 1: --I don't know.
Speaker 2: --right, yeah, yeah, I mean I guess the closest I'd come to that is thinking about, you know, somebody like Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] who, you know, lived this incredible span of life and, but actually he didn't get along with people a lot, he was kind of (laughter), and so, if he had been, actually, in his own, certainly, given all the wisdom that had accrued by the 1940s, say, and the '50s [1950s] when he, of course, got into trouble because of the, you know, McCarthy [Joseph McCarthy] oppression and so forth that he might have been a much more, you know, effective resource, I mean, 'cause that, that was our history right there from the 1868 to, you know, 1963.  I never thought about it, so, I don't know.  I don't have any answer of what he might have done but if somehow decisions that he made, alliances that he made that he had been able to remain effective in the U.S., you know, context, what impact that would have had on the dynamics of leadership and, you know, what the new leadership that's emerging in the '50s [1950s], say, if he had been, you know, still a central figure.
Story_ID: 672148
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite set of historical figures in African American history?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: A favorite set of figures in African American history that you--
Speaker 2: Set of?
Speaker 1: --a favorite, I guess maybe four or five people in African American history that--
Speaker 2: Oh, set of figures.
Speaker 1: --you, that you--
Speaker 2: No, I mean, the people like, am attracted to, I think are people who were able to articulate something, you know, very powerfully, I mean, Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] is one, I mean, 'Souls of Black Folk' is still my favorite text. Douglass [Frederick Douglass], I mean, amazing, you know, force of character and speech so, yeah, so those are people, actually, I mean, we have him recorded by Ted Rosengarten [Theodore Rosengarten] but a person I've gone back again and again to is Ned Cobb, in the 'All God's Dangers,' ['All God's Dangers: The Life of Nate Shaw,' Theodore Rosengarten] that's sort of unlettered, you know, I mean, he could have been my grandfather or something, I mean, you know, and, which is yet a different figure than a Du Bois or a Douglass, an ordinary, you know, farm laborer who, yeah, as, only partially sees the light but, you know, he's doing the best he can and he's, you know, force of character, shapes history--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've seen that book a million times in Powell's [Powell's Books Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and I've always picked it up, I never bought it, now, now I'm going to have to get it.  I might have to get it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you should read it.  Now, it's a, it's a--
Speaker 1: 'All Gods--'
Speaker 2: And it's one of these, sort of, it's an oral history, you know, recording--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: 'All God's Dangers,' by Theodore Rosengarten, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's, yeah, his own insights and stuff are really powerful.
Story_ID: 672149
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, that, well, we'll finally see justice done.  Yeah, I mean, I think that sort of sums it up, I mean, that, for a historian, I mean, looked at this long, long history, I mean, of centuries, on this continent and that, you know, there's got to be some, there's been a lot of transformations but they're transformation that's, you know, basically makes that in Du Bois' [W.E.B. Du Bois] words, "Less of a problem," you know, the, you know, presence of African Americans in this, this country.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I mean that's a big, big ask but that's, you know, again, based on its, that long history in which, as I've said, that these moments, many moments in which things are going to, you know, the light is at the end of the tunnel, if you will, things are going to get better, we finally reached that point of, you know, that countless people, ordinary and leaders have articulated as, you know, as Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] getting to the mountaintop and so that's, obviously, that's, that's the hope.
Story_ID: 672150
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family.  Now, do you have children?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have, actually I have four children.
Speaker 1: Okay, are you married now or--?
Speaker 2: I'm married now [to Leora Auslander].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have one child who's actually adopted and who's just, went off to college, this is her first year in college and then I have yet another family on my, my first wife, who's now dead and one of them is adopted as well and two are, you know, my biological children, a boy and a, he was the youngest and a girl, who's the middle, middle child.
Speaker 1: Is anyone interested in history in the group?
Speaker 2: Not a bit (laughter), staying as far away from it as possible.
Speaker 1: That seems--
Speaker 2: Right, and that's fine with me.  I think, you know, let a thousand flowers bloom, I mean, do other things.  I mean, you know, I often described myself to my students as accidentally a historian, I didn't start out to be a historian and sort of came, sort of roundabout back to it after doing other things.
Speaker 1: I wonder sometimes if knowing a lot of history is helpful in going forward or, or not, you know.  You know, sometimes you wonder, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I think it's usually helpful, obviously, but, but in terms of doing it as a profession as opposed to simply a consumer, I mean, that's the difference.  I mean, you can be reading history but, you know, actually, you know, writing it and that's what I didn't think I'd be doing, I mean, I mean when I was a young man.
Story_ID: 672151
Speaker 1: Now I have two more questions, but is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to cover before I ask my last two (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Well one question I didn't ask you is, what are you working on now?  Are you working on anything major today?
Speaker 2: I'm working on, actually I'm writing a, I'm supposed to be writing, right now, a short book on the Civil Rights Movement which I was, you know, I was a part of but then never written about it except, you know, in short pieces.
Speaker 1: So are you going to write about your own experiences?
Speaker 2: No, no, but just, I mean they are formed by my own experiences but basically it's a short account of the movement for a general reading, for general public.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I hope to finish that in the next several months.
Speaker 1: So have you considered writing your own experiences down in terms of Civil Rights Movement or--
Speaker 2: No, they come out in, in bits and talks and other things but I'm not inclined and the other thing, I've mentioned the, what I want to get to, to write about, Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and that cohort of people there--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --that generation, actually.  And I'm writing with my current wife, writing, or not writing but we're planning a book on race in the Atlantic World, because we've spent a lot of time in Europe as well as here and so and want to try to bring some perspective on thinking about, in the twentieth century, on how, you know, race is played out in policy and social life and, and thought and--particularly in France and in the U.S. as two sort of counterparts, comparisons--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 672152
Speaker 1: Well the last two questions are these.  What today do you see as your legacy and how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I think, I hope our legacy is the, are the works that I've written as a professional, at least, and professional legacy.  The other part of my legacy are my kids that I'm very proud of and, you know, I think that they have been raised well and will, you know, succeed in life, I mean, not just success, success but in terms of live a good life and those seem plausible; and, wait a minute, what was the legacy and then what was the other one?
Story_ID: 672153
Speaker 1: Last one was, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Actually, you know, that is less do with professional than personal.  I was thinking recently, my mother's [Catherine Fitzgerald Holt] still alive, my father [Grover Holt] died, I mentioned, and she's ninety-four and I was thinking as I visit her and think, you know, I get great pleasure about her pleasure in, you know, in me and my, you know, I don't think much about, you know, various sort of accomplishments, you know, things I've done or whatever and I'm not being modest or anything, I've never, you know, sort of, on to the next thing, you know, whereas she gets great pleasure out of it and that gives me great pleasure.  So, that's, I mean that's not so I guess much remembered past my own lifetime but, you know, it's right now that is the most rewarding thing that somehow I've, my mother, you know, let alone my father, did not, you know, they grew up in a segregated South, did not even have a high school, you know, they got a GED [General Educational Development] later in life.  You know, my father was a barber and my mother's a beautician.  So, to have a son, and I'm the only child, who, you know, goes off and gets a doctorate and teaches, you know, at some of the prestigious universities in the country so indirectly I get the pleasure of that even if directly I don't, you know, I don't particularly think about it, I mean, it's just, (laughter) you know, keep moving along but, so, so that's, you know, that's good.
