Story_ID: 24418
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Esther Avilla Harrison Hopkins.  That's E-S-T-H-E-R, Arvilla, A-R-V-I-L-L-A, Harrison, H-A-R-R-I-S-O-N, Hopkins, H-O-P-K-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: And those names are recognition of my father and of my husband.
Speaker 1: Okay, your father's name was Harrison?
Speaker 2: Harrison, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and is there a story behind Arvilla?
Speaker 2: Yes, the Arvilla comes from a woman that my father was working for back in the early part of the twentieth century.  And he thought that was a very lovely name.  And when he had a little girl, he, he named her Arvilla.  The Esther was for my mother, and the Arvilla was for her, and so I usually use all of my name, Esther A.H. Hopkins, and that makes a problem in terms of filling out some forms where they want "a" middle initial.  And they only have space for one because I use both of them because they were both important to me.
Speaker 1: Okay, and ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: You wanna know how old I am.  I'm an old lady.  My birth date is 9-18-26 which means that I'm eighty six years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Stamford, Connecticut.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I'm retired, in fact, I'm three times retired (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, you're a retired chemist?
Speaker 2: Yes, my first profession was chemist, and I retired from that.  And then I worked as an attorney in the Department of Environmental Protection, and I retired from that, and then I went into politics and became a selectman in the town of Framingham [Massachusetts] and retired from that, although I still keep a calendar with lots of things to do because I haven't yet given up moving around and being involved in things.
Story_ID: 24419
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth though, we have five lightweight questions we ask as sort of a warm up.  I don't know if we need one, but we'll ask these questions anyway because we have to.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: The, they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is it (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Oh, (laughter) peanuts.  I love peanut butter, yes.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I sort of live in a vacation destination here on the island.  So I like to be here.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: What, what do you mean by that really?
Speaker 1: Well, some people have a favorite quote that they like to say and some people have something they say all the time that everybody knows 'em by, and, you know, those are the favorite phrases.
Speaker 2: I can't think of one.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you reminded me when you said you live on an island here, that I neglected to ask you today's date.
Speaker 2: Today's date is the 13th of October, in 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We on, in Oak Bluffs on Martha's Vineyard off the coast of Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 24420
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side, and, so we keep them straight.  So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Esther Small.  And she was born in South Carolina, a little place called Society Hill.  And she left there, she was, she was born--her mother was born right after slavery.  And she, my mother came North on a boat by herself when she was twelve.
Speaker 1: So about what year was your mother born?
Speaker 2: Well, she was twelve on day [President William]  McKinley was shot, which was 1901 or something like that.  So I guess, you can calculate back how, how--because when she got off the boat, people were saying, "Oh, the president was shot, the president", and she didn't know what a president was.  And she was going to be working in service at someone's house in, in New York state.  And they told her about the president being shot.  And she remembers that date, and that's the date that she remembers, the first one she sort of remembers that on the day McKinley was shot, she was twelve and she was getting off a boat coming North.
Speaker 1: Well, that's a great historical frame of reference.  Now, what about your grandmother, her mother.
Speaker 2: My, my grandmother--
Speaker 1: Now, she was born right after slavery.
Speaker 2: Yes, she was, she was born five years after slavery because her older brothers and sisters had been slaves, and she was born--
Speaker 1: Was it 1870?  I mean the end of slavery would have been 1865.
Speaker 2: Sixty five [1865], yes.
Speaker 1: But the Emancipation Proclamation was 1863, so some people actually got freed then who were--
Speaker 2: And I don't know the details of when that was.
Speaker 1: Okay, around 1870, I guess, probably.  And what was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Susan.
Speaker 1: Now, was it--what was her last name?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ah, yes, I do because the, her, her--their names was Evans, E-V-A-N-S.
Speaker 1: And she became a Small later.
Speaker 2: She became what?
Speaker 1: A Small later.
Speaker 2: Yes, she became a Small.  But my mother, she had my mother, and my mother, my mother's birth father was a Grant Douglas, developing from the Douglas's, but they were never, my mother was never claimed as a part of their family.
Speaker 1: Grant Douglas, and this is a relative of Frederick Douglas?
Speaker 2: A relative, but I don't know what connection, and the, the--Frederick Douglas family in Massachusetts does not recognize my mother as a part of their family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --although we might--
Speaker 1: That's a valuable oral history, again.
Speaker 2: But I'll tell you later, Grant Douglas and my mother, my grandmother, Susan, married when my mother was a grown woman and living in Stamford.  So he, he claimed her, and this was years later.  This was after World War I, and they actually got married in the home that my, that my mother had bought and my grandmother was living there with her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they got married after World War I?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, okay, so your grandmother was born in--so was she born in, was your grandmother born in South Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, the same--
Speaker 2: And it was very interesting.  My, my father always joked because they called, referred to it as Sous Carolina, and they always referred to North Carolina, but Sous Carolina (laughter).
Speaker 1: Sous Carolina (laughter).
Speaker 2: Sous (laughter) Carolina (laughter).  And I, we were, we were, for Thanksgiving in South Carolina, this last year, and I found a map.  It was in, Society Hill is, is there and Darlington is there on the map.  And I thought, I thought that, you know, I'd heard about them when I was a little girl, generations ago, and I thought that they were, they were--would have disappeared or would no longer be there.  And they're on a map currently.  There is Society Hill, and I thought, well, that's fascinating.  Someday I ought to go back and see what papers they might have about the slaves who were living around there.
Speaker 1: Any stories about who they were the slaves or what kind of situation (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, no, when (unclear) (simultaneous) situation at all--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --except my, my mother, my, my mother--my grandmother's mother was an Indian, and I have a picture of her and, hanging on the wall in here.  And, and I don't have pictures of any of the others of that generation at all?
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is this the one who is deaf?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 24421
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Esther Small] have relatives already in the North when she came up, at McKinley's assassination?
Speaker 2: No, she came alone, and that always amazes me when I look at my granddaughters who are around twelve at this point that, that she would have done that on her own, would have come here to sort of work.
Speaker 1: Now, did she come to Stamford?
Speaker 2: No, she came to New Rochelle, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she worked as a domestic.  She was, you know, they had Thursday afternoons off, and every other Sunday.  And what she did with her Thursdays, she, she studied, rhetoric and recitations and, and she went to school to learn how to, how to write and to do things of that sort and how to read.  And she went over, and she went to church.  She was a part of the people who were sort of, who founded Union Baptist Church in Stamford, Connecticut.  And she sang with the choir.  She was a part of, of that often.
Speaker 1: So she helped found Union--
Speaker 2: Union Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: Union Baptist Church.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: That's Union Baptist in Stamford.
Speaker 2: In Stamford, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, Stamford.  Okay, so she wasn't, she didn't stay in New Rochelle?
Speaker 2: No, she didn't stay there.  Well, because the people she worked there in New Rochelle, and she worked in, in Greenwich and numbers of places around there.  But the, when, when the maids had their time off, they went to Stamford, where there was, where they founded the church and there was a group of people who lived there.  So on their day off, they went over there.  And going from Greenwich to Stamford was like, it was something they did on Sunday, and they did with horses.  And it was a long ride.  But it's, it's only five miles now, when you--(laughter) but it used to be a major thing that they did on Sundays.  They went to church.
Speaker 1: Okay, so New Rochelle and Greenwich--
Speaker 2: New Rochelle is--
Speaker 1: --it's about five miles from Stamford?
Speaker 2: Greenwich is.  New Rochelle, then it's Port Chester [New York] and then New Rochelle is down a little further and down into New York state.
Speaker 1: Okay, I glean from what you're saying here that there's a black community in Stamford--
Speaker 2: Yes, there was a black community.
Speaker 1: --where a lot of people that worked in the suburbs around there would congregate, they would--they called that, they considered that their own space.
Speaker 2: Yes, they sort, they sort of moved there.  And my mother bought a house.  My mother, they were moving the house across the street to make room for a school.  And she bought the house.  And she felt it was necessary to own a piece of property.  And she was also one of the first--well, she always said, she was the first black woman who had a driver's license in Stamford.  She, with the family that she was living with, they were going out to California.  And they were gonna drive out to California.  And they wanted someone else who, who could drive the car other than just the chauffeur.  And so she learned how to drive a car, and I have a picture of my mother in knickers at the time she took this trip to California, and she drove.  And when she came back, she had a talk about that trip, and she would often tell people about where they went and the things that they saw and driving through the desert and things, all of that.  She told that regularly about her trip to California, and about their driving out there, the parks and the things that they saw.
Speaker 1: Now, she, this would have been in the, what 1920s?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it was--well, it was, it was earlier than, than the '20's [1920s] I think because when they had that flu epidemic right after World War I--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that's 1919, right off the cusp of--
Speaker 2: She did not get, she got sick, but she didn't, well, she didn't die.  But there were numbers of people who were sick at that time.  And, and she remembers that flu epidemic and whatever date that was, you know, was, she had been doing these things, and she was back.  And she was in Stamford at that point.
Story_ID: 24422
Speaker 1: Now, this is interesting, the picture you're painting here, the black domestics, from what I understand, there's a famous book called "Living in, Living Out" [by Elizabeth Clark-Lewis], the struggle of black domestics in Washington, D.C.--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --to have the right to go home after work, go back to their home.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And not have to live in, and, so she was living in.
Speaker 2: She, she was, she was living in and they had Thursday afternoons and Thursday was maid's night out and every other Sunday.  She would, and she would fix their meals, and then she had Sundays where she'd go to church.  And on Thursday was maids' night out, and they all went, and they went--they, they socialized.  They went to church suppers and, and were like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, so, yeah, there was a struggle kind of nationwide around that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that's why it's really not like that anymore, I mean where some people might do that now, but by and large, people go to work and they go home.
Speaker 2: Yes, because really, if you were living in, you're there all the time.  You're working twenty four hours a day, and that's rough to do.  And it also meant that if you had any family of your own, you were not around them.
Speaker 1: That's right.  Yeah, these are all the issues that made, you know, black urban life hard because mama was gone.  Everybody was doing domestic work, and they weren't home.  They were--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --yeah, so, that's a struggle.  There's another story probably in there to tell, you know, and so, and the people are congregating, they're claiming Stamford as their home base.  And that's another story in this that is really interesting and that your mother [Esther Small] was able to save her money and buy that house.  Of course, she wouldn't have--she probably didn't get paid a lot, but she had no expenses, I guess, when you think about it, because she's living in the--or few.
Speaker 2: Well, the house, the house must have had a mortgage because later on when the, when the, in the '30's [1930s] when the banks were having problems and things of that sort, the couple my folks were working for, I mean the family my folks were working for as a couple, did something about mortgage things, and he was able to set them up so that they, that their mortgage, the bank that had their mortgage on that house was something that was, I don't know guaranteed or something with the, with what was going on.  And they were able to pay it off.  So eventually, my mother and dad ended owning that house completely, with, you know, free of the mortgage and all.  When my father died, my mother, my mother gave the house to my younger brother and me, but not to my older brother.  And when she went down to, to Stamford to the town offices and everything and she was going to write this deed to give this to two of her children, then this police officer who went, who was asked into, you know, the legal offices where you do that, and they were very concerned.  Are you being forced to do this?  They wanted to know, you know, were your children making you give up your house and are you under any duress or anything?  And she said, no, I wanna give this to my children, and so she signed it to us without--and I thought that was very good that they, they wanted to be sure that an older person at that point was not being forced to, to basically give their place because, you know, she gave it for a dollar or something of sort, it was listed (unclear).  She didn't sell it to us.  She, she gave it to us.  And they wanted to be sure that we were not taking advantage of her.  And so she was very pleased that she had been able to do that and to, to give the house to us.  The interesting thing about that house, my brother and I kept it for a, for a number of years.  We rented it out for a while, and then when neither his children nor my children were ever interested din living in Stamford again, we sold it.  And my brother got half of the money, and I got half.  With the half that I got, I gave to Boston University to establish a scholarship to help underrepresented minorities study the sciences and technology.  And so I, there is a, there is a part of their endowment that is in my mother and father's name where the money from that came from that house that she bought when they moved it across the street to make that school back in the 1920s.  And--
Speaker 1: Was it on valuable land then, about the--
Speaker 2: The, the town was going to--well, the city and the town, which Stamford was both a city and a town, was going to build a school there.  And it was down toward the river, and so they wanted that piece of land.  And so the land across the street was vacant, so they moved the house over, and my mother bought it when they moved it over.  So she, we lived across the street from the school when we were going to school there.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, your mother's employers must have been remarkable people.  They sound like they were helpful.  I mean I don't know the full story, but what were their names?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember their name.  I remember, I remember that the family my, my father worked for was the man who invented the Anthony truck lift.  And, you know, I think you still see them around sometimes.  They're the truck lifts that go on the back of a truck to lift stuff up so that you can, without having to lift 'em on your hand or use a ramp.
Speaker 1: A forklift like?
Speaker 2: No, it's, it's, when they lower it off the back of a truck, it's level with the ground--
Speaker 1: It's a tailgate--
Speaker 2: --to roll a load onto there.  And then it elevates up to the level of the truck bed and so that you can move the thing in directly.  And I've seen Anthony written on the, on some trucks, relatively recently.  But he was the one who invented that, and he was, my, my--and the Arvilla from my name was, was the wife's name in that family.
Story_ID: 24423
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Esther Small], I know you said she took courses, and she was trying to improve her vocabulary and--
Speaker 2: And she was, and she was, when she, when they moved to Stamford and she had the house, she, she went to night school.  It was afternoon school.  She was very interested in education.  She wanted her children to be educated.  She asked, she wanted all three of us to be sure to get a high school diplomas.  And we were the first ones in, for her side of the family or from my father's side of the family ever to get a high school diploma.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My brother, my older brother, who had been unhappy about going to school regularly, he got his diploma and he gave it to her.  I was thrilled to have mine, and because at that time, there was only, only one of us could go to, could go off to school, and he obviously, rejected that opportunity.  I got a chance to go to college.
Story_ID: 24424
Speaker 1: So George Burgess Harrison.  So what do you know, how far back can you trace his family and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Not any further back than his.  He, he, his mother's name was Emma, and Emma was not one of the favorite children in her family.  And they never talked about who they were and how they were connected--
Speaker 1: Now, where was he born?  I neglected to ask you that.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  He was, the, the family at the time that I know anything was in New Jersey.  And his brother was in New Jersey.  And whenever we visited his mother, it was in New Jersey.  I don't know where they were from or how they got to New Jersey or, or anything at all about that.
Speaker 1: Where about in New Jersey?
Speaker 2: East Orange.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, but you don't know how long they'd been there or--
Speaker 2: No, I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Okay, East Orange, New Jersey, okay, so--
Speaker 2: And, you see, we had, my, my father had a brother who had a son, would have been our first cousins, who went to, to high school, but didn't finish.  So that was why we were, although we were younger than they were, we were the first ones ever to finish high school on either side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, do you know very much about your--now, did you hear any stories about your grandfather, your father's father?
Speaker 2: No, nothing about him at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so your father, as far as you know, he was raised in New Jersey?
Speaker 2: As far as I know, he sprang out of the air in New Jersey (laughter).  And that's interesting because I, I don't think my brothers knew, but my brothers are both dead at this point.  I really don't know how I could even find out.  You know, I don't remember him telling me stories about what he was doing, the way my mother [Esther Small] would tell us about her, her coming here and her going to California and driving a car and things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I know he was a, he was a chauffeur for the family, and I know that he knew how to drive a car years before lots of people could drive cars.  And he always, when he taught us how to drive, he was always very careful.  He said, you, you never put your car away at night without having gas in it in case you --  And when you get in, up in the morning, you walk all around your car to see that the wheels are, that the tires are all right and everything is, and nothing has happened to the car.  And he was very careful about things like that, that, you know, a car was something that you took good care of and that you, you know, you drove well.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, that was his job so he--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was his job.
Speaker 1: --he took that, you know--
Speaker 2: So, he, he did that very seriously.
Speaker 1: --definitely seriously.
Speaker 2: He was, he did that well, and when, later he, he worked in service with my mother, he was always a little bit--he always felt that working in service was less than the kind of job he had as a chauffeur.  And, and he always wanted more for his children, the two of them wanted more.  And the, the two of them wanted a place for us to live that, that was our own so that it wasn't, someone else could say, your children are making too much noise and put them out or raise the rent when, and evict them and be out in the street.  It was important we have a place to live, and, and I always remember being, feeling quite safe in our home with my mother and father.  It was, it was a sanctuary.  And I knew that other children didn't have that, other children, folks, they rented, they sort of moved around.  They--in my case, my father and my mother were good family for us.  And--
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your father have a chance to go to high school?
Speaker 2: He went to high school, but he never finished.
Story_ID: 24425
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: My father smoked cigarettes.  He smoked a cigarette called Lord Salisbury, and my father also died of lung cancer.
Speaker 1: I've never heard of that brand, but--
Speaker 2: No, it was a Turkish sort of cigarette that came in a little flat, dark green box, and he used to smoke a pack of them a day.  And it was one place in town where he could get them.
Speaker 1: It's interesting that, you know, I guess there probably needs to be more written about the relationship between people who work for people of means and the transfer that takes place, you know.  And I'm sure Lord Salisbury would probably not have occurred to somebody that didn't have that kind of job, you know, and that kind of proximity.  And also, you know, it may be that even form the aspirations of people they work for people (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I think so because people who work for them saw the sorts of things that were going on, and saw all those kinds of foods that they ate and saw the kinds of things that they did.  And, oh, while my mother was working in service, the, the woman that she was working for, and, you know, when they were in Stamford [Connecticut], was a part of a woman's club.  And, and they have, they had performances and shows, and she saw that, you know, we got tickets to go see these things.  And, and, in fact, in our high school, they, the women's club, chose girls to be a part of junior women's club.  I was chosen for one, and it was very interesting because my, my, the woman my mother worked for had been at the club meeting where, where the women were chosen.  And she said, she didn't see me.  She'd seen an Italian-looking girl, but she didn't see me (laughter).  I thought, well, that's interesting.  She was the one, also, they, they talked about, her son went to Princeton.  He was killed in the War.  But one day my mother came home and, and she had written on a piece of paper, Phi Beta Kappa, and she said, I don't know what it is, but it sounds good.  You know, they were talking about it, and she wanted me to get it.  And I didn't know what until I got in college, but I did get to be a part of Phi Beta Kappa, the Epsilon Chapter from Boston University.  And, yeah, she wanted more, and she was exposed to more from a different point of view, and therefore, she, she wanted those things for her children.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is the kind of modeling that could only take place in that kind of setting, I guess, that kind of, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Because if you, if you lived in a different sort of (unclear), you'd never get exposed to those things, and there's a great divide between those who have things and the ones who had not, and there was no way that these people would ever know about what's going over, over here, and what they have.  And, yeah.
Speaker 1: I've often thought about that. There's more access for the, those who work for the rich than it is for those who don't have to do that, and have something else to do.  They don't, they don't really have the same access to see what's going on on that, on the high-end of the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --high economic end anyway.  You know, so, it's interesting.
Speaker 2: You're always on the outside looking in, but at least you're looking in, and there're some things that you figure, some day I can get this for me too.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but in another way, you're actually on the inside, you know, looking at all the workings of it, you know, where another person may not ever get in there.
Speaker 2: I never felt I was on the inside.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 24426
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now when you consider your parents' dispositions, their mannerisms, their habits, their hobbies, their looks, their, how they moved and talked and acted, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My mother [Esther Small], very much so.  My mother was an outspoken person who could present herself well in front of anyone.  She also knew the sorts of things that she wanted.  She recognized the things that she couldn't have, but those things that she wanted and that she could find a way to get, she would get.  She was--and my father [George Burgess Harrison], my father was not a meek person, but my father always loved my mother and wanted for her, you know, he encouraged her in terms of doing the tings that she wanted to do.  He also, he teased her about some things in terms of, he always said that she believed anything that a white person told her.  And he would sort of, you know, why do you do that, you know.  He would question (laughter) (unclear) everything.  And because he himself looked at things with, with a grain of sand.  He looked at whether or not it was so or not, and she would tend to believe--if a white person told her something, she would tend to believe it.  He might or might not depending on whether he believed it was so.  They were both independent in that way.  He thought a lot of his daughter, and he, you know, he taught me numbers.  And he taught me letters, and to the point where my brother, who was older, started kindergarten, and I went along with him across the street to the school to, to do that.  They, they thought that that my brother was the baby, and that I was the older one and, because I did--they gave me a test to see whether I could go to kindergarten.  And so I started when I was, I guess, I was almost three.  And I started kindergarten.  And, because my dad had taught me all the numbers, although I seriously questioned why the number fifteen was fifteen and five-teen because it was fourteen, five-teen, sixteen, seventeen, and I would diligently count that way, and that seemed reasonable to me, although the teachers insisted that, that wasn't the way to, the way that it went.  And you sort of had to conform to what was usual (laughter).  And my brother didn't like my being in, in the same class with him.  We were in the same class all the way through elementary school, up through sixth grade.  And then we went to junior high, and he was with the boys' group, and I was with the girls' group.  And he was, he was just as pleased that I was not in, in his class with him.
Story_ID: 24427
Speaker 1: So your brother is how many, how much older than you?
Speaker 2: My brother was born in February the year before--February '25' [1925].
Speaker 1: Okay, so can you name your brothers and sisters for us and where you fit into it?
Speaker 2: I had two brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One was George Frantino Harrison.  Frantino was F-R-A-N-T-I-N-O.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind Frantino?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: It seems--
Speaker 2: It's the name my father [George Burgess Harrison] liked (laughter).  And my, my brother's son also got the name rights (laughter).  And my other brother who was younger, who was born in December of '28' [1928] was James Burgess Harrison.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have no sisters.  There were the three of us.
Speaker 1: Now, does the Burgess relate to some significant historical relationship?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I, I have never heard any discussion about those two names as to the significance they have.
Speaker 1: Okay .
Story_ID: 24428
Speaker 1: So, now, you told us about the--now, you grew up in the house your mother [Esther Small] bought, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And can you kind of describe for us?  What kind of house was it?
Speaker 2: When we were growing up, it was a big house.  When we went back, it was a small house (laughter).  It's a little house, sits, it sat on the corner of Adams Avenue and Chestnut Street.  And it had on the, it had four rooms on the first floor, a living room, a dining room, like a den and the kitchen was on the first floor.  And the bathroom was off the kitchen.  And upstairs, there were four bedrooms.  My mother and father had a bedroom and each one of the three of us had a bedroom.
Speaker 1: It seemed like a pretty good sized house, four bedrooms--
Speaker 2: They were small rooms.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: But it was, it was, you know, it was, I'd say it was about the size of a 30 by 30 cape [Cape Cod], and it had a dirt floor in the basement.  And it used to have a coal stove, and they would put the coal in through the, the thing there until my father won the numbers and what he did was to buy a furnace.  And--
Speaker 1: What kind did he get?
Speaker 2: An oil-burning furnace.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, this is New England, and so a lot, you know, a lot of parts of the country is gas, you know, so I just--
Speaker 2: No, no, it was an oil-burning furnace.  And so that, we no longer had to have the coal dust and, and the plates that were in there.  And, and in the backyard, there was back, a big backyard, and then we had a, a garage.  And the garage was a two-car garage.  It was big enough for the boy scouts to have their parties and camping things and things in the garage, and that was what often happened because my father was a scout leader.  And he always worked with the boy scouts in terms of doing things.  And my brothers were boy scouts.  And I was very unhappy that I was never able to be a boy scout because they wouldn't take girls in.
Story_ID: 24429
Speaker 1: So they didn't take you on the trips or anything?
Speaker 2: No, I couldn't, when they had parties at our house, and they, they would sell soda and do things of that sort.  They'd have their typical bean supper.  Sometimes they'd let me out in the backyard, and I could sort of see what was going on, but the boys always did their thing.  They didn't have girls around.  And girl scouts did cooking and, and sewing kinds of things, and I really wanted to go camping (laughter).  And I read the boy scout handbook and all the, the things that they did for merit badges, and I thought how marvelous to do all those things.  And they wouldn't let me do any of them.  My father worked diligently with the boy scouts.  In fact, he was awarded a Silver Beaver which is the highest award they give volunteer leaders with the boy scouts.  And my son has that Silver Beaver now.  My father also worked diligently during the War [World War II].  They wanted to, to--when there was a question about whether or not they were gonna have bombings and all in America, and they were doing blackouts and things of that sort.  And they, they wanted, there were no black people who were part of the police department, but they were interested in having an auxiliary police group that was made up of, of the black men who were, who were there.  And my father organized and got that together.  He found the numbers of, of men who were in town, black men in town, were not eligible to be a part because they had criminal histories.  But he did get together a whole group who were ready, and I remember their being out there during the War telling people to put their, cover their windows and to, and to do that, although we never got bombed or anything here in this country.  But I remember him, him working that way.  He would, he worked diligently, both in church with the boy scouts, with the citizens things.  Yeah, that was, that was the sort of thing that he did.  My mother as always, we were always liked in, in elementary school 'cause on Thursdays when my mother would come off, you know, on her day off, she usually would bring things like fudge or cookies to school.  And so my mother was quite welcomed at school (laughter) on Thursdays because everybody looked forward to the sorts of things that she did when she was cooking.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she worked for this family up until--how old were you when she, when they moved to California, I guess?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, this, this is not all the same family that she worked.  She worked for numbers of different families.
Speaker 1: Did she work in that same fashion for most of your childhood--
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.
Speaker 1: --with Thursdays off, and every other Sunday.  So, you didn't see your mother that much (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, by the time we were, she worked in, she worked in service right up, right through all the time that we were, we were youngsters in school.  And, and we were, we were forbidden to go out in the street.  We could go up to the end of the sidewalk.  My father, when they were doing sidewalks, rather than those asphalt, even as he, he had a concrete one put in front of our house so that we could roller skate.  But we weren't able, we were not allowed to put our feet over on the curb, I mean off into the street.  We could stay on the sidewalk.  And they would come home and, you know, he'd come out and see how we were. But they, they were working in service during the time that we were there. They, they--some of the time that they, that they took off when my brother and I were playing in orchestra because they saw to it that I had piano lessons.  And my brother took violin lessons, and we played in an orchestra in our elementary school.  And I remember their driving us down to New York because there was a, a program that they were having with elementary school orchestras.  And we played, and we played.  I don't remember the, quite the names of the pieces that we played at this point, but they were, you know, Gray, Bach, things of that sort, I mean Beethoven.  And they saw to it that, that--well, you can see, my, my folks wanted us to have things growing up that was not, that were not the ordinary sort of things that went on, and experiences that we could have that were different from others.
Story_ID: 24430
Speaker 1: Now, so your mother [Esther Small], she had like, was it a Thursday and every other Sunday off?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And she was away, now, was your father's [George Burgess Harrison] schedule similar in terms of--
Speaker 2: When, when, by the time that the, we children were along here, he was working, he was working as a--they worked as a couple for a number of years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then he got a job as a sexton in a church in St. Andrews Episcopal Church there in Stamford [Connecticut].  And so--
Speaker 1: So, but I guess, I'm, what I'm trying to get at is when he was working with your mother as a--when you were growing up, I mean who, what adults were around most of the time when you were growing up?  So--
Speaker 2: I remember there being a couple of, of girls who came in and stayed with us.  I remember there being times when we got older, when, you know, when, when they were no longer staying overnight at their job, and when they would come home--
Speaker 1: About how old were you when they kind of, that duty kind of was relaxed?
Speaker 2: Tween kind of age, not quite teenagers, but older--
Speaker 1: Okay, like when you went to school (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --but not, not elementary school, but sort of middle school kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Eleven, twelve years old.
Speaker 2: Well, that, yeah, about like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you spent a lot of time as a little kid without your parents around, but you said you had like lots of rules and you--
Speaker 2: Had lots of rules--
Speaker 1: I just wondered how, you know, when you look today, there's so many--I mean it was a different time period.  Kids were raised better, I think in those days, I mean we'd like to think.  But, so how, what kept you all in line, you know, throughout that kind of--
Speaker 2: Oh, my father kept us in line.  I mean we wouldn't dare go against what my father would say (laughter).  And at one point, the time when, when my mother was working in service, and when they were there, when it got--I remember one year when it got very, very cold, and the pipes froze in the house, and my mother took us all to her job.  And we sort of stayed, they--these people had a big house, and we sort of stayed there.  And they had loads of books and I read books.  And I remember we had to be sort of quiet when people were around and everything.  But I, I got to the point where I read everything, even the labels on cans.  I was so interested in learning about things.  And--
Speaker 1: About how old were you when that happened?
Speaker 2: This was during, junior high school age, when junior high was seventh through ninth, kind of age.
Speaker 1: Okay, you were like eleven, twelve--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and--
Speaker 1: --thirteen?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  So, well, pipes freezing in the house, that's an expensive--so, I'm just wondering now if you, if they were gone so much, I mean did--your father live away from home too when he was in service?
Speaker 2: When they, when they, when they, when they were, as a couple they both lived at the, at the--they both worked for the same family and lived at the same place.
Speaker 1: So somebody had to check in on you all--
Speaker 2: Except my, I remember my dad coming home, and he would, 'cause it was, this was in the same town.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he would drive in and check and go back?
Speaker 2: He would come in and check how things were going, see that the, you know, the fire was still going, and see that the kids were okay.  And, and I remember, my father was the one who was not that fond of cats.  He, whenever I had a cat, my father would make them disappear.  And I was very unhappy.  And this lady gave me a cat whose name was Jerry.  And this cat was about two years old.  And my, because she had been a gift, my father was not allowed to get rid of this cat, the way he had done with kittens.  I remember one time when it was, he came in the house, and the cat, because the central stairs in the house.  As you walk in the front door, the stairs were there.  The rooms were on the other side.  And the cat was at the, jumped on his shoulder and purred.  And he decided he liked that cat.  And he became as friendly with that cat as anybody (laughter), and, 'cause the cat was glad to see him too (laughter), and she had jumped down there and jumped on his shoulder.  And here he was the one who was sort of death on cats.  And there was this cat purring on him.  So that cat was quite welcomed, and stayed with me until she had to be put to sleep--
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna--
Speaker 2: --at which point my father cried.
Story_ID: 24431
Speaker 1: Who was in your neighborhood?  What did you, was it mostly an African American neighborhood or mixed or what?
Speaker 2: We were a block away from the Baptist church.  There were black people living in our neighborhood, some, and there were white people living in our neighborhood.  The woman across the street was an old German lady who taught me how to knit.  And the people on the opposite corner was a black family, but all the houses further down were white people.  And the houses between our house and the church were black people, but on the other side of that street and the church, there was, there were white people, and there was a store, a corner store.  And up the side streets were, black and white people.  It was like, up the side streets.  There were some youngsters we went to school with and there were, and on the other block, there were some white and black.
Speaker 1: So you had a mixed neighborhood, now--
Speaker 2: It was, it was mixed, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Did it have a particular ethnic flavor in terms of the white people that were there?  Were they mainly Italians or Germans or--
Speaker 2: There were some Italians, who kept beautiful lawns--yards, I remember.  And as I said, there was this German woman who lived across the street.  I don't remember any other specific ethnic group.  There were no people other than either black or white.  I don't remember anybody Eastern at or anything of that sort.
Story_ID: 24432
Speaker 1: You said you were across the street from a school, I think before.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: The house was right across from--
Speaker 2: Elementary school.
Speaker 1: Now, that's the school that you attended?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of the school.
Speaker 2: Hart, H-A-R-T.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you see how long ago it was, it has been replaced (laughter), the school got old, and they replaced it with a bigger school, a junior high school.
Speaker 1: And you started there when you were three years old, you said, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I remember one time, I guess we were in first grade, and the teacher was counting up the youngsters who were, and then they asked the people, she asked the people which ones were, you know, five, which ones, which ones were six, which ones were five.  And they raised their hand, and she added them up.  And she, and she counted the people in the room, and she said who doesn't know how old they are?  And I said, I--nobody answered (laughter).  Who didn't answer?  I said, I didn't.  I said, well, you didn't call my age (laughter).  And she hadn't, and so when asked who was five, who was six, she didn't ask who was four.
Speaker 1: But they let stay, huh?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: They let you stay as a young student?
Speaker 2: Yes, they let me stay (laughter).  I was one of the good children.  When my, when my younger brother went to, to that school, there were some times when I don't think they wanted to let him stay.  He was really a lively, rambunctious boy.  And when, when we were in junior high, my, my older brother and I had both been, you know, good children.  We, but my younger brother got there, they had two benches outside the principal's office.  One for my brother and one everybody else in the school (laughter).  He was there that often, that he went, he went to (laughter)--that they had a bench for him.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have any black teachers in school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what do you think the population, I mean what percentage of black folks were in the school population, you think?
Speaker 2: In the school population?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh?
Speaker 2: There were probably two or three in each class.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because we were sort of spread out in age, but there were about two or three in each class.
Story_ID: 24433
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?  Sights, sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: Sights, I don't remember sights especially, although, of growing, on Sunday afternoon, when my folks were no longer working, we would often drive in a car, and sort of drive around and sort of see things.  Sounds, I remember my, my dad [George Burgess Harrison] buying a collection of records, you know, these great deal old (unclear) platters, a collection favorite sounds or something of that sort.  And I remember, and we had one of those Victrola kinds of things.  And I remember playing them over and over and over and loving the music.  They were, every now and then you hear, when they talk about golden oldies, and I will hear one of these old songs.  And I remember them from, from my childhood, that there was music.  And I remember the music of my practicing, and I remember my brother screeching away at his violin.  My younger brother had a trombone and so sounds were music.  Sights--
Speaker 1: Sights, sounds, smells.
Speaker 2: I remember a smell was fall.  We used to burn leaves, and I remember before they no longer allowed to burn leaves, I remember fall, everybody--you raked up leaves.  And you had these big piles, and they would smell kind of acrid, you know, kind of leaves, burning leaves.  I guess, well, I guess people now-a-days don't know how burning leaves smell.  They're not allowed to burn them, but that was, that was one of the things I remember from, from growing up, was this smell of burning leaves.  And in terms of sights, sights--well, there're some things that you sort of, they're always there and that you, you know, I, I remember the sight of, of the church and the, and the people in the choir singing and the minister preaching.  And I remember the sights of going along, walking to school and the things that were there and how that gradually changed from being all country to some stores and things being added and sidewalks being, you know, more and more part of the landscape, more and more cars being around.  But other than that, I, I don't remember any others.
Story_ID: 24434
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite teacher in school?
Speaker 2: Not that I remember.  No, I don't remember a favorite teacher.  You mean from, from elementary school and junior high and that kind of--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, from the early years.
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember a favorite teacher.
Speaker 1: And can you remember, I guess your first interest in science.  Were you interested in chemistry at all as a, in grade school?
Speaker 2: I remember the first day I was in chemistry class.
Speaker 1: Now, that's high school, right?
Speaker 2: That's high school.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That was, that was in high school.
Speaker 1: But did you have any inklings of anything like that in grade school?
Speaker 2: No, I liked math when I was, when I was in, in elementary school and middle school.  I liked working with numbers and maneuvering numbers and thinking out where they land and things of that sort.  I, I, I was not--I didn't even know what chemistry, which is, I guess why I remember the first day I was in chemistry, was because it was in the, I had never heard of it before.  But, yes, math, I, I loved math.
Speaker 1: And you said your dad [George Burgess Harrison] really helped you with math early--
Speaker 2: My, my, he really helped with arithmetic and numbers and things of that sort.  And, and I remember I would, I would sit up, yeah, I don't know, on his shoulder or on his chest, and we had a big, where we had a big calendar.  And he always, you know, I learned how to count up through thirty one because that's how many numbers were on the calendar (laughter), and that's how I learned them, you know (laughter).  And so, well, it was present for people, for me to count.  It was, I, I remembered those numbers because my dad had always pointed out what they were, and them to me.  And, you know, he, he didn't do that for my, my, for brother.  My brother was not interested in that type of a thing.  And I was the one who was, and he, my dad helped me do that a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so he didn't, even though he was a boy scout master, he spent, he spent quality time with you.
Speaker 2: He spent time with the boy scouts doing that and making root beer and all sorts of things.  And they knew how to make root beer, my dad taught them how to make root beer.  My dad taught 'em how to make ice cream, all sorts of things of that sort.  And they made delicious baked beans which they always used to all eat up (laughter).
Story_ID: 24435
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now did Hart Elementary School have a middle school too or did you go to another school?
Speaker 2: No, no, I went to Burdick, B-U-R-D-I-C-K.
Speaker 1: Was it called a junior high school or middle school?
Speaker 2: It was junior high school.
Speaker 1: Junior high school, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause it was [grades] seven to nine.
Speaker 1: Okay, Burdick Junior High School, and was that close by?
Speaker 2: No, we had to walk, it was, I guess it's probably, maybe a mile, maybe a little more than a mile to get to Burdick.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, but you were older by then.  You were like ten, eleven, twelve.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we walked to school.  I remember we walked down the street, down Broad Street, around the corner at the library and (laughter) over to Burdick.  Burdick had a, I remember Burdick had, like one of those Greek oaths that the youngsters took about transmitting this school, greater, better and more beautiful than it was transmitted to me.  And Burdick was very much into that.  There were at least three junior high's in Stamford [Connecticut].  And Burdick was sort of on the North side.  There was one on the West side, and I, and there was one down towards the South side.  And there were more black youngsters in the West side one, and the poor side of town, we thought of it as poor.  We were all poor, but the poorest side of town was the South side, and we were on the North side where most of the youngsters were interested in further school, and their parents sort of did things for them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We also, I remember our class had a, we had a class song that--we finished Burdick in '40' [1940].  Boy, that's old.  I run into numbers of people who can't imagine anybody was alive in '40' [1940] (laughter).  But, yeah, how did it go?  [singing] "To our alma mater, we all feel true.  We could only be true.  We'll fight on forever till we come through.  So the Class of '40', bids adieu to their beloved gold and blue."
Story_ID: 24436
Speaker 1: So did you play the piano all the way through--
Speaker 2: There were a group of us who played the piano, yes, of course, we played the piano and the--
Speaker 1: Did you play at church too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I played at church too.  And, and we sang and did all those kinds of things.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have leadership positions in the church as a youth?
Speaker 2: Did I?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: While I was growing up, no.  I had a leadership position at the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association].
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you didn't tell us about that.  So this is (unclear) YWCA?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So girl scouts, YWCA.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the president of the, there was an organization of all the girls in the girls' clubs that met there at the Y.  And I remember very much being at a, a luncheon in which this woman was there, and she was talking about what people were going to be doing.  And she asked me what I was interested in, in being?  And I told her a brain surgeon.  That seemed like a nice, exciting thing to do.  And she said she thought I ought to be a hairdresser.  And, and I thought why would she think I ought to be a hairdresser (laughter).  I was very concerned that, that she wanted me to do that.  But it was because I was a black girl, and she said, and you know, your people sort of all need to have their hair done.  And so (laughter), she thought that I ought to do that (laughter), and--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: That wasn't where I was going.
Story_ID: 24437
Speaker 1: What kind of counseling did you have in school?  Did you have good counseling or did you have like that kind of counseling in school?
Speaker 2: Well, when we were in junior high school, everybody was sort of tracked.  And the girls were all in, 7A, B, C, D, E.  And the boys were in 7-1, 2, 3, 4, 5.  And you got into the A's by getting the best grades.  And if you were in 7A, it was sort of assumed you were gonna go on to college and things of that sort.  So the whole class was kind of tracked into doing that.  And we studied Latin and we studied various kinds of things of that sort.  My brother was in 7-5.  That made him very unhappy.  He was with the group that they were sort of--and they really tracked youngsters that way in those days.  They, they split up the class.  They took the highest grades, and they put them in 7A, and they put the boys in 7-1 and put the next group of girls in 7B, and the put the boys in 7-2 and they went down that way.
Speaker 1: So was this your older brother or younger brother?
Speaker 2: My older brother.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you all were in the same classes--
Speaker 2: We were in the seventh--
Speaker 1: --in the same grade--
Speaker 2: --and once we got to--
Speaker 1: --but not in the same classroom.
Speaker 2: When we got to seventh grade, to junior high, we were in the same grade, but not in the same classes.  And I remember our, our Latin teacher because we got first-year Latin or something in, in that point.  He thought the people, the girls in our grade were snobbish because we were in 7-A and 8-A and 9-A.  And everybody recognized that these were the ones who were the brightest.  And one year when we were studying, we were studying first-year Latin, and we had learned how to count in Latin--anyway, they had assemblies.  And we all decided to wear a white blouse to assembly.  And so when the class walked into assembly, all the girls in our group had on white blouses.  And it was not taken very well by most of the other people who were at the assembly.  And when we got to our Latin class that day, the Latin teacher made us count how many girls in the class had on white blouses in Latin.  And we hadn't learned much (laughter) Latin.  But he wanted us to remember that that was not the sort of thing to do when you're in a group of, of lots of people, to sort of make yourself be different that way.  And we were a little unhappy at that, but looking back on it, I think it was a very good lesson we learned, that you--so you were the "A" group of students, but that didn't mean you were better than the other people who were in your class also.
Speaker 1: Now, I would guess that being, black people being a minority in the schools, or even more minority in the higher track classes--
Speaker 2: I was alone.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, but how were you treated basically, by the teachers?  Were you treated--
Speaker 2: Fine.  I mean they, the only thing I remember about being unhappy about what happened was I wanted to take a creative writing class, and the teacher didn't think that I, my writing was creative enough.  And I was unhappy about that.  But looking, my writing is not that creative.  I, I could write factual things and informative things, but not so good creative things (laughter).  And, but some of the girls were being chosen to do this creative writing, and she didn't choose me, even though I asked about it.  So--
Story_ID: 24438
Speaker 1: I'm just kind of curious.  Now, we were talking about Della Hardeman earlier, and I was talking about the Dunbar (unclear) on the mast head of the gazette.  But did you learn about any black writers or, or any black history at all during the time you were in school?  Did anybody talk about, you know, contributions of African Americans?
Speaker 2: No, not in school.  The, there was an Elks group in town of people that were also sort of, sort of connected with the church, but they were a group of Elks.  And they would have history things, and they would have meetings, and they'd talk about those people who were black who had done things.  And so, you heard them but not in the schools.  I don't remember in the school ever doing it.  But I, I do remember that, that the black people in the community did talk about black folks and what they--
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your parents get like any of the black papers, "The Afro-American" and "Norfolk Journal in God" or the "Amsterdam News" or--
Speaker 2: My father [George Burgess Harrison] would pick up a paper.  I'm trying to think of what it was.
Speaker 1: Courier, "Pittsburgh Courier"?
Speaker 2: It was probably the "Pittsburgh Courier".  Regularly, he got the "Stamford Advocate", and he also, he, he got the, the "New York Daily News".  But on, was it Thursday or every other Thursday, he had the "Pittsburgh Courier".
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you were reading everything.  Did you read those too?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, yeah, I--you put down something in front of me, and I would read it (laughter).  I loved reading, and I still read a lot, although I don't read the kinds of things that lots of people--I run into these people who read these very weighty towns.  At this point, I've read enough of those, and textbooks.  And so I read page turners, but I read them like galore (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite book from growing up?
Speaker 2: One favorite book?
Speaker 1: Well, you can give me some names of a couple favorites?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think of, of--I would go to the library with my friend, Mary Canty, and we would bring home a stack of books, and I'd gobble them all up, and I'd read.  I don't remember a favorite book that I, no, I don't.
Speaker 1: Well, do you have like some names of some of the favorites, some of the ones you liked the best?
Speaker 2: Oh, we read the Nancy Drew books.  And we read, and I'm trying to think of what other sorts of--we read most of the books about, that were about girls that were that were in the, in the public library there.
Speaker 1: "Louisa May Alcott" and, I guess--
Speaker 2: In school, we read some of the, you know, the "Little Women" and some, those, those books of that sort.  But on my free time, no, I, I read other things (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what about, did--television didn't hit yet.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, television wasn't anywhere near (laughter).
Speaker 1: But in terms of radio and--
Speaker 2: "The Green Hornet", we used to read, hear, and the "Shadow" and "Amos and Andy".  And I don't remember any other sorts of radio sorts of things.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you--were the movies segregated in Stamford or--
Speaker 2: No, we would go, my brothers and I would go to the movies on Saturdays.  My mother [Esther Small] would give us .50 cents--that was for all of us, three admissions, a nickel candy bar each, and my brother who was the oldest got the extra nickel.  He always pulled rank on us (laughter) for the extra.  And we would see two features and a news reel and coming attractions, and the whole works.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And later, when I got older in Stamford, I liked going, they had live theater there.  And I liked doing that.  I would go to live theater, mainly by myself because no one else was sort of interested in, in the thing there.  But, but I would go, I think it was the "Strand" in Stamford, and I would go there to the, to live theater.  I've always liked live.
Story_ID: 24439
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about high school, now, where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Stamford High, in Stamford, Connecticut.
Speaker 1: And was there only one high school in Stamford?
Speaker 2: There was at that point.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: I think they have even gotten rid of the name since then, but there was one high school, and it, which meant that the youngsters from all the three junior highs all ended up at the same high school.  It was on Strawberry Hill Avenue.
Speaker 1: Now, you said this is, this is your first exposure to chemistry, right?
Speaker 2: When I took the chemistry class.  I remember the first day we walked into chemistry class, and there was--the teacher had written on the board, labor-atory, not laboratory, and I thought that was kind of, he was gonna, we'd better work at this.  And then he started printing symbols for chemical names on the board.  And there was this fascinating world of, of not music, not musical notes and not numbers, but of letters that referred to elements.  And it all seemed to logical and well put together, and I loved it.  We took, this, this was my second year in high school because the first year we took biology.  And the second year we took chemistry, and the third year, we took physics.  And I, I run into youngsters who don't like school, and I keep thinking, I wonder what was wrong with me.  I loved school.  I kept wanting to learn things.  There were all kinds of fascinating things one never got to do.  And while we were in high school, we had, it was a girl's glee club.  And numbers of the girls who had been in Burdick [Junior High School] together, and we were, we were singing.  And because the classroom schedule is such that, you know, you moved around from one room to another, and the time sort of went.  So we requested that the teacher, the music teacher who directed the glee club asked for all of us in their home room so that we could practice as a home room rather than going to separate home rooms and having to sort of find another time to, to sing.  And so we had a home room in which there was a grand piano in the front of the room, and everybody sang.  And we had a marvelous time with singing and music.  And some people didn't like that either, that we had a home room in which one teacher picked the people for her home room.  Every, all the other teachers got whoever came up in the shuffle.  And this one teacher got the people that she chose and they were all girls from the girls glee club (laughter).  But we enjoyed that year very much.  And that year, someone also gave to our high school an organ in memory of a person who had been very important in teaching music there at the school.  And so three of us were allowed to, for our elective, to take organ lessons.  That's when I first got a chance to play a, essentially, a pipe organ.  We had that.  And they showed us how to, they, they taught us how to play an organ.  There were, and I said, there were three of us.  We learned, one of the things we learned was you don't, you don't polish the organ bench 'cause you slide off (laughter) if you're sitting at the organ bench.  And we learned how that, that an organ is an instrument that is, it has, it has the strings and the reeds and the horns, and the percussion.  It has all of these, and it's all sort of under your control with your fingers and your feet.  And you can make glorious music on an organ.  And so, and the chance that I had to be one of the three who was chosen so that we could do this, I was just thrilled to have a chance to, to play the organ and to do that.  So, I remember high school as being a chance where I studied science and mathematics and music, and I was delighted. It, it was a delightful time for me to be there.  I was in a, an Algebra class, and our Algebra teacher let people work sort of on their own.  And as you finished the things, she moved so that the person, the rows went like this, and the person who was furthest away from her was the one who had finished most of the projects.  And the one nearest to her was the one who had not, who was closest to being sort of fed up.  And if you finished a lot of the projects, you were able to sort of work on others while the class was going on.  And it was one fellow and I who changed that last seat often.  You know, he would get a little ahead of me.  Then I'd get a little ahead of him.  And for, we kept switching the seats.  And at the end of that year, and that was our junior year, I got the Algebra prize when they had the assembly, and they called me up, and they gave me an Algebra prize.  It was all of $5.00, and I knew exactly what I was going to do with that $5.00.  I was going to pay for my degree when I finished college, and so I kept it sealed up, and I, I was gonna use that $5.00.  And do you know, when it was time for the degrees at BU [Boston University], it was gonna cost $20.00, and they were gonna take it out of your account.  They were not, there was a time when you could sort of ceremoniously give them the $5.00.  And so I didn't use it for that.  But that was what I was going to do with it.  And, and I was really thrilled to have gotten the award.  The only dark spot of my high school career was that I couldn't go to Yale [University].  Yale at the time had a scholarship for the top graduate of the high schools in each of the, each of the towns in Connecticut.  And Yale was not co-ed.  So I couldn't get it, and the principal told my mother that I couldn't, I couldn't go there because I was not a boy.
Speaker 1: You didn't know that at the time, that you--
Speaker 2: It was not until we were talking about college that, that, because the idea of how they would have paid for it, I have no idea how they would have paid for it.  But high school, junior high and high, all the school--school had been a delight in terms of what I was doing that, of course, I was going to keep on going.  The idea of not going to school was kind of, I never thought of it. I was, of course, going to go to school.
Speaker 1: Now, let me go back a little bit to, now, you were in high school from '40' [1940] to '44' [1944], is that true?
Speaker 2: To '43' [1943].  I finished--
Speaker 1: Forty-three [1943], oh, you finished in three years.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, no, the high school was three years.  Middle school--
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right, 'cause you had ninth grade already.
Speaker 2: I went to junior high school which was seven to nine.  And then high school was 10 through 12.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, so this is, would be basically, pre-World War--well, pre-U.S. involvement in World War II through the early stages.  This is the middle of the War actually, where you--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes.  I was in, I guess the War, December 7, 1941--
Speaker 1: Forty-one [1941], yeah.
Speaker 2: --which, which meant that I was in, that, that was the year I would have been a sophomore in high school.
Story_ID: 24440
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your, did anybody in your family serve in the War?  Did your brother--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Your brother was a little too young--
Speaker 2: My brother, my, my--I was, you know, my brother was, he was born in '25' [1925], and so at the time, he, he would not have been old enough.  He served in, what was the war after that?
Speaker 1: Korea.
Speaker 2: Korea, he served during the Korean War [1950-1953], and my younger brother was in the army and served--he played in the band, and he was, I think that was probably Korean also.  But I don't think they were, you know, we were home with, with the watch guards (laughter) during World War II [1939-1945].
Speaker 1: Okay, how did the War affect, you know, your high school experience, do you think, I mean just looking back on it?
Speaker 2: Except that we had ration cards, and we didn't, we couldn't ride around on Sunday afternoons any longer, I don't remember it really affecting us because my father was too old to go to the War, and my brothers were too young.  And the War wasn't in this country, and, you know, you were aware because you had these ration books, and you could only buy certain things that were in them.  But it, and you had these black-out practices where, where they would, you know, ring the horns, and you had to cover all the lights or turn the lights out and that type of a thing.  And you read about it, but in terms of it affecting me in terms of what, what I was doing, I don't remember the War as affecting me that much.
Story_ID: 24441
Speaker 1: Okay, so, did you have a favorite teacher from high school?
Speaker 2: Can't think of one.  I, I liked, you know, most of my teachers (laughter), and, you know, and I was part of the glee clubs, so we had that, home room teachers.  And we had, and my chemistry teachers, and, and our math teachers, and, you know, I, I don't remember a favorite.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember any.
Speaker 1: Did you graduate as the top student?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, 'cause I thought you got the prize for--
Speaker 2: Algebra.
Speaker 1: That's right, top Algebra student.  Okay, all right.  So did you, when you graduated, did you, what were your, what was your rank or do you remember?
Speaker 2: I was probably Number 21, but I don't think, no one ever sort of ranked students at that point, except something happened, and they, they said something about the Top 20, and my name wasn't on that list.  And there was a picture in our yearbook that showed one teacher's grades, and my name was down on the, on the bottom of that.  So I don't really know.  I did well enough to, to be admitted to, for early admission to Boston University, which was, and since I didn't go to Yale [University], there was this question about where would I go to school.  And my father [George Burgess Harrison] was working at that point for, he was a building custodian.  And one of his, one of his, the clients in the building was a doctor, Dr. Madeline Fisk.  And she went to Boston University.  And she was interested in my interest in medicine, and I remember, and she lent me her yearbook, and I remember pouring over all the pictures at Boston University, and the people who were doctors there.  And I was just thrilled with the idea of going to Boston University Medical School.  And so, when I didn't get into Yale, I applied to go to BU.  And that's another thing that sort of amazes me with numbers of youngsters.  They apply to ten or fifteen different schools.  I applied to BU, and they accepted me, you know, over the holiday, for early admission.  And I went to BU.  I didn't get into medical school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 19--
Speaker 2: That's another story (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1943.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay .
Story_ID: 24442
Speaker 1: So did you choose chemistry first as your major?  Was that your first choice?
Speaker 2: No, it was pre-med.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was pre-med.  And I remember they were, we were registering for, for things, a friend who was from Massachusetts.  And we were, we were looking for the, the place for us to register, and this upper classman asked us if we were interested in thermodynamics.  And it sort of scared both of us, like, thermodynamics, like what's that (laughter).  And, but we did find the classes that we were supposed to register in.  And, you know, biology and chemistry and English and, you know, all the, the sorts of things that you did with--and, and that was a time when the, the War was, was more, I was more conscious of the War at that point than earlier because the, most of the young men our age were off at War.  But there was a group of soldiers who were studying at BU, and also because these soldiers were studying there, and the, the college at that point, you know, the town wanted, the City of Boston wanted to take it over.  So they were condemning parts of regularly.  And the girls' gym was a different place from the classroom things, and we had to go across--so our gym outfits, and everybody had to have, had skirts on top of the shorts.  So we were not, we didn't walk through the halls at the university with the shorts on.  Everybody had a skirt (laughter) that matched that went around, and ours were blue (laughter).  You'd see these groups of girls walking around.  Most of the, most of the men who were in the school at the time were soldiers.  And, and they were some, not the regular students.  They, they studied diligently because I guess they knew what it was that they wanted and everything.  And most of the regular students were, were girls because most of the boys of that age were someplace else, going to school or something.  So you were more conscious that, that there was a War going on, and it was different when, when we were first in college.
Speaker 1: Okay, like were there many black students there on campus at BU?
Speaker 2: There were several of us (laughter) (unclear).
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, there must have been six or eight.  And we, we, Gertrude and I were pre-meds and we took chemistry classes together.  And--
Speaker 1: This is Gertrude, you said?
Speaker 2: Gertrude Tecsera Hunter.  She went on to become a physician, a pediatrician working.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you wanted to be an MD, but--
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: So what happened?  Now, you got a degree in chemistry and--
Speaker 2: I wanted to get an MD.  I went to Boston University so I could go to Boston University Medical School.  At my junior year, I applied and took the test and did all that kind of thing.  And I did not get in, although Boston University talks about not having quotas, they really had a quota up.  They took in two black students in the medical school at that point.  They took in a soldier and they took in a young woman who had a Masters degree.  And supposedly, I was Number three.  And I wept all over Boston for a week, didn't see what in the world I was going to do.  I was living in the dorm at the time, and there was a woman who lived in the dormitory who, she was more mature.  She wasn't that much older than I was, but she was more mature, and she said to me, "So, now, what are you going to do?"  And I thought, you mean other than just curl up and die?  (Laughter) And she was challenging me to, to do something.  And, and I said, I'll go to graduate school in chemistry, and, you know, putting it in words sort of meant that I was going to work at doing that.  So I applied at Howard [University].  And I went to Howard as a graduate student, lived at Slough Hall.
Story_ID: 24443
Speaker 1: Now, how was D.C. [Washington, D.C.] different from Boston [Massachusetts].  Now, you grew up in Stamford [Connecticut], and you--I guess you didn't range too far from Stamford
Speaker 2: No, I didn't--
Speaker 1: --when you were growing up, from what I understand.
Speaker 2: I, I was, and I went to Boston, and then I went to D.C., and it was quite different.  It was, it was quite different.  It was, there were a lot of black people down there that I could talk to.  And it was, yeah, it was different.  And I, I got, I guess it was a teaching assistantship or something while I was, to go down there.  And I started working in physical chemistry with Lloyd Taylor.  Do you know Lloyd Taylor.  He's one of your ScienceMakers.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I was his first graduate student.  And, and, and it was physical chemistry, physical chemistry.  And I remember we had to take language exams, including a German exam.  And I hadn't really sort of, I didn't know what was going to, what was the topic or anything was gonna be on that German exam.  I had, I had studied German and that type of thing, but I went into the exam, and I, and I thought, I, I don't know what's gonna happen with this.  I'm not that facile with languages.  But then when I got into the exam, I realized that the exam that he gave me to do was the preparation of a compound that he had given in German before, and I had had to translate it in order to make the compound.  And so, and so I thought, oh, yes, I remember this (laughter).  These are the words and I remember this happening and that.  So I finished up the exam, and I, and I was pleased that that happened, that, that I was able to, to pass the language exam.  You know, I had done the French exam in high--in college.  And so I did that German exam, and, and in graduate school.  And we worked diligently there.  That was before the time of much air conditioning.  And Washington, D.C., as you know, can get hot and humid.  And to protect the instruments, at that point, they were doing things like spreading calcium chloride, calcium chloride?  Calcium carbonate on the floors to sort of keep the humidity down in the rooms that had the instruments.  They didn't care about, you know, Washington would have days in which it would be, not go below 80 degrees day or night for a couple of weeks, and you had all these things to do.  And I met some lasting friends down there.
Speaker 1: Well, who are some of the people that you met?
Speaker 2: The person I worked with most closely down in, at Howard was Gwendolyn Hackley, Hackney, Hackley, H-A-C-K-L-E-Y.  Gwen sort of took me under her belt.  She knew that while I had finished college, and I was there in graduate school, I was also young in the sense that I was young in years, I was also young in terms of, of living on my own, so far away from my family.  And, and young in terms interacting with people of my race.  So she sort of, well, I remember she first took me to a supper at, a church supper at her church.  And everybody was very nice and very friendly, and so we went often to, to her church.  And, and at one point later on, after I had gotten my degree, I actually started working there as the organist.  I played the organ there.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Tabor Presbyterian.
Speaker 1: Tabor Presbyterian.
Speaker 2: Yes, and I remember (laughter), one Sunday, I was still living at Slough Hall, and I got a phone call from the minister.  And he said, he asked me if I were coming to church.  And I said, oh, yes, I figured I'd be there early and on time.  He said, well, church is starting now.  It was the time they changed to daylight saving.  Oh, and I'd forgotten it, so (laughter) I was, and so I got to church, and our choir director who played enough to sort of pick out the notes like this was at the organ.  And so I had to go in, in front of all the church, to go over to the organ to play.  I have not forgotten daylight savings change since then (laughter).  And it was, so you see how music and science sort of all wove together in my life often.
Story_ID: 24444
Speaker 1: There seems to be quite a few scientists who are musicians and stuff.  We've met a few this week.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, tell, now the president was Mordecai Johnson, I think, right, in those days?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Was the president of Howard--
Speaker 2: Mordecai Johnson, yes.
Speaker 1: Mordecai Johnson, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't know that I ever saw him when I was down there.  The chemistry building, you know, sits down on the, on the side of the place.  And he was sort of up running things up there, and--
Speaker 1: Now, did they call the science portion of Howard, "Death Valley" in those days, 'cause--
Speaker 2: They might have (laughter).
Speaker 1: Instead of little--
Speaker 2: There was, there was a place, and it sort of went off in the place.  And, and numbers of people had trouble with the courses that were down there.  I, I--it would not surprise me if they, I don't remember it specifically, but it, it doesn't surprise me.
Speaker 1: I know they call it that now.  So I don't know if it--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh (laughter).
Speaker 1: --how old that is.  So, who were some of your professors?  So, Dr. Taylor, we talked about--
Speaker 2: Dr. Ferguson.
Speaker 1: Ferguson.
Speaker 2: Lloyd Ferguson.
Speaker 1: Lloyd, oh, Lloyd Ferguson.  This is Lloyd Ferguson who, yeah, I was at, I've seen a bust of him after we interviewed him on campus in California out there.  This is Dr. Lloyd Ferguson, okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Dr. Lloyd Ferguson.
Speaker 1: Lloyd Ferguson.  Okay, we interviewed him, yeah, just a couple of years ago.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I looked, after I heard about the HistoryMakers and the things they were doing, and they mentioned some of the--and I looked it up, and, and Lloyd Ferguson was one of your interviewees.  And then I Googled him, and discovered that he had died, I guess last year.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Yeah, we interviewed him the year of the Tsunami, the big Tsunami that hit Japan and it came across, you know.  So, we were there when that was going on.  So, okay, Lloyd Ferguson.  So he was chairman of the department or was he just--
Speaker 2: No, he wasn't, no.  I don't think he was--who was chairman?  A Russian, Cherashefky (ph.), and don't ask me how to spell that one (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, a Russian was chair.  Okay, well, what are your impressions of the department, and how did you do?
Speaker 2: I worked hard there.  They expected--well, one of the things that, that people sort of didn't realize at the time, at that point, Howard's chemistry department had been credited by the American Chemical Society.  And Boston University's department was not.  And so I had to sort keep up with the, the background of the people who were at, at Howard in terms of what they were doing.  They had instrumentation, up to, up-to-date instrumentation, not a lot of it.  And I remember that, and I remember I spent many a night sort of taking care of an experiment going on, and you'd get out in the, the middle of the night and sort of have to walk home in terms of getting there.  But I, I don't ever remember being frightened about walking through the streets in D.C. from, from the Howard campus down to Slough Hall was where I lived for a while.  And then I lived up on Princeton Place where the, the woman who had, who took students in, a place there, although when I read about Washington, you get the impression that it's kind of dangerous to sort of walk around in those places.  We never had difficulties.  I, I know we had long hours in which you had to sort of stay with your experiment in terms of getting it done.  I got most of the work done there of the year, and I spent a summer there in terms of, of both getting the, the class work, the laboratory work and the, the exams and all done there.  And I, I got my degree there in, I think I marched with the class in '49' [1949], but I had finished up the work in '48' [1948].  I should look to see which year is on the, is on my diploma.
Story_ID: 24445
Speaker 1: So after graduation, you went on to teach chemistry at Virginia State [University], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is, but this is 1949, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's about right, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, tell us now, how did that opportunity come about?
Speaker 2: As I say, I was, I was working at the, at the School of Medicine and Physiology.  And, you know, job opportunities get posted on boards and things of that sort.  And I remember simply applying for that job, talking with them about it, and they said that I had it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I went into Virginia, and I, you know, you notice I'm going further and further South (laughter), and I'm getting more and more scared (laughter).
Speaker 1: So did you have some trepidations about like going into Virginia State [University]?
Speaker 2: Did I have, I didn't really, I didn't really have any trouble, but I, I sort of thought it was going to be trouble.  I, I had never, you know, I was born and raised in Connecticut and New England and I'd gone to school in New England.  And I had made this brave step to go to the District [D.C.] and here I was going into Virginia.  And I'd heard things about Virginia.  But, no, I didn't have problems down there.  I, when I, when I first arrived on campus, and it was a Sunday afternoon.  And the, the dining rooms were closed and everything.  And I was going to, since Virginia State at that point was just, was in Ettrick [Virginia] which is just outside of Petersburg, I felt I'd walk over the town and see if I could find some place to eat.  Naive.  I'm walking down the hill, and this woman calls me.  And she asked me, you know, if I were new and everything, and I told her, yes, I was new.  And I, and she asked me where I was going, and I told her what I was--and she said, come in.  And she gave me some supper.  And she told that I wasn't going to find any place to eat down there, that evening (laughter).  And I discovered, yes, that was true.  I wouldn't have found any place, but I, I had no idea that, that, you know, you arrive in a town, especially a mid-sized town or some place, and there's always a corner place where somebody has some food.  I discovered that not only was I in the South, but I was in the rural South, I learned.
Story_ID: 24446
Speaker 1: But, and the people, you know, the faculty people were all very nice.  I was assigned classes.  I taught chemistry to Home Ec majors, to Agriculture majors, and I'm trying to think whether other--I didn't teach any of the chemistry majors.  I expected, I think, more of the students than, than they were prepared to, to give.  So that, it really wasn't that successful a time in terms of teaching because there were students in my class who didn't understand.  And I was not able to, to teach them how to, to do it.  I ran labs as well as doing the lectures.  They were quite good in terms of doing the lab and doing the manipulations, but the concepts were not what they were used to.
Speaker 2: Are you saying that they really weren't prepared really?
Speaker 1: I don't think they were prepared.  Oh, one of the things in Virginia at the time, if you finished high school in Virginia, you could go to Virginia State.  It wasn't a matter of a certain grade or test or anything.  If you were, if you finished high school in Virginia, you could go to Virginia State.  The students who were out of state had to, were admitted from, you know, they had to be admitted to the school.  And usually, they, they were, they did somewhat better than the ones who were, who were from Virginia.  I remember that, I'm trying to think of the sort--well, you would have a classroom of people who were interested in mechanics of some sort but who were not really interested in chemistry, who were required to take it because it was something that they had to do in chemistry.  And they were not that interested.  And I graded fairly strictly, and my, the head of the department, suggested that we lower the, the top of the bell curve (laughter) a little bit, which I did.  And I don't think I was set out to be a Virginian.  One of the things, the weather was never the right temperature for me.  In the wintertime, it never got cold enough to wear my winter coat that I was used to having (laughter) from up here.  While I was there, I, I went to the Episcopal church that was there.  And we had a, I had a men and boys' choir.  We started to have a choir of young people, and the night that they were starting, that we were starting, only two girls came and a whole bunch of fellows.  And the Vestry were men.  And so we decided we have a men and boys choir.  And so we thanked the two girls and I, and so at some point when the people came down from the college to the town, we, we were doing a cantata of some sort.  And they were waiting for the, for the sopranos to come in.  Of course, there were no sopranos in my choir (laughter).  They were, they were all baritones, tenors and bass.  So, I was involved with music along with, with the science there also.  And the interesting thing was that, that the, the boys who were in agriculture didn't have many dates.  And I remember one time we were having a lab, and people were back at the dorms getting ready to go out for this evening, and all the fellows who were ag majors were, were there in class in the lab, and, and I asked them why they were there.  And they said, they weren't going to the dance.  They, you know, the girls wouldn't go out with them.  The girls didn't want to date fellows who were gonna farmers in Virginia.  And the fellows who were studying agriculture were going to be farmers in Virginia, and these girls grew up in farms in Virginia, and they were going to go someplace else.  So they went with fellows who were, who were doing, studying other things (laughter).  And one of the things that was amusing, later, years later, I was visiting the family of my husband.  And his, his aunt was showing me her family pictures.  And she opened up this book, and there was this fellow who had been in one of my classes.  And she said, that's my baby, you know, and I thought, "What grade did I give him?"  (laughter)  But as I remember, right, the ag fellows did fairly well (laughter).  He had not, he was not unhappy with me when, when they came over, and we met later.  And he, oh, yes, my chemistry teacher and all.  And he, he was not furious with me at that point.  I had difficulty sort of teaching the, the people who were in the, in the general science, the concepts of chemistry and the equations and the mathematical ratios and things of that sort.  The chemistry majors who were also around the department were always sort of interested in things that were more about chemistry, and I had conversations with them, and it was--but three years of that, and when it was time for contract renewal, they were not ready to renew, and I was not ready to renew.  So I left Virginia State--
Story_ID: 24447
Speaker 1: So you went back to Boston [Massachusetts] to work?
Speaker 2: I went back to Boston.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went back to Boston for that summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, I went back to Boston, I went to, I went to the graduate school at BU [Boston University] for a year in chemistry.  But I didn't get a degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it was in '55' [1955] you worked for the Institute for Medical Research in Ridgefield, Connecticut.
Speaker 2: Ridgefield, Connecticut.  That, that was after I had moved back to Stamford.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, why did you--now, you were working on the Masters degree at BU, right, and what happened that you didn't finish?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't finish, I didn't finish the, the degree there at BU.  Oh, I got married.  And--
Speaker 1: Oh, you were working--wait a minute, so you were working on a PhD at BU, then?
Speaker 2: No, I was, I was in the graduate school, and, and it's like at Yale, you sort of register in the graduate school, and then when you finished a certain amount of work, you get a degree or the other depending on how much you've got.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause you already had a Masters from Howard [University]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I got another Masters at Yale.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, all right, well, tell us about, now, Yale, you started Yale [University] in '62' [1962] or you got your Masters in '62' [1962].  Yeah, you got the Masters in '62' [1962] from Yale.  Now--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got my Masters at Yale the same year that John Kennedy got an honorary degree (laughter) at Yale.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1962, so, now, were these two different types of chemistry that you, 'cause--
Speaker 2: Yes, one was, the, the Masters I got from Howard was in physical chemistry.  The degree that I got from Yale [University] was in biophysical chemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay, biophysical chemistry, okay. Now, did you, did you have trouble getting employment with a Masters from Howard?  I mean was that any incentive to go get a Masters from Yale or was it--
Speaker 2: No, I worked at, for American Cyanamid in Stamford, Connecticut.  And, and I, that was also the time, I had also worked earlier at the New England Institute for Medical Research while I was living in Stamford.  And one of the things that became obvious to me was that a Masters degree in chemistry by itself was like a, one needed it like an extra hole in one's head.  If a, if you were a chemist, you had the doctorate or you were a chemist at the Bachelors level, and, and people were not willing to pay a Masters degree person more than they paid the Bachelors' level, and they were not qualified to do work that the PhD did.  And, therefore, you were sort of sitting in a, it's, it's an odd position to be in, in the profession to have just a Masters.  So while I was working at, at Cyanamid, one of the things that Cyanamid was doing for some people was allowing them to go to school while they, while they had leave from their job at Cyanamid, and they were going to, to do graduate work.  And I applied to do that.  And I applied for admission to Yale, and I got admitted to Yale, but I didn't get the, the scholarship from Cyanamid.  So we decided we'd go to Yale anyway.  And so we were living in, we were living in New Haven at the time.  And when I say, I'm referring--my husband, my daughter and my son and I, the four of us.  We were living in New Haven, and he was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --a part of the Wider City Parish.
Story_ID: 24448
Speaker 1: Now, how did you all meet?  Now, we skipped over that part, but, so, let's go back.  Where did you meet your husband and--
Speaker 2: My second husband, my, the minister.  Well, I met him at the church because he came to Stamford [Connecticut] where I was living with my, my parents at the time.  And he was interested in having good music at the church, and people told him, people at the church--we were not attending that church at that point.
Speaker 1: This is Union Baptist?
Speaker 2: This is Union Baptist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That, that I played the organ, and that I was a musician, and so he decided he'd interview and see if I were interested in a job.  And so the, some of the deacons in the church came down and asked me if I would interview with him for this job.  And so I went down and interviewed with him.  And he (unclear) how I could play at his church (laughter).  I shouldn't say it that way.  He, he did hire me to, to play.  And he was from Washington.  He was interested in good music.  He, music in the, in the black church at that point was becoming very highly gospel, and he knew he had to have a gospel group there.  But he also wanted good music.  And so, and the church was large enough so that we had several choirs.  And so I was the organist, and there was a gospel choir.  I had the regular choir, and there was another, there was a gentleman who played for the gospel choir, and there was another woman who had the children's choir.
Speaker 1: Now, you're something here that--
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: --a lot of people don't know, and that's, you're talking about the beginnings of gospel music in a Baptist church, which is something that hardly anybody would suspect, you know.  I think today we think of gospel music as being part of the Baptist church, but you're saying when you were growing up, it wasn't.
Speaker 2: No, we, we, the music was from the regular hymnal.  And the music that I played was classical music.  In fact, one of the things that I played when I interviewed was, "Clair de Lune" and so there were people who wanted both kinds of music at that point.  My husband was, was interested in spirituals, but not gospel music specifically.  And spirituals were on the way of going out.
Speaker 1: Now, spirituals would be those songs composed during the slavery and post-slavery era--
Speaker 2: Yeah, "Deep River", "Deep River" was beautiful, and "Go Down Moses" and things of that sort.  The sort of things that the Fisk Jubilee Singers would sing.  Those were being pushed aside.  And gospel was taking over, and there were some places where it was classical music.  And in towns that were large enough to have basically graded church, there were churches where they did gospel music, and there were churches where they did classical music.  And typically be one or the other.  Stamford was not large enough to have both kinds.  And so they were both sort of trying to, to co-exist in the same church.  And so there were people who wanted, who wanted one kind and there were people who wanted another kind.
Speaker 1: And gospel music would be the music originated by Thomas Dorsey in Chicago, years ago, and--
Speaker 2: Oh, it was, it was more, it's more recent than that.  Thomas Dorsey's music was, was more toward the spiritual kind.  You've heard the music that they sing in, in black Baptist churches today.  Well, that was the kind of music that was, that was coming up.  And there were numbers of people two liked it and they wanted that.  And when you hear gospel choirs--
Speaker 1: And what was (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --sing, they, they sing that type of music, and that's what they do.  And, and the very interesting thing in terms of music and spirituals, there is on the island a group that sings, it's called the "Spirituals Choir", and they sing spirituals from before that, that time.  And so it's not a gospel choir.  It's a spirituals choir.  And numbers of people, I guess don't understand the difference between the two genres.
Speaker 1: This is true.  I think, and that's why I'm spending a little time on this.  But a gospel song, an example of a gospel song would be--
Speaker 2: I never did them.  I'm trying to think what (laughter), they were.
Speaker 1: It's okay, but most of this, the popular (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Most of the ones in which there's a lot of beat and a lot of rhythm and a lot of movement are the gospels songs.  And I don't have the kind of rhythm to do it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so this is how you met your second husband.  Now, I didn't even know about the first one.  Now, this is the, the second one--
Speaker 2: This is the second one (laughter).
Speaker 1: --is met in, this is before 1962 so it would be like what?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this, oh, yeah, this is 1959--'58' [1958].
Speaker 1: Okay, 1958, and the first husband, was he someone you met at school?
Speaker 2: I met him at Boston University.  He was an African, a Liberian who was studying, not political science.  What was he studying?  International, International Studies at Boston University.  And he then went to Chicago [Illinois] to get his PhD, and he went on to be the minister of education in Liberia.  And it was obvious that African women were more meek than I was, and that we weren't gonna do that well.  And so, my daughter and I stayed here in this country.
Story_ID: 24449
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, okay, you got the second Master's degree from Yale [University] in 1962.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, and [President] John F. Kennedy gives the Yale commencement address.
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.  And Yale didn't usually have anybody give commencement addresses.  And he was only gonna accept the degree if he would get a chance to address the group.  So he, he came to New Haven and addressed the group and got an honorary degree.  And they cleared the campus out, and they had, you know, security people (unclear).  And the only way to sort of get on the campus at that point was to be a part of the graduation.  So everybody who had completed enough credits to get a Masters, claimed the Masters so they (laughter) so they can go to graduation (laughter).  And my son, we, we went because we were part of, of the thing.  And I had a Masters, and they had the Masters degrees in a desk drawer some place 'cause, you know, Yale didn't pay but so much attention to Masters degrees.  In fact, you, you matriculated for a doctorate, and if you couldn't make it, you got a terminal Masters.  And, but that year, they had a whole lot of Masters, and they didn't quite know what to do with all these Masters people (laughter).  And my son was, well, it was '62' [1962], well, my son was, was born in '59' [1959], so he was three.  And he was running around the room, and somebody came over to me and said, "Is he yours?"  And since we were the only two black people in the room (laughter), I claimed him.  And they went up and they found my degree and so I could get, I could take him out of there.  And we, so we were in, with all the commotion that they were doing and everything.  So, we, we got my degree and, and--
Speaker 1: So did you have a chance to hear the Kennedy--
Speaker 2: Oh, this was after the--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --after the, after they do all the pronouncing and the whole ceremony and everything, then people leave.  And the various people who are getting the various degrees go to separate colleges, and the people who are getting Masters went to this particular office to get, pick up their actual piece of paper.  They don't have people marching across the stage at the, at the graduation.  You just sort of sit there and listen to the thing and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, so we--so, we (laughter), we got our degree and, and he was, my son was with, with me at Yale for a number of years.  We were Yale's oddest couple.  Is that listed down there that we were Yale's oddest couple?
Speaker 1: No, I'm writing it down now.
Speaker 2: He went, he went to the Divinity school, nursery school where they teach young children that people other than their parents love them.  And I went to the graduate school.  And this was during the time that Yale was not, the Yale College was not coed, but the graduate schools and the professional schools were, were all coed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so we had an interesting time in New Haven.
Story_ID: 24450
Speaker 1: Now, who were some of the professors at Yale [University] that guided you towards your PhD?  Now, who was your PhD advisor?
Speaker 2: His name was Jui Wang, and Jui is spelled, J-U-I, and Wang is W-A-N-G.
Speaker 1: So Ray is spelled--
Speaker 2: Jui.
Speaker 1: --is spelled--
Speaker 2: J-U-I.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and I don't think I ever got the Wang quite pronounced the way, 'cause it's not W-O-N-G.  It's not really W-A-N-G, but it's sort of a Chinese people can, can say his name (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and so he was your advisor--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and what was your dissertation in chemistry?
Speaker 2: I got out a copy and was gonna bring it down.  I really ought to get it and, so you can get the exact title.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, since we don't have it here, but if you can kind of summarize what it was about?
Speaker 2: It was, I worked with ADP, which Adenosine diphosphate which is an energy-absorbing and releasing molecule, which is found in fireflies to measure what was happening in the nonaqueous medium that mimicked the internal part of the cell and the effect of various alkali metals on that release, sodium potassium and lithium.  And it wasn't that esoteric.  We were, we were--it was biophysics in the sense that people were at that point beginning to work in biophysics.  They wanted to, to see what happened in a chemical environment that was close to what happened in a cell, inside of a living organism.  And you couldn't have an aqueous medium because water sort of destroyed the chemicals you were working with.  And so we worked with dimethyl sulfoxide, which has a state sort of like the ions in water, but it's not aqueous.  And working in that environment, you could get, you get reactions that were parallel to the kinds of reactions that would go on in a cell.  I, we traipsed around to find, we bought fireflies from some place just outside of Baltimore [Maryland], and we measured the light in a spectrophotometer in terms of, and measured the, the speed with which these reactions would go from no reaction, zero time and followed the curve up to see whether there was an induction period at the time before your slope went up (laughter), I'm waving my arms around like people can see the (laughter), I'm waving my arms, and I, I don't mean to do that.
Speaker 1: Now, something tells me this can be simplified more.  I don't know, but for, so why fireflies?  Were you like measuring the light--
Speaker 2: Because fireflies do have the Adenosine diphosphate, ADP, in them, in their tail.  When they light up, that is a release of the, of the ADP.  And so, you get the living fireflies, and you get the, you know, the, you can extract the ADP from the fireflies and measure the, time we say light up, in this other environment.
Speaker 1: Outside of the body of the firefly or--
Speaker 2: We didn't put the whole firefly in, no.
Speaker 1: The firefly is dead, right (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) By the time we got to what we were working with, yes, they were.
Speaker 1: You were--
Speaker 2: But we had to, we had to get them--they were alive and flashing when we got them to be sure that they had it, and the stuff was still there.
Speaker 1: So you were studying the, okay, the properties of the fireflies--
Speaker 2: We were, we were studying, we were studying what, what makes, what makes life go, but not, we weren't trying to make life.  And we were, people who work in biophysical chemistry are interested in how the biology is comparable to the chemistry.  And I can show you my dissertation (laughter), if you wanna read it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, okay, I understand somewhat of what you're doing.  I'm just trying to--so you weren't trying to find out why the light comes out, but you were studying--
Speaker 2: We were really studying the effect of various ions and especially alkali ions on the reaction.  You have the reaction going.  There are certain metals that will catalyze it and will make it go faster or slower or keep it from happening.  And we were studying the effect on, the effect of this particular class of ion.  They're all the alkali ones that run down the side of the periodic table.  And I had done my work, and had struggled and written it up on sodium and potassium.  And one of the professors on my committee, he said, "That sounds very interesting.  I wonder what would happen if you did it with lithium."  And so I was back in the lab for quite some more time (laughter) to do it with lithium.  My, my--we lived in, in New Haven at the time, and at the, I remember being in the lab when the word came over that, that President Kennedy had been shot.  And I dashed around to find my children, and my husband came home, and we were just sort of shaking like everybody.  And we drove to Washington, and we were in Washington when Jack Ruby then shot [Oswald].  And, and then we came back to New Haven.  And I can't tell you why we went to Washington [D.C], but it seemed, I don't know, that we needed to be there.  So we went to Washington.
Speaker 1: Boy, that was a tough year.  The March on Washington was a triumph, but the bombing of the 16th Street Baptist Church was, I think about two months before JFK [President John F. Kennedy] was shot.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, okay, so were you there for the funeral?
Speaker 2: No.  We came back that Sunday, we came back Monday in time to go to classes.
Story_ID: 24451
Speaker 1: Okay, and so you got your, you were awarded your PhD in 1967.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And so what happened next?  I think you were hired by Polaroid immediately.  Is that--
Speaker 2: Yes, as I was finishing up my degree, I'm trying to think of, I tried to get this straightened out about--oh, yeah, I had been, remember I told you I had been at [American] Cyanamid but I didn't get the, the scholarship from them and the leave.  And so I was interviewing for jobs, and I, one of the persons who was at Cyanamid knew that I was finishing up my degree.  And I applied for a job there, and I came up for interviews.  And I was, I was trying to--at that time, when I was finishing up my degree, there was, there was the question of working at the hospital in New Haven [Connecticut], which was--it was Grays New Haven.  I guess it's Yale New Haven now, with a woman who was, who was from, a woman PhD who was, who was there.  And I, I decided I didn't want to a PhD working in an MD environment, a woman working in a black environment 'cause it seemed more that I could sort of handle at that point.  And so I got the job at, I took the job at, at Polaroid, which was a real bitter-sweet kind of a thing to do because Polaroid was a corporation in America at the time.  Compared to numbers of others, it was a much better place to be in, to work.  But it wasn't ideal.  Women were paid less than men.  Women were valued less than men.  Black people were sort of, sort of expected to sort of accept their position, and yet, it was better than you would hear from lots of corporations around the country.  And I worked there as a scientist.  I ran an emulsion lab.  I had first started working with the, in the analytical lab there and sort of working with the people who were analyzing the various dyes and materials that went into the Polaroid product.  And then I worked in the emulsion lab where I had technicians who learned how to take the various things that were emulsified and spread them evenly on papers so that you could get a coating that would react to a chemical reaction.
Story_ID: 24452
Speaker 1: That was the '60's [1960s] Polaroid camera.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but a lot happened in terms of chemistry that was going on in there--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --in terms of, of the light hitting--the, the Polaroid emulsion was in layers, and the layers were reactive to different wavelengths of light.  And the dyes that were in those layers would, were arranged so that they, they would go through the emulsion at a certain speed, depending on what the dye was and what the layer was.  And so you had to get the layers on even.  You had to get the dyes in there right, and then when light struck it, it activated those molecules and they came through the layers and up to the top.  And then that thing on the top was to sort of coat them on the top and keep them there.  It was much more complex, I mean people would take a picture and look at, (laughter), 60 seconds, and they, Oooh, but it was, it was a whole lot of, well, people would call it magic, sort of going on in terms of the movement of those dyes and making the particular dye that would be the certain color and have the certain speed through a certain depth of emulsion.  And, and Dr. Land had a way of putting the question to numbers of different people.  How would you do so and so?  How do you get this to happen, and sort of sent them off in their labs to work on this.  And then whichever one sort of came up and was right, they would sort of develop that.  Polaroid was also an interesting company in terms of their beliefs about people having jobs that interested them and things they wanted to do.  And Polaroid also believed in further education.  And Polaroid paid for me to go to law school, and so while working there full-time, I went to law school nights.
Story_ID: 24453
Speaker 1: Now, how did you become interested in--now you studied patent law, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you--well, you know, I, it may seem obvious to some, but from you, what was your motivation?
Speaker 2: Well, patents are licenses that the government gives to someone to encourage them, putting out what they have discovered and what they've found.  And it has to be something that's new and it's useful.  And so the people [clearing throat], the people who were working on patent kinds of material are not doing the straight kinds of analytical things that numbers of chemists do where you do the same thing, you know, a thousand times in a row, like this woman who has done the, who was working at the, the drug lab, who did 43,000 tests.  That must have been horrible, 43,000 tests of doing the same thing all the time.  And they, when you're, when people who, the people who are working on, on patent kinds of things are trying new things to, to find ways to, to make something useful.  And when you work with them, when you, when you're a lawyer and you work with them, you work with people who are at the cutting edge of what's going on.  Everything is new and things are being discovered.  But in order to be a patent lawyer, you have to understand the chemistry of what they're doing, and you have to be able to express what it is that they're doing in a sentence 'cause each patent claim is one sentence, "I claim the process for" and you go on.  It might have a hundred words in it or 200, but it's one sentence, not creative.  You, I mean that's, you know, you write down what actually happens, and you have to be sure that all your sentences hang together and everything is in the proper order and that type of a thing.  And so I was working at Polaroid in the, in the research labs.  And Polaroid went through this process with, with South Africa.  You've heard about the South Africa thing?
Speaker 1: No, well, tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, let me just say Polaroid did the South Africa thing, and we can talk about (laughter) that later.  But let me tell you what happened as a result of that.  And I was directing a group of people that was working with why Polaroid was in South Africa and what they were doing.  And the group, the group, the men in the group went off to South Africa and they worked that very sort of thing, and I couldn't go because they had Apartheid [1948-1994] going on there, and they were not sort of hot on women doing things.  And so I stayed in this country.  But when the fellows came back and later I was talking to one of them.  And I asked him how he was doing, and he said he was going to law school.  And I heard myself say to him, if I were going to do this day over again, I'd go to law school.  And it occurred to me that I couldn't do it any sooner and that if I didn't do it at that point, I never would.  And so, I decided I wanted to go to law school, and Polaroid was a corporation that was going to pay for me to go to law school.  So I applied to law school, and meanwhile, I got a transfer from the lab in which I was working over to the, the patent department, so that I was working with people who were actually writing patents at that point.  And so I went to law school [Suffolk University] nights, and I worked days.  And I tell people, the housework was done by whoever wanted to push a button at doing it (laughter), and my husband and my children were both good at doing that.  And I finished law school and took the patent bar and passed that and became a patent attorney.
Story_ID: 24454
Speaker 1: So, you worked at Polaroid as a patent attorney for the-
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --rest of your time there?
Speaker 2: No, no, I worked there as a patent attorney, I found--one of the things when I was going to law school, all the gentlemen who were in the patent department were quite thrilled that they were able to teach me things.  And when I got my degree, they all became sort of, I guess they saw me as competition in the department.  And I moved over to new business development, and I worked with the division of new business development.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How long were you there before you retired?
Speaker 2: (Sigh).
Speaker 1: I was trying to picture where--
Speaker 2: How long was I there before I retired?
Speaker 1: Okay, retired in '89' [1989], right, from Polaroid, so--
Speaker 2: Polaroid, was it '89' [1989]?
Speaker 1: That's what they have here.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's been that long, yeah.  How long?
Speaker 1: So you're in new business development.  Was it ten years, five years?
Speaker 2: I would say less than ten, but I also think it was more than five, but I, I can't be sure of all that.  At the time, I was working at Polaroid, I was counselor at the Chemical Society.  I was, what else was I doing?  There were times when I was very busy (laughter), there were times when I--
Speaker 1: Well, I guess we could check that somewhere.  You might have a vitae or something with that information on it, but, now, what are your reflections about Polaroid, you know.  I mean you left in '89' [1989].  What were your reflections?  Now, they allowed you to get a law degree, but you got, but you weren't really--
Speaker 2: My reflections of Polaroid in terms of, of working there.  Polaroid was a company that gave one a lot of opportunities.  I had opportunities to study different subject matters like we studied photography.  We studied coatings.  We studied power and influence.  We studied, all sorts of things were going on that Polaroid would give you a chance to sort of be a part of and learn.  And just this, I have said I liked learning.  I took advantage of as many as I could in terms of the time that I was there.  Polaroid was like most other places in, in the sense that people don't want black women to do but so much, and when we tested things like, I, I did one of the things on laterality there, and we talked about, not only laterality, but also about what is this study that, where they discuss cerebral versus limbic and about whether people are more with their minds or with their emotions.  And they study all things of that sort, and I tested very strangely and ambiguous.  So that even for both parts of cerebral, both left and right and lower for limbic, both left and right.
Speaker 1: Is this a Myers-Briggs tests or--
Speaker 2: No, we did that too,--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --but, no, this, this was another one.  And it said that I would be good things which, if I were given a chance would do would be threatening to numbers of men.  And, and I had sort of, I, I found that to be true often.  And so I figure I've done, for my generation, in that the women who are coming after me need to push on some of those other things because it's not nice to have people not like you because they feel that you're threatening them or their position or something they do.  So I have found that as I've gotten older that I have tended to back away from some things.  I think if I were 50 years younger I would be a force to be reckoned with (laughter).  I would, there're numbers of things that I would be doing.  But, but I've seen enough people who, who look at you as if to say, we're not gonna let her do that.  And they don't.
Story_ID: 24455
Speaker 1: I want you to tell us something about the conference in 1975, the National Science Foundation's conference on the "Double-Bind", the "Double-Bind Symposium", the price of being a minority and a woman in science.
Speaker 2: Oh, '75' [1975], that was a long time ago.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think of people who were there.  I remember that there was, it was an interesting sort of a thing because the AAAS [American Association for the Advancement of Science] was very interested in what was happening to women, minorities in science.  And they gathered together these women from all over the countryside.  And there were, that was the beginning of the time that they were sort of interested and also in Asian women and their being a part of it.  And so the discussion was very much, "Do you feel that you had more of a problem being a woman or more of a problem being a minority?"  And sometimes, for some of us, that's very hard to tease out, what's, what's causing the problem.  And then other times, it becomes obvious.  You run into a group of people who don't let any women in at all.  They're obviously not gonna let black women in.  It was some discussion as to whether or not Asian women were more discriminated against than black women and the thing sort of came up, you know, look at the people who are here.  I guess they were about thirty women who were there at the time 'cause I, it was about that number of women.
Speaker 1: It was only attended by about thirty women?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they, they invited that number of women.  It, it was like a retreat sort of a thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they invited and paid expenses for the women who were there, and there were about thirty.  I remember Jewel Cobb was there, who went afterwards to California as a--I don't know whether you have her name or not.  But, yeah, it was, it was not, you know, a huge, several hundred.  It was a small, retreat group, and we--to talk about problems and issues.  And it was interesting.  I guess a couple of women, one of the women from the staff was the woman from the Triple AAAS who was, who was there, and I've run into her.  Do you know her, the name of the woman who runs the minority sort of problems of the AAAS or who did at that point?
Speaker 1: I don't.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was--the Asian women were sort of, of the opinion that they were more discriminated than the black women.  It was kind of (laughter), it was interesting to hear people at the bottom of the pie saying I was more a problem, I had more of a problem than you did, kind of a thing.  And they'd say, well, look at the conference because a lot, I take it more than half of the women there were black.  And, and I don't know how women were chosen to be there, but they had invited people who, that they knew from various places and they were there.  I don't know that coming out of that was a lot of action.  We had a chance to interact with one another, to get to know one another, and, and it was nice to know that there were other women around who were facing the same kinds of things you were facing, who were, what they were doing, and how they were working out.  And it's been interesting to sort of follow, like Shirley Jackson's career, and the things that she's done and when you run into a situation, you say, "Oh, I know her.  She was at that conference.  We were there."  But I, I don't remember there being an earth-shaking change that resulted from it.
Story_ID: 24456
Speaker 1: Okay, now, and for the record, you received your JD in 1977 from--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --from--
Speaker 2: From Suffolk [University], uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --Suffolk Law School.  And so, but in, we had sort of marched you through Polaroid before we stopped.  And you, you said you weren't really allowed to use your degree the way you wanted to, and so you switched to the new business development section of Polaroid.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And, but you, before that you wrote an article, "A Certain Restlessness".
Speaker 2: "A Certain Restlessness".  It's in the thing there.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was the essence of this and why did you write it.
Speaker 2: Numbers of, of chemists, scientists work in science, but there're numbers of other people with scientific discipline who work in other fields.  And I looked at numbers of women who were writers, who were lawyers, who were all sorts of, kinds of other things.  And I wrote up an, an article that related to the, the, a feeling that just plain doing science wasn't quite enough and that there was this restlessness about dipping into other parts of the world and what was going on, and being a part of those.  And, and I wrote a paper, and it was one of the ones that's in the, in the--that Journal of, I mean the annals of the New York Academy.  Have you had a chance to read it?
Speaker 1: No, just a, just a couple of quotes from it.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) who developed this paper that you have that you (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Oh, a gentleman named Y'hoshua Murray in the office in Chicago [Illinois].  Yeah, so, okay, and there may have been some collaboration with some other people too, but he's basically the one.
Story_ID: 24457
Speaker 1: So, you retired from Polaroid in '89' [1989], and you start a new career with the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection, EPA, the Massachusetts EPA?
Speaker 2: DEP.
Speaker 1: Oh,--
Speaker 2: Department of Environmental Protection.
Speaker 1: DEP, okay, right.
Speaker 2: But it's comparable to the, to the federal EPA.  It's the Massachusetts State Department of Environmental Protection.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about the transition to that job.  What happened?
Speaker 2: Polaroid had a big offer of people, they were allowing them to retire early.  And they were offering ten years additional onto your age or your, or your, the numbers of years you had worked there and everything and numbers of people were leaving at that time.  And I took advantage of that one because at the time, if I worked, if I continued to work until I was old enough to retire at the regular age, I would really earn no more pension than I had at that point because of this additional one that they were giving out.  So I retired.  And I'm not one to sort of sit still and do nothing.  I had the, the work that I had done in terms of getting a law degree, and I had passed the bar, I was a member of the bar.  And a woman representative, my, from my hometown, from Framingham, indicated that there were some jobs available in various sorts of things.  And she said, went over, and I applied there.  I went over to interview them.  It was different, it was law, but it, and it was not patent law obviously, but it was environmental law, and I did mainly administrative law with the department, with the general counsel's office.  So I learned a lot about how laws are made, about regulations, about what goes on in the Commonwealth by way of pollution and about clean air and clean water and the things that are going on.  And I found it very helpful to have learned that part of what goes on in terms of, of the Commonwealth.  And I stayed there a little over eight, some years, and had an accident.  My heel was broken and my jaw and my back and I was out for a long period of time, and it was very difficult to sort of get back.  And then I was gonna be going out to Worchester to work rather than in Boston.  Boston was very difficult to manage if you're, if you have problems getting around with the cobblestones and the traffic--
Speaker 1: Well, what happened to you?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What happened to you?
Speaker 2: The automobile, I was in an automobile accident.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so I decided that I was not going to go through another winter of hobbling around, trying to get out to work there on my feet.  If I'm not gonna work in the winter, I don't want to work over the summer 'cause the summer is pleasant.  So I quit.
Speaker 1: Okay, was it helpful to be a chemist and have, you know, a PhD in chemistry--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I have found that my scientific training has been very helpful in almost everything I've done.  And I found that numbers of, of these things, you know, where I dip into this, and I do that, so many of those things come together in terms of being able to do things.  And so, yeah, I found, I find my scientific work has, has been important in all of that.  And my scientific work was important in terms of my getting to be a fellow in the American Chemical Society to have it down there.  That, because that happened relatively recently.
Speaker 1: Now, this is, that's almost like the, if I'm not mistaken, it's almost like a Hall of Fame where they--
Speaker 2: They decided that those persons who have made significant contributions to the profession and to the society over years would be named as fellows.  And they named a class of fellows in, I guess, 2010 and then 2011 and this year, they named another group.  And--
Speaker 1: So you were made a fellow--
Speaker 2: A fellow of the--
Speaker 1: --in what year?
Speaker 2: Last year.
Speaker 1: Last year, okay, 2011?
Speaker 2: Eleven [2011], uh-huh.
Story_ID: 24458
Speaker 1: So, when you left the DEP, what did you, now, you're 73 at this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, did you decide to just now, kick back in Martha's Vineyard or--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, no, I wasn't even near Martha's Vineyard.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: At that point, I decided I was going to retire, retire.  And then the Town of Framingham changed their structure.  They went from a three-person board of selectmen to a five-person board.  So that at that point, there were two really open seats because they were gonna add that to the, to the town.  So I ran, and I didn't win, but I got enough votes to sort of scare everybody around the place over there.  And, all right, well, it was a nice try.  I've tried these various things, and so I tried to be a selectmen.  It didn't work, but the next year, a couple of gentlemen who were active in town came by to visit, and they said they wanted me to, to run.  And I said, I've done that, and it, it's a rough thing to do, to run.  And they said, we'll take care of all the work.  We want you to be the candidate and that they, they knew how to gather the people, do the fund-raising, set up the open houses, get the printing done and the mailings done and all this kind of stuff.  And, and so, and my husband said, you're not gonna do that, are you?  And I said, yes, I am (laughter).  So I ran for selectmen, and I won.  And I had a fascinating time.  I enjoyed being a selectman.  As I said, the running was not my favorite sort of thing to do, but I enjoyed being a selectmen.
Speaker 1: Now, this is, just for the record, this is 1999, and you become the first African American selectman of Framingham, Massachusetts.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And then when my three years were over, in order to prove that it wasn't a fluke, I had to run again.  So I ran for a second term, and there were those people, there were some people who were so negative.  And they kept talking about how old I was and all this kind of stuff, and one of the things I can say, when you're running and they put your name on a placard this big in bright yellow.  And the first time you come around a corner and see your name written out there for selectman, it's kind of [gasp].  Am I going to do that (laughter)?  But the people in Framingham, most of them knew me.  I had been active in the town for a long time.  My son had been there.  Everybody in town knew my son.  And I'd been on the finance committee.  I'd been a part of the town meeting.  I was on the commission for the (unclear) tour centennial.  I'd been active in the church there for a long time.  And my husband was well known there.  And so, people voted for me, and, and I ran on a slate of civility.  I was really interested in civility and diligence in terms of working for a town.  People were getting to the point where they were being nasty and unpleasant with one another.  And so I always called them on that.  Then when I was elected chair, we didn't have any of that.  I would tell them that we couldn't do that sort of (unclear).  I've actually had the police take a fellow out of the selectmen's meeting.  But being a part of a town in Massachusetts where we have this town government is a very interesting way of living in a town and knowing the people and their issues and knowing what people, what people in general want and need and which ones are willing to help, and which ones are simply gonna talk about it.  And I, I found it a very interesting thing.  I didn't think that I was gonna be able to run for the third time 'cause the, the money is rough.  And we found someone else who was willing to run for my spot, and so I did not run for the, for a third term.
Speaker 1: That was 2005 when you stepped down, right?
Speaker 2: Six years after the time that I won, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes, it's 2005, yeah.
Speaker 2: So, I was not gonna be doing very much of anything after that.  But then, the, our regional vocational school really was sort of ingrown in terms of the people who were there.  And there were folks who had been a part of the vocational school's committee who had been there for years and who were really not contributing very much anymore.  So we decided I should run for that.  So I ran for that, and we displaced this guy who had been there for years and years.  He was so unhappy.
Speaker 1: So this is the, it has to do with the regional vocational school.  But what's the body that you ran for?
Speaker 2: The School Committee.
Speaker 1: School Committee, okay, the School Committee.  Okay, and what's the name of the school?
Speaker 2: It's, technically, it's the South Middlesex Regional Vocational High School.  It's known as KEITH throughout the state.  It's one of the twenty-three regional vocational schools in Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you were there from, what, from 2005 to what?
Speaker 2: I left when I moved down here, and when did I move?  I moved here, I've been here now a year--I came down, this is 12 [2012].  I came down in 11 [2011].  So I gave up my seat when I left town which was in the early part of 2011.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I ran a term and a half, I think, about, for that.
Story_ID: 24459
Speaker 1: Now, you've been a volunteer in a number of organizations, some of which are here.  The American Chemical Association--
Speaker 2: Society.
Speaker 1: Society, okay.  That's society.
Speaker 2: I was a counselor for more than thirty years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, Eastern Massachusetts Junior Achievement.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, Claire Barton Camp for Girls with Diabetes.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: The Regional Laboratory for Educational Improvement of the Northeast and the--
Speaker 2: --and the Islands, uh-huh.  Where'd you get that list of things?  (laughter)
Speaker 1: From the office (laughter).  No, they do a good job.  The Association of Yale Alumni.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Unit--
Speaker 2: I was, we had a very interesting time.  One of the women who was responsible for the paper that I did, the Association of Yale Alumni, usually the, all the alumni from the college.  And then from the graduate school, they're allowed to have a certain number of delegates, and they very often don't have the delegates from the graduate school.  And she asked me if I'd be interested in doing, doing it.  And she was gonna go down, and I was gonna go down.  The woman who was editor for "Consumers Report" was gonna go down.  So we went down there, and they, all these men were running things.  And we really figured we ought to do something about that.  So at the, they, they have an assembly every year in which they talk about a phase of Yale and what's going on.  And they have these various committees and things of that nature.  And they have a big weekend in which Yale alumni come there and talk about Yale.  And so we ran the next year to be on the Board of Governors.  We had to wear these big, the things that they put on horses when they win, they're these great big rosettes, things, and we had to wear those around during the whole thing.  And then they had the voting, and, of course, all the women who were delegates at the place, I suspect voted for us and some of the fellows figured, you know, they'd give some of the ladies a vote.  Anyway, we all won, and (laughter) the men were quite taken aback by that.  It was interesting.  I went to, I went to Australia with the Yale alumni a couple of summers ago.  That's the first time I rode on a camel.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you served on the Yale alumni association Board of Governors.
Speaker 2: Board of Governors, yes.
Speaker 1: For, how many years do you think it was?
Speaker 2: A term.  I don't know, three years or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you just left that or--
Speaker 2: Well, they have elections in other things.  During the time that I was on there, I did run one of the assemblies.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay, you're a member of the Unitarian Universal Association, as well--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and the League of Women Voters in Framingham.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The organizations that you're naming, are not the ones that I would first of all put down in terms of things that I was doing (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, who have we left out, now?  Who, what are the organizations that we--have we left something out or which ones would you highlight?
Speaker 2: Well, I did have, I wrote down a--
Speaker 1: Oh, oh, now, you've got a mic on now.
Speaker 2: I'm all attached.  I had the list of the things that I was part of in the Chemical Society, the things that I was part of as part of Boston University, and the Honorary, the organizations that were there, things I was part of at the UUA in the first parish, and the Guild of Organists, and at Yale and the sorority, Della Hartman Day, and Ace down here.
Story_ID: 24460
Speaker 1: Well, give us, you know, kind of a run-down on things you're proudest of, that you've been involved in?
Speaker 2: You know, people ask me about that, and I have on these things here, I have fried marble.  My son made me that fried marble when he was in nursery school.  And I put it on with my keys.  And he, he often, he--whenever I get a chance to wear it, he sort of looks around and wants to know if I still have it because he brought it home to me wrapped in a little piece of green tissue paper for Mother's Day that year when I was at, at Yale, and he was going to the nursery school there.  And I said, yes, I'll wear it son, and I'll put it on there.  I have always been interested in a wide range of things.  I've been interested in things that have to do with education, with religious and moral life.  I've been interested in things that have to do with music.  I have, of course, been interested in science and what that does for all of us.  I've been interested in the arts, and how they, how the arts speak for that part of us.  And from the time that I was, well, from high school on, when I first went to college, my, my father told me not to join everything that I was invited to join.  And every year, my father would say, I had to get out of everything except three organizations.  And by Thanksgiving, I was, so I ended up with Scarlet Key at Boston University which is the, the student, the student leaders organization there.  I believe that if you're part of a profession, you should work with the profession.  And so I joined the Chemical Society as soon as, when I finished Howard [University] because Howard--remember I told you that Howard was certified by the Chemical Society as, for giving degrees.  And so I, I joined the professional society, and I'm still a member of their professional society, although I'm emeritus at this point.  But I worked, I was thirty three with the council.  I worked on most of the committees there, the, the committee on committees, which my husband thought was funny.  They got so many committees they have to have a committee on them, with women chemists.  I worked with the nominating committee.  I worked in our local section here in Massachusetts.  And I've been, I've chaired that, which was another thing I needed to thank Polaroid for because in terms of being chairman of the section, it takes a lot of time and doing.  And my boss at Polaroid was kind enough to say, yes, he thought it was a good thing that I could do that.  And so they allowed me enough time to, to be chair of the section for doing that.  And I've gotten awards for some of those things.  And I, and I actually chaired one of the ACS National Committees.  I chaired the Committee on Professional Relations when, when Mary Good was president of the Chemical Society.  She named me as a chair of one of the committees.  And this is an organization.  Earlier, the women who were chemists sort of went to the meetings, and they used to have breakfast and fashion shows.  And we were part of the women chemists committee.  We figured we really needed to do more than that, and we were gonna--they changed the name to the Women Chemists Association.  We worked diligently at getting the society to recognize women chemists as full-fledged chemists.
Story_ID: 24461
Speaker 1: And when, we were finally, when Mary Gordon was elected president of the whole organization which has, I guess they have 165,000 members at this point, Mary named me as the chairman of the Professional Relations Committee.  So I got a chance to dabble in that also.  And it was science, but also, you know, it's not science, if you're doing professional relations for a professional organization.  It's, it's a different sort of thing.  And that was one of the reasons I was looking at the, at, you know, the invitation from The HistoryMakers to be one of the ScienceMakers.  And I thought I've been a scientist, but I don't know that I have been a ScienceMaker in the sense that other people work on a particular project at work and do that and get grants to do that and that type of a thing.  But I've used my science in numbers of ways.  And at Boston University, I chaired the Academic Affairs Committee for the Board of Trustees, and I've been a member of the Board of Overseers, and I'm a member of the School of Medicine at Dean's Advisory Board.  I got an alumni award from there.  And I got--I'm a part of the Collegiums of Distinguished Alumni, and as I told you about Scarlett Key, and I'm a  Golden Terrier.  And a Golden Terrier--
Speaker 2: That would be BU.
Speaker 1: Yes, (laughter).  I told, I saw some of the people there this last fall, a couple of weeks ago when they were having homecoming, and they asked if I were a Golden Terrier?  I said, I've been a Golden Terrier for 15 years.  And (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Boston University Terriers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and with the UUA, I've been, I've been a part of the president's council.  That's a group of UU's from around the countryside that are, are chosen to advise the president of the organization, and I don't know whether you know Jim--Bill Singford (ph.)?  Bill Singford was the president of the UUA, and he, he was a black man.  And he was one of the ones, you remember when Massachusetts got the same-sex marriage sort of through, he was the one who married the people who were a part of that.  He has been leading the, he was leading the organization at that point.  And when, at one point, I was saying that when I was little, if someone had said that I would grow up at a time when, when the president of my country and the governor of my state and the president of my denomination which is mainly white, were all black men, I would have told them, they were dreaming, that I never would have thought that I would have seen that day, and I did.  There, there was a time when that was so, and I was, I was pleased, very pleased.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, did--
Speaker 1: And other things, I was dean of the Stamford, Connecticut Chapter of the American Guild of Organists, and I was on the evaluation committee for the National Medal of Technology.  The president gives the medal for technology, and they give one for science and the persons are evaluated for those awards, and then we'd go down to Washington and the president gives the awards to these people.  And I was on the evaluation committee.  My son went with me one, one year for the, for the presentations.
Story_ID: 24462
Speaker 1: Now, we were talking about some of your volunteer activities.
Speaker 2: Yes, we didn't mention the YMCA.  I was part of the National Board of the YMCA.
Speaker 1: No, now, when were you involved in that, National Board of the YMCA?
Speaker 2: I don't know, when Solomon Cousins was president of the (laughter) National Y, and I don't remember what year it was, but it--
Speaker 1: Now, was he black, Solomon Cousins?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, he was not.  I belong to a sorority, Alpha Kappa Alpha, and I'm a Golden Sorer.  And I've been down here on the island, I do chair the Della Hartman Day, and I am a member of the Board of the Mess of the Martha's Vineyard Dems, which is really partisan.
Speaker 1: Now, this is--okay, well, ahead, I'm just--
Speaker 2: And I'm also on the, the Board of the ACEMV.  ACEMV is Adult Continuing Education here on the, on the island [Martha's Vineyard].
Story_ID: 24463
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I want you to go back to Della Hartman Day--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and tell us who Della Hartman was and why this is so important, and what happens on that day.
Speaker 2: Oh, Della Hartman, a woman of ability, a renaissance woman, very interested in wherever she was, and interested in arts and the people.  She knew everybody.  She had met people from all over.  She traveled around the world.  She was a faculty member at West Virginia State [University].  She taught art, and when she retired, she, she got, she came down here to Martha's Vineyard to live.  And she, everybody on the island knew Della and the sorts of things that she was interested in pushing, the cultural things, the, the evolvement of people, the social things, educational things.  And she wrote a column for the "Martha's Vineyard Gazette".  She took over the column after Dorothy West had written it for a number of years.  And her students from West Virginia State had a day to celebrate her here on the island.  And they, they brought their exhibits of their paintings and all to honor her, and we had a big party.  Della died shortly after that, and Della's daughter who is Andrea Taylor who worked for Microsoft, and I wanted to--Della's daughter and I wanted to find a way to keep Della's spirit alive, and to, to bring to the island those sorts of things that Della wanted her, the culture, the arts, the vitality, the interest in people, lifelong learning.  And so we established a Della Hartman Day.  And the selectmen in Oak Bluffs designated the day as Della Hartman Day.  We founded a committee to do this.  We decided to pick out just a couple of the things that she was interested in 'cause Della was interested in lots of things.  And so on the fourth Saturday of July every year, we have a day dedicated to those arts that Della was interested in.  And we've had speakers here.  We've had musicians.  We had, as I say, Sonia Sanchez was here a year ago and Nikki Giovanni was here this last year.  Rose Styron has spoken, numbers of people.  And the people on the island rally around and are part of this.  We have exhibits at the library, and a reception at the library.  Usually, because we have a Della Hartman calendar, and the artists who submit their, their photography on the theme of "Savor the Moment" have put together for a calendar which we have at that.  We didn't have a calendar this year.
Speaker 1: Now, is that something that Ms. Hartman said a lot, "Savor the moment".
Speaker 2: "Savor the moment" was her, her favorite, yeah, in fact, we have a recording on the, on her, when she'd answer her telephone.  And it says at the end, "Savor the moment", and her daughter often plays it at the end, "Savor the moment".  And that, that was, that was Della's saying.  And, and that's what she did with her life.  She savored every part of it, and it showed in, you know, she was a vigorous, lively person that everybody knew and loved.  And there was a contest at the high school, an essay contest.  The youngsters, they get a chance to write, and the newspaper, the local "Martha's Vineyard Gazette" publishes the winning essays each year, and the museum sponsors at the lighthouse a concert by the Spirituals Choir.  Della was a lighthouse keeper at one point.  And she painted also a picture of the lighthouse, the East Chapel House, where there was chocolate brown to avoid being spotted so easily from the Atlantic Ocean if the submarines were to come over here and look.  And, so we had this big day, and we usually have a cake, and we have, we have a tent in Oshawa Park.  And people come.  We would really like to have people sort of--there're expenses always that go with it, but we don't charge people any money.  It's a gift to the community if people want to give some money, that's fine, and we would be pleased to have it so we wouldn't run into the hole all the time.  But it's, it's a gift for, for the community from Della.  And you must come back on the last Saturday in July (laughter) and, and come be a part of Della Hartman Day.
Speaker 1: I'd like to.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yes.
Speaker 1: I'd like to, so thank you for that.
Story_ID: 24464
Speaker 1: Now, any other volunteer activities you wanna talk about?
Speaker 2: What else do I do volunteer?  No, I, you know, I, I go to the senior center, and they're teaching me how to play Marceline, and I never did that before, but I, they were teaching it, and so I wanna learn it.  I'm also taking a class in conversation Brazilian Portuguese because they say if you keep your mind going, you can stay young.  And I'd just as soon stay around.  There's fascinating things going on in the world, and I really wanna sort of be here for, for some of them.  I've told my grandson who is ten that I really want to be there the day he becomes an Eagle Scout.  He's, he's a Cub, he's a (unclear).  He's just becoming a boy scout this year.  And he, he's going, he wants to be an Eagle.  And I told him I wanna be there when, when he gets to be an Eagle Scout.
Speaker 1: Well, this is a good time to tell us about your family.
Speaker 2: My family that's here on the island?
Speaker 1: Or elsewhere, I mean your children and your husband.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, my, my daughter died.  And she had one son who is my grandson, the oldest grandson.  And my, my other child is my son, Yule who lives here on the island.  And his wife is Kimberly Cartwright.  Her father was the Martin Luther King Professor of Religious some or the other, at Boston University.  And, and they, they met, they both went to Boston University, but they, I don't think they met there.  They have three children, Christine, who is our quiet, delicate little girl.  She's fifteen.  Her name is Christine Elizabeth.  We have Danielle Esther, who is named for Yule's grandfather and for Yule's grandmother, but her name was the same as mine.  So she's Danielle Esther.  And, and we have Trip Hopkins who is Thomas Yule Hopkins III.  And he's, he's Trip, and he is the Cub Scout.  He's ten.  And we all live here together along with our dog, Leroy, Leroy Brown (laughter).
Speaker 1: Baddest dog in the whole--
Speaker 2: Baddest dog (laughter) in the whole (laughter), and you notice how bad he was (laughter).  And we live here on the island.  We really love living here on the island, get involved in a lot of things.  My son has, has been here about twelve years.  He's only lived full-time here on the island for a couple of years because he did work in Manhattan.  And now he's, he's on the island.  Everybody in town knows him.  And he works with the boy scouts.  He was involved with affordable housing.  And he works with the church.  And my daughter-in-law has a business, a spinning studio, bicycle spinning.  And it's called "Ohm of Motion" because it's more than just movement.  It's also a part of where you are in your head while you're exercising your body.  And so it's Ohm of Motion.  And she has started this business several years ago at this point.  Kids go to school.  They do very well in school.  They get embarrassed if I talk about their grades.  And we're just, we're here, and we enjoy living here and Yule has always wanted to work with young people and to do things for them and he does that.  He's a, as I said, he was Cub Master of the island for, for a bit.  And I guess that's all about our family.
Speaker 1: Now, did your parents get a chance to see you accumulate all these degrees and--
Speaker 2: My mother was, was there when I got my PhD, and she was in a wheelchair, and my brother brought her down and rolled her in.  And so she was able to see her daughter get a PhD.  And so, my father did not live to, to see that.  So, yeah.
Speaker 1: I imagine he was excited about your becoming a chemist.
Speaker 2: Oh, she was excited about all the things that I--both my parents were just very enthusiastic about the things that I wanted to do.  And they, they never said to me, you can't do that.  They'd say, try it, go ahead, you know, that type of a thing.  They, they were encouraging in that way, and in that sense.  And, yeah, and they were, they were proud.  They were proud.
Story_ID: 24465
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Some of my hopes.  Well, I hope that when we have bright leaders like Barack Obama that we can listen to the sort of things that he is doing and that we can become more than just entertainers or just sports figures, and we can encourage our young people to want to be more than just entertainers or more than sports figures.  And I hope that we all remember one another when, when we get to be somebody, in that term that people use, that we can remember that there're others of us who have desires also and want things for their children, and that, and that we can be encouraging of one another, that we not--was it Booker T. Washington who said, we were like crabs that when one climbed up, the others would reach up and pull 'em back in.  We need to get over that.  We need to be helping one another out of the barrel and into places where we can go.  We need not to be jealous of one another, and we need not to feel that if a person makes a decision about what it is they wanna do with their life, that we should resent their doing that.  I do have one prejudice that my son teases me about and numbers of people--I think my father would have teased me about.  And I don't know, maybe I don't wanna sort of say it the world (laughter).  But so many of our young black men are not keeping up with what they need to do.  And they're going to prison, they're being, the old word was "no count" or they're marrying white women.  And when so many of them are taken out of the pool, it means that black women who are struggling to do things often don't find a mate.  In my sorority, which--I never had sisters, but I, I have sisters in my sorority, and I see these bright young women and the things that they're doing, and the young black men are not there to compliment them.  And I know that there're some things you can do on your own, but there's some other things you need somebody to back you up and to be with you.  And numbers of things that I've done, I could not have done without my husband being strong there for me.  And some of these women will never have that, but I also believe that people should marry who they love.  And so I'm not gonna say to, you are black man, therefore, you may not marry a white woman or a yellow woman or a brown woman, marry whom you love.  But it would be nice if, if there was some way that our young black men would remember that these black women need their moral support also.
Story_ID: 24466
Speaker 1: When you look over everything you've done to this point in life, is there any major thing that you regret or would go back and change if you could?
Speaker 2: That I regret, that I would change?  I guess there're some things I would like to add to or make different, but I--one of the things that I, that I've found is that if you're, if you're open to life, and you say, yes, a lot, all sorts of interesting things happen to you.  So, if you go back and change something, then something else would not have happened, and so I, I would hesitate to say that I would change anything, although my life has not been all that happy.  I don't know what I would, what I would change.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Like, if I were to be given another complete life over here again, and know what I know now, there are lots of things I would like to study and read.  I would, I would--that was one of the things about being in the academic affairs at the, at the university.  You read about these professors who were joining the faculty, and the things they were teaching.  And there's a world of stuff that sounds, I would love to be a college student again (laughter).  But that's not gonna happen so I'm not gonna be able to do that.  But in terms of changing things, most of my life, when I wanted, when I wanted to be a physician, I think that if you had said to me, if I could go back, would I have been admitted to medical school?  I would have said, yes, I wanted to go to medical school.  But looking at my whole life in terms of what has happened to me, I don't know that that would have been the best thing for me.  I don't know how I would have reacted when my first patient died.  And other things, you know, you say, I, I wanted so and so, and I didn't get it, I didn't get this.  And you say, well, if you had gotten it, what else would have been different and, and you say, "Well, if you had to do it over again, would you have preferred to be a black--a white man"?  Well, I don't think so.  It hasn't been the best in the world being a black woman, but there are things that I know that I haven't gotten because I was a black woman.  And in a group, I stand out, and people noticed that I was there, and people will listen to some of the things that I say.  And if they said, would I like to have changed and had lots of money?  Yeah, I'd love to have millions of dollars.  I could think of lots of things I could do with millions of dollars.  But, but I haven't had it, and it has not been the determining factor of my life.  And I didn't end up being a, homeless on the street, you know, in my old age.  I, I don't fear that I'm going to be pushing a cart around with all my belongings in it or something of that sort.
Story_ID: 24467
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Legacy, my son.  I think, I'm very proud of him and what he does, and how he raises his family.  I'm very proud that, that my husband and I were able to give him the kind of a home to make him the kind of person he is.  Yeah, my son.
Story_ID: 24468
Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: There's a flip answer to that.  I'm not gonna give it to you.  How would I like to be remembered?  How would I like to be remembered?  [Pause] It's, it's hard to think of a formal thing other, you know, that flip answer came into my mind, and it's hard to put it out and think of something that somebody would write on a tombstone or something of that sort.  I'd like, I guess I would like for people to, to feel that, that I loved people and I tried to make a way for some of them to do that which they wanted to do.
Story_ID: 24469
Speaker 1: That photograph was taken for the Girl Scout Leading Women Award.  It's taken in Framingham [Massachusetts] under one of these old apple trees on the Framingham Common.
Speaker 2: About what year is this?
Speaker 1: Is there more information you want?
Speaker 2: Do you know what year, or close?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Or about how old you were then?
Speaker 1: It was, well, it would have been about eight or nine years ago, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Go ahead and tell us--
Speaker 2: Oh, that one was taken because I didn't have any photographs of myself, and they wanted to put something in the "Nucleus" or the "Chemical Newsletter" that we had.  And that was taken about, oh, 10 or 11 years ago. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: Okay, and there's a picture, oh, that was a picture, oh, that was the one that was in there.
Speaker 2: That was taken in the law library at Polaroid Corporation by the gentleman who came doing a series of photographs of people who were, called them Living Legends in Black.  They were usually not entertainers or, or sports people, although, I guess one or two are in there.
Speaker 1: He concentrated on (unclear)
Speaker 2: It was displayed at--
Speaker 1: -- piano playing, (unclear) entertainer--
Speaker 2: That's T. Yule Hopkins when he was a big Baptist minister.  That's my son's father, and my grandson's grandfather.  That was picture was taken before I knew him. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: At the time, he was a minister of a Baptist church in West Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: My great grandmother who was a slave, part Indian.  She was a mute, a death mute from way back in my family.
Speaker 1: So this was taken in South Carolina?
Speaker 2: I'm sure it was taken in South Carolina.  And I don't know what tribe she was a part of.
Speaker 1: Was it around the turn of the century or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
