Story_ID: 210080
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Oh my God I've been, ma'amed (laughter).  [HistoryMaker] Jessica B. Harris, okay, J-E-S-S-I-C-A, middle initial "B" as in boy, H-A-R-R-I-S.
Speaker 1: All right now what does the "B" stand for?
Speaker 2: Aw, that's my secret I've not sure if I want history to know.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have any nicknames or anything?
Speaker 2: As a child I was called Jesse.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And not at home because my father's names was Jesse [Brown Harris], I'm actually named for my father, and I guess I'll fess up, the "B" is for Bertha, which is my mother's [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris], mother's first name but it gave me the same initials as my father whose middle initial was Brown.  So he was JBH and I'm JBH.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 18th, 1948, Queens General Hospital [Queens Hospital Center], New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's the hard one, certainly by profession a teacher--I'm a professor at Queens College, [City University of New York] CUNY in New York City.
Speaker 1: Okay, you're an English professor, is that what you were saying?
Speaker 2: I'm a professor of English currently, I started out teaching French and my training and background are in French and theater.
Speaker 1: Okay and your--just briefly what are you--you're famous as an author, can you expand on that?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Famous, you know--c'est beaucoup dire.  I'm a food historian by avocation, and some might translate that as simply saying, I'm a nosey broad.  What I do is I look at the food of Africa and how it has evolved in this hemisphere, this hemisphere being the so-called Western hemisphere, west of what is always the question, but all of those things are, are part and parcel of what I do, but food is simply and I, I keep telling people this and I need to start writing about it as opposed to talking about it, food is one of the several and different ways that I look at those connections, 'cause it really is all about connections.  I'm also interested in the religion, the dance, the dress; you know dress in the larger sense from jewelry to what have you and all of those other things that take place between east and west or between motherland Africa and new land, new place.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's the hard one, the 18th of August, 2004.
Speaker 1: Okay and where are at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts], we are sitting in the living room of what was my parents' house, but now that they are ancestors, what is my house, which is at 63 Tuckernuck Avenue in Oak Bluffs [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 210081
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five People magazine-ish type, lightweight questions we always ask and they only require and deserve a short answer. And the first question is, ma'am what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, good Lord, okra.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay and basically because it's totemic, it speaks to what I do and who I am.
Speaker 1: Okay do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm not wearing it (laughter), it's blue.
Speaker 1: Yeah well you've got some turquoise on.
Speaker 2: I have turquoise, yeah turquoise, turquoise and the shoes are definitely glow-in-the-dark blue.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I may be a winter person, I always get jazzed up in the fall, it's probably the academic calendar, so I would say fall-winter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Winter baby.
Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well I'm in one of 'em.  I have what I call my--like my triangulations, they would be Paris [France], which I go to once a year, New Orleans [Louisiana] where I have a house, Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] where I am every summer, New York [New York] where I was born and raised, [State of] Bahia [Brazil] where my soul is at home, and Senegal and Benin in West Africa and then that is a long answer to a short question (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. The last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Goodness, not that I'm aware of although recently I've been catching myself being terribly valley girl and going "cool" a lot, so I hope (laughter) that's not it, you'll probably hear it as, as I speak.
Story_ID: 210082
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family history. I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Jesse Brown Harris] side of the family, and we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Okay, my mother's full name was Rhoda Alease Jones Harris.  R-H-O-D-A, A-L-E-A-S-E, J-O-N-E-S, H-A-R-R-I-S.
Speaker 1: All right and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 18, 1913.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what do you know about her side of the family, I mean how, how far back first of all can you trace the ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: I can do pretty--well I mean sure that there are people who have actually researched it, but for someone who has not researched it I can do fairly well.  I found a letter that my maternal grandmother, whose name was Bertha Philpot, B-E-R-T-H-A, P-H-I-L-P-O-T, Jones, had written to me when I was one or two years old that traced the family history, and it was a gift, I mean it was an absolute gift because I didn't know it existed and I found it when I was well into my forties, and in it she talks about David Cobbs, C-O-B-B-S from Patrick County, Virginia who was given a piece of land to farm.  With that land and farming that land he brought his freedom, and he also purchased the freedom of his wife, Amy [ph.] Cobbs.  It doesn't really give a particular timeframe, but it would seem that it was fairly early on because it doesn't talk about him purchasing freedom of the children so that somewhere along the line emancipation obviously must've come.  He was my great-great-grandfather on the maternal side.  Following that he had at some point and I've never researched it so I really don't know whether she was eldest, youngest, or where on the list, a daughter whose name was Rhoda and Rhoda married Samuel [ph.] Philpot.  Rhoda, I don't know very much about.  Samuel Philpot I know and it's the same spelling and the common ways of spelling it.  Rhoda is actually--was the name of my mother, she was named for her grandmother.  Samuel Philpot had been a house servant in Eastern Virginia.  Philpot is a big Eastern Virginia name and apparently there was even a governor Philpot in Eastern Virginia at some point.  He use to claim that he had worked for [President Abraham] Lincoln, or not worked for Lincoln but served Lincoln at table at something which would have meant that he would've been relatively older at the time of emancipation.  I have at home--home being New York City [New York, New York]--a picture of him when he was 101 which was in 1930-something, and wish I had it to show to you.
Story_ID: 210083
Speaker 1: So he [Harris's great-grandfather, Samuel Philpot] was born in the 1830s?
Speaker 2: In the 1830s yeah, so he would've been a grown, full grown man at emancipation.  One of the things that was interesting about the story that my grandmother [Bertha Philpot Jones] tells is in the letter she says that she always wishes that she had listened to him and had written his story because apparently his mother had been sold south when he was two years old, and the mother's last words to him were, "Be a good boy, Sammy," and those last words impelled and compelled him to go into the ministry and the letter from my grandmother is amazing because it's written in these sort of wonderfully old-timey biblical terms and she says that he preached but he never pastored, meaning that he never had a church, but he was the beginning of what in my mother's side of the family includes at least one minister in each generation, sometimes two and three.  So that's my great-grandfather on my mother's [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris] side.  My mother, my [grand]father on my mother's side was Arthur Dempsey, like Jack Dempsey the fighter, Arthur Dempsey Jones, and his wife was Bertha Philpot Jones.  So this actually has been through the matrilineal line in that sense 'cause it's my mother's mother and so on and so forth; but he was--I guess I can say an orphan in the black sense, in the sense that he wasn't raised by his immediate parents, he was raised by other relatives to adulthood and there was some kind of friction somewhere along the line.  He left and he went to a--ended up at a seminary in Virginia and that's where he met my grandmother.  The thing that's interesting about them is that they--it all sort of is rudimentarily connected with food, in the sense that they met in the cafeteria, in the sense that you know Samuel Philpot worked as a house servant at table in the sense that David Cobbs had land and grew obviously foodstuffs of some sort if not for sale to the public, 'cause I suspect it might have been tobacco or something like that to put on his own table.  Arthur Dempsey and Bertha Philpot--Arthur Dempsey Jones and Bertha Philpot Jones were my grandparents on my mother's side and they were the parents of my mother Rhoda Alease who was one of ten who lived to adulthood, and he was a Baptist minister and that was certainly--provided for (laughter) interesting times in the family 'cause with ten kids, a Baptist minister and leading up into the [Great] Depression, it was touch-and-go much of the way, but as an only child and as a child listening to the tales of my mother's growing up it always sounded like a sort of combination of you know, 'Life with Father,' and 'I Remember Mama,' and 'Cheaper by the Dozen' (laughter) and all of those sorts of things coming together because, with the siblings they would put on plays and you know recite things, I mean my mother could recite poetry.  My grandmother could recite, you know, Paul Laurence Dunbar at the drop of a church program and sort of stuff like that so there was all of that kinda stuff, and then there was me, and I.
Speaker 1: Okay well that's a wonderful history I mean to have that and to be able to.
Speaker 2: Oh it was truly, truly--
Speaker 1: And to be able to link all that up.
Speaker 2: --a gift.
Speaker 1: That, that really takes you back if you know, probably to I guess--
Speaker 2: Probably turn of the--
Speaker 1: Eighteen hundreds [1800s], yeah 1800.
Speaker 2: Eighteen hundreds [1800s].
Speaker 1: Yeah maybe 1800 at the furthest.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum.
Speaker 1: And 1810 at the latest I guess or (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and what's even more wonderful about it is that my grandmother actually gave me the county--Patrick County, Virginia which is outside of Roanoke [Virginia], it's just a matter of going to the courthouse and trying to connect the dots, which I do plan to do very soon.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I, I'll be doin' that I promise okay--
Speaker 1: All right, all right.
Speaker 2: You don't have to get on my case too much.  Now what's wonderful about that letter is about two days later I found another one which was from my father's [Jesse Brown Harris] half-brother, who was also my godfather, which talked about my father's side of the family.  So it was a like a combination of having, you know, a diptych, it was both sides of the coin--
Story_ID: 210084
Speaker 1: Now before we get to your father's [Jesse Brown Harris] side of the family, I just wanted to ask you, are there any stories that are passed down through your mother's [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris] side of the family that are, you know, of note?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly the one about Samuel Philpot [Harris's maternal great-grandfather] having served [President Abraham] Lincoln, you know, at table is a family story.  Another one would probably be how he died, and I have, I am not the youngest, but pretty much the youngest of the cousins who are still in contact, and it's interesting because every once in a while we'll say, "Did you hear that, did you hear that?"  So we kinda confirm it among ourselves that it was a family history, but apparently he was a spry old 102 or 101 or whatever he was when he died and I don't remember that off the top of my head but he certainly lived past one hundred, and had been I think at that point living with my mother's family, so with his daughter [Bertha Philpot Jones], and had made friends and everything else and apparently walked around town one day, blithely said, "I'm not gon' see any of you trifling negroes anymore, so I just came by to say goodbye," and he proceeded to cuss out, not really cuss out, but certainly say that to all of his friends as he walked around and greeted them in the course of his afternoon or whatever, came home turned his face to the wall and died that night.  So that kind of real sense of prescience of his own death was, was quite strong.  He is, I mean it's--kind of a classic thing for most people of you know color to talk about their Indian [Native American] ancestor, but if you see him in a photo and I think I have a photo that I can show you of him, he very clearly has some kind of Native American cast if you will to his face, his features and everything else and that whole connection might be the coming together of, of the African in and the Native American in him, and just that ability to know, you know, this is the night, and I'm going, I mean to have that kind of control over one's self.  So I think that's the main story that got passed down.  I intend to see to it that my nieces and nephews or actually third cousins or what will they be?  First cousins twice removed I've been told is what they actually are--will know about him and see his picture, but also that they will know the sad part of the story which is, I cannot imagine anyone growing up having lost a mother at age two, seeing her taken away and having her last words to you be, "Be a good boy," that's astonishing, you know.
Speaker 1: That's tough to think about.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's just that, just, you know, rips you into shreds.
Story_ID: 210085
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna get to your father's [Jesse Brown Harris] side, but I wanted to ask you about your mother's [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris] growing up.  Did she have stories about growing up?  You said she talked about it as if it was like a--
Speaker 2: Oh, there were all kinds of things, I mean okay, one of the stories that she always told was of--now Toby [ph.] has arrived, my oldest child.  She had this family of folks, she was--let's see it was, I'll see if I can do this for you: Lallege [ph.], Arthur [ph.], Dorcus [ph.], Rhoda, Bertha, okay that's--Clara [ph.], Ethel [ph.] and I may have that wrong somewhere in there, but I think it's, Bertha, Clara, Ethel, Gregory [ph.], Dorothy [ph.], Zenobia [ph.].  Gregory, Zenobia, Dorothy, actually, so that was ten of 'em, it was a house full of folks (laughter), plus he was a minister so there were all of the parishioners that would come and go and do what all and whatever, and so what happened was they would put on all kinds of shows and my grandfather [Arthur Dempsey Jones] was--certainly my mother always felt she was his favorite, whether or not she was we will never know which is probably a very good thing, but he had so many kids he didn't really necessarily even know them by name (laughter), I mean he knew who was who obviously, but he wasn't necessarily sure of it.  She always spoke of him as being off in the study, learning Hebrew.  He apparently had a rabbi who came in and who taught him Hebrew, and she remembered some words.  I remember once I was with her at Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], in Philadelphia for a culinary thing and she met somebody and--who spoke Hebrew and she said, "Well what does this mean"?  And the woman corroborated and confirmed that it fact it was Hebrew and that it was biblical and it meant, I don't remember what.  So he had been learning Hebrew so he could read the Bible in the original.  So he was that kind of an intellect and a scholar, you know bless/cursed with these ten rowdy kids.  So apparently one day they decided to, to fool him and my grandmother [Bertha Philpot Jones] had you know sort of very long hair, and would comb it, and back in those days they use to have a little hair bowl and you would put the combings in the hair bowl and I guess you'd make a rat or you'd do something and so they made a wig for my Uncle Arthur out of these hair combings and dressed him up as a girl and he sat by the door and apparently at some point grandpa, or papa as my mother called him, came home and you know sort of greeted the girls, "Hello daught" 'cause he would call 'em "daught" not daughter, "hello daught" and they just got hysterical 'cause of course it was Arthur in the wig and the girls dress so that was the kind of stuff that they would do, but I mean, you know, they would put on, I think there was, in fact I think somewhere at home I may even have a record of this and it's Ma Jones and her, and I can't think of it, my grandmother being Ma Jones and her (laughter) performing children or something like that but it wasn't quite that.
Story_ID: 210086
Speaker 1: --They [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris and her siblings] actually performed?
Speaker 2: No, they never did--
Speaker 1: Oh they--
Speaker 2: No, this was just for them, for themselves, for maybe a church, something like that, but it was never anything professional at all.  I mean my [maternal] grandmother [Bertha Philpot Jones] was pretty astonishing, I knew her very well, well not very well, but I knew my father's [Jesse Brown Harris] mother [Ida Irene Harris] certainly better, but I knew her well and she was a woman of no small, what shall we say, will.  Following, raising all of these, you know, ten kids and losing two, she went back to school, became a beautician, worked as a hair dresser and at some point became very active.  She'd always been active in National Baptist Alliance [sic.] and things of that sort, and I may not have the terminology wrong because I haven't really.
Speaker 1: National Baptist Convention [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Convention--well back in the '50s [1950s] they sent a delegation, or I guess every year they'd send a delegation to the World Council of Ministries [World Council of Churches] or something like this and this was to be held in the then-Holy Land, and she got herself together and raised money and got herself to the Holy Land.  So she actually rode airplanes and undoubtedly crossed the Atlantic [Ocean] before any of her children and I will never forget seeing her off.  One of my father's brothers was a--worked for customs, U.S. Customs and he had you know certainly arranged to you know have the way smoothed for her.  So we went down, she went to Europe on the SS America and I remember that, I don't know, I must've been about six or something like that.  We went down to see her off and you know I remember they use to--at that point they had first class and what was it, first class and cabin class and tourist class or vice versa whatever and so we looked for her in you know tourist class and no Bertha Philpot Jones, in cabin class and no Bertha Philpot Jones, and madam had gone first class (laughter), so she went to Europe first class on the SS America, long before any of us, and came back with all of these incredible tales about radar ranges, microwaves before they existed, which they had on the ship and somewhere at home I also have her, her travel diary and I'll never forget her description of flying, because she flew at some point fairly low over the Holy Land, and I remember she talked about it, how it looked like a quilt with embroidery on it and the trees looked like the little embroidery knots and stuff, so she was a poet in her soul.
Speaker 1: About what year was this in that she went on--
Speaker 2: This would've have been in the mid-'50s [1950s].
Story_ID: 210087
Speaker 1: How did your mother [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris] grow up and what was her childhood like and--
Speaker 2: Well she grew up in this big ol' house [in Oak Bluffs, Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts]. It was always a kind of sense of--well certainly being the minister's [Arthur Dempsey Jones] daughter conferred a certain kind of stature in the community, but being the minister's daughter of a family that had ten kids and not a whole lot of mouths probably made that a contradiction in many ways, to certainly the financial means of the family.  My mother's family was organized in a very interesting kind of way.  My grandmother [Bertha Philpot Jones] and grandfather had decided that what they would do would be they would place all of their resources in the educating of their oldest two children, my Uncle Arthur [ph.] and my Aunt Lallege [ph.], and that those children would then aid and assist and help and carry forth in, in sort of trickle-down theory of education (laughter) if you will, but for whatever reasons Uncle Arthur decided he would much rather have fun and be out.  He wanted to be jazz man and didn't work and then he became a minister and I don't know that he ever had any other profession per se.  My Aunt Lallege was actually, to the best of my knowledge, the first black woman to graduate in pharmacy from Rutgers [University, New Brunswick, New Jersey], and I know that she worked briefly as a pharmacist in Virginia, so she certainly had her license and things like that.  She opted out as well and decided that she really didn't like that and became the organist for her father's church, 'cause she was given the piano lessons and all the rest of that.  The other children kind of suffered because it didn't trickle down necessarily, my mother being in the upper quadrant if you will (laughter) of the family--did a lot of, a lot of different things.  She, she worked a lot, I mean between the babysitting and the domestic work and stuff like that, and didn't do a, not a whole lot of domestic work, she actually went to Pratt Institute [New York, New York] and was a trained dietician so she went back in the '30s [1930s], I think she was I the class of '30 [1930]-something I can't tell you exactly, and she--I remember I had to stay out one year because Uncle Arthur got into some kinda, something, kerfuffle and, and the money that she'd saved had to go get him out of the kerfuffle and so she was, you know, off to work for someone. She worked for a couple of families in Plainfield [New Jersey] which is where she was from, Plainfield, New Jersey and, and at some point briefly worked for the Huntington Hartford family.  I said earlier I'm the official archivist.  I, I guess by dent of being an only child of people who save stuff, I have letters from my father [Jesse Brown Harris] to my mother from the Huntington Hartford period and I'd--I don't know when or where, but I do remember that.  It's one of those funny things because you never know what you're going to glom onto in your life experience, and at some point their every day--I guess it was silver plate, was a pattern that she liked so much and so she purchased that when she was getting ready to get married and that was our good silver for most of the years of my childhood until you know she got sterling at some point and I have that now, I eat off of it every day and so that's kinda, you know one of those eight zillion connections when you know how you got it, that's another kind of thing, I ramble on.
Speaker 1: Okay, but now well, let's so--your mother became a dietician (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Okay she became a dietician.  She ultimately worked down at Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina] I think for one semester is where she learned how to cook and eat grits under Willa [B.] Player, which is the name that people who knew Bennett will certainly know.  She decided that she really wasn't to the dietician born if you will and gave that up, came back to New York [New York], married my dad, and began to work for the--well at some point city government in hospitals briefly and then ultimately as an administrator secretary up through the ranks to become ultimately an administrative assistant at Queens College [New York, New York].
Story_ID: 210088
Speaker 1: Tell us about your father now, and his side of the family, can you give us his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Sure, my father's full name was Jesse Brown Harris, real simple, J-E-S-S-E, B-R-O-W-N, H-A-R-R-I-S.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 29th, 1913 although he would probably shoot me, the world was not supposed to know he was a little bit younger than my mother [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris].  He was born in Napier, Tennessee, N-A-P-I-E-R.
Speaker 1: Napier, Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Tennessee which is--my understanding is that it that it is a small town--not my understanding, I've located it on a map, it's a small town outside of Nashville [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about your ancestors on that side of the family?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, we have, we have another letter right now right?
Speaker 2: We have another letter now, right, and that letter talks about Merendy Anderson, M-E-R-E-N-D-Y.  Merendy and Tom Anderson if I'm not mistaken, and they were slaves in or at least, no it's--they I think.  I don't know that they were together, but they were both from Upcountry, Georgia and following emancipation went basically up the [Old] Natchez Trace [Natchez Trace Parkway] to Napier.  She had a daughter, and I mean it gets a little confused there, it needs a little more untangling than is in the letter, 'cause I've also found a family Bible which complicates things somewhat, but she had a daughter whose name was Harriet Hornbeak.
Story_ID: 210089
Speaker 1: --We were talking about your father's [Jesse Brown Harris] ancestors?
Speaker 2: Okay, well it was Harriet Hornbeak and then Harriet Hornbeak had a daughter named--
Speaker 1: Oh, how do you spell Hornbig [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Hornbeak.
Speaker 1: Hornbeak?
Speaker 2: H-O-R-N-B-E-A-K.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she had a daughter named Ida, whose last name I am actually not sure of it because I don't believe that it was Hornbeak, she may have had two husbands, anyhow Ida became Ida Irene Harris who was my grandmother, my father's mother; and dates of birth I can't give you okay?
Speaker 1: They go back from slavery times, all the way (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah, yeah it goes back to slavery on both sides so.
Speaker 1: So before 1863 you would guess and (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah certainly Merendy Anderson before 1863, and the interesting thing is that my Uncle Bill [ph.] who is also my godfather who is the one who wrote the letter says that he remembers her as being the jolliest person he ever knew, given her enslaved background and what was it, there's, there's a wonderful turning of phrase that he said, "She did this, she did that and she'd never refuse a toddy", so I thought okay (laughter) she's, was a, apparently a spry old girl and, and you know had a good time and you know made the best of the lot that she had.  With all of that there was this move up to Napier [Tennessee] and outside of Napier and--Napier and Centerville, Tennessee are those, those two kind of things that are the words that come up that get conjured with, on the side of the family.  He mentions that she had orchards and grew stone fruits, so apricots, cherries, plums, peaches, you know, probably peaches more than anything else peaches and cherries, and, and sold those.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that I've always found kind of fascinating.  Her daughter didn't quite fare as well.  My grandmother was kind of buffeted, she married a gentleman that she obviously loved dearly at a very young age and he died, and he was the father--would have been the father of my Uncle Bill and my Uncle John [ph.] and then she remarried a man who was older than she was by a fair amount and had three children by him--my father was the oldest of those three.  His name was Miles Harris and he was a hardworking man, he--but I mean, but at that point you know things are gittin' tough and tougher, and the [Great] Depression is getting ready to come on, certainly World War II [WWII] is--World War I [WWI] rather is, is occurring pretty much around the time of my father's birth 'cause my father was born 1913, so things are beginning to spiral economically and, and in the South and the Great Migration.  The two half-brothers who were older migrated first, both of them worked in kitchens, they were cooks of one sort or another, Uncle Johnny had a pot that fell on his head, is one of the family's stories and he was unable to work so he lived with his mother for most of the time after that, and Uncle Bill basically worked as a chef for many years, and I remember he was the first person who ever fed me rabbit so you know he cooked as long as I knew him pretty much.
Speaker 1: Was he a chef or (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I don't know where he cooked. I never really knew where he cooked and I mean when I say chef I don't know that he ever was the head of the kitchen but he always worked somewhere in the preparation of food in a restaurant setting of some sort, and then the back three would have been my father as the eldest, my Uncle James [ph.] who was the one who worked for [U.S.] Customs and my Uncle George [ph.] who was kind of the official family ne'er-do-well.
Story_ID: 210090
Speaker 1: It's kind of interesting because the two families [Harris's maternal and paternal ancestors] together juxtaposed, kind of, Virginia South and then the more, you know, the whole kind of would be patrician shabby aristocracy Virginia South kind of thing, and then the more hard scrabble Tennessee--I think that my grandfather was maybe my grandpa Harris now, Miles Harris was perhaps from Alabama which then brings both of the Souths into play which is something that's interesting 'cause they certainly took place that way on the plate, you know very different cooking, very different food, very different traditions, very different way of I mean you know my father's [Jesse Brown Harris] family was Pentecostal Church of God, my mother's [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris] family was Baptist you know with the grandfather [Arthur Dempsey Jones] who was learning Hebrew so, sort of interesting dichotomies.
Story_ID: 210091
Speaker 1: Tell us about your father's [Jesse Brown Harris] growing up.  Did he talk about growing up in Napier [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Okay my father didn't talk an awful lot about his growing up and some of it was because it wasn't easy.  It was very difficult, he came to New York [New York] as a--I guess a pre-teen.  He had been dirt poor, I mean in really, you know, the classic southern tales about going down to the railroad tracks and one brother is knocking the coal off the top of the car, and the other brother is picking up the coal, and things of that sort were the things that sort of escaped, never something that he would tell you, but it was always something that you kinda could get.  Came to New York as, I guess pre-teen and lived at.
Speaker 1: Did, I'm sorry, did--
Speaker 2: Go 'head.
Speaker 1: Did--he have a chance to go to school much in the South?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm getting there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm getting there--a one-room schoolhouse.  I actually have one of his--'cause I told you, archival child--one of his report cards from back there and also a picture of him in the schoolyard with all his little schoolmates and it's you know, one class, one room southern school house.  At some point when he gets to the city, his father works as a rag and bone man, which is interesting, and he has always been a dreamer.  That was what he did, that was who he was. He always was the one who had the aesthetic sense.  So when they were in Brooklyn [New York, New York] he lived in Williamsburg [Brooklyn, New York, New York], he would walk across Brooklyn 'cause he really couldn't afford the trolley fare to go to Erasmus Hall High School [Brooklyn, New York, New York] because Erasmus Hall first of all was one of the preeminent high schools, but secondly it's a high school that looks like a school should've looked as far as my father was concerned.  It has a quadrangle, it had you know the sort of granite correlated you know academic gothic look to it and he went to Erasmus Hall High School and it was only literally, literally when he was dying, about ten days before he died that my mother [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris] and I both discovered that the price he paid for going to Erasmus Hall was that Erasmus Hall was not, not giving academic diplomas to too many black folks, if any.  And so he had gotten a general diploma which meant that he could never matriculate for college but all of my youth my father took night courses in college, I mean he never matriculated for a diploma of any sort because he couldn't you know, but what he did was he took Russian lit [literature], he took psychology.  I'm a child who was threatened with Heathcliff--not the boogeyman, I mean it was always about Heathcliff, and the moors and 'Wuthering Heights' [Emily Bronte] and, you know, that kind of stuff so he was someone who read voraciously, had a memory like a steel trap and was just pretty extraordinary on any number of levels you know and certainly the intellect of the family.
Story_ID: 210092
Speaker 1: Well my parents [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris and Jesse Brown Harris] met in Brooklyn [New York, New York].  My father, taking those courses, had taken some art courses at Pratt [Institute, New York, New York] and my mother was studying at Pratt as the dietician and apparently on MacDonough Street.  She looked out the window one morning and apparently said to a neighbor or something, "Mm, who is that fine looking young man going down the street" and he was daddy and they met and I don't know how specifically they met, but you know the black community you know of Brooklyn at that point in time was only so large, and certainly those folks that were you know trying to do things like--I know there was a little theater group and they were at homes and stuff like that was probably even smaller and so they met and got together and discovered that they liked each other and then apparently had an extremely long engagement (laughter).  My mother use to tell me these stories of the engagement ring with the miniscule diamond which would've been kept in, in his grand--in his mother's [Ida Irene Harris] china closet and would come out and be shown (laughter) periodically and then go back into the china closet, so it took 'em a while to finally get together but they did and then they were married for nine years before they had me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so you know.
Speaker 2: And so are you the oldest?
Speaker 1: I am the only.
Speaker 2: The only?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, I'm well worth the wait I might add, but yeah, yeah I'm it.
Speaker 2: That's something.
Speaker 1: Which is how I get to be the official archivist.
Story_ID: 210093
Speaker 1: What did you father [Jesse Brown Harris] do for a living?
Speaker 2: My father worked first as--well I mean he did a whole lot of things, but for my lifetime he worked first as a personnel officer or I, I don't remember which one came first--placement of personnel.  He was a personnel officer and a placement officer for the VA [Veterans Administration] hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he was a government employee.
Speaker 1: Okay and now did they always have a place on the vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] or did they--when did they start--
Speaker 2: Oh that's, that's a whole another story, that takes us back to Tennessee and my father being the dreamer, and it's fascinating because I don't know if it--my father didn't spend that much of his life in Tennessee, so what happened was he had a teacher who came up here for one summer vacation and she must've been--it must've been pretty early on, 'cause it must've been in the '20s [1920s] at least, if not the teens [1910s] and went back and told her class about this magical summer place that she had been and my father you know sort of--this is what he did, he would just soak up things like a sponge I mean and forty-plus years later, my father whose Sunday major habit was reading the real estate section (laughter) of the New York Times, found a little ad that was probably that big in the Times that said, you know, "House for Sale, Martha's Vineyard" and the irony is that we used to take our summer vacations in East Hampton [New York] and this all sounds, oh, so terribly, terribly grandiose at this point in time, but East Hampton was potato fields you know and some nice houses and Sag Harbor [New York] had been started and there were the black folks that lived in a place called As You Rest [ph.] and you know there were areas--I don't know whether we rented or--I know we rented a house and went out there for a week or two every summer.  I've got baby pictures in East Hampton, you know or three-year old, four-year old pictures in East Hampton.  Well so he said to my mom, "Rhoda, let's not go to East Hampton this year, let's go to Martha's Vineyard."  "I'm not gonna (unclear) anything in Martha's Vineyard why do we need to go to Martha's Vineyard," blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  They had what I call the Rhoda and Jesse Road Show.  So she acquiesced and up we came to the Vineyard.
Story_ID: 210094
Speaker 1: --We rented a house [in Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] right down--not rented a house, actually rented a room with a lady named Irby Jones [ph.] and Irby Jones had a big ole' house right on the water of Canonicus [Avenue] and Seaview [Avenue].  It's actually walking distance from here, and I remember Irby Jones said, "I'll meet you at the boat," 'cause you know you'd come and you'd get on the ferry and then come on across on the ferry.  "I'll meet you at the boat; I'll be the lady in the turquoise pedal pushers," and so she met us at the ferry in turquoise pedal pushers and drove us to her house and she had a daughter whose name was Winirby [ph.], her husband's must've been Winston [ph.] or something 'cause that--you know how do our name thing, so I mean I remember 'cause we use to joke 'cause Winirby was the official sort of lady of their all--of doing all and so Mrs. Jones's mom would say, "Winirby" and Winirby would say, "yes'um" and proceed to do whatever her mother had asked her to do. And we stayed with them for about a week and at some point in the course of that week, my father [Jesse Brown Harris] reached into his wallet and came out with this little teeny, tiny ad from the New York Times (laughter) of a year prior that he had been carrying around for a year and he said, "Well Rhoda [Alease Jones Harris], let's go see if the house is still for sale", and so my mother is, "Oh yeah sure, okay let's go see."  So we drove out to Menemsha [Massachusetts] to find the family by the name of Flanders [ph.] and Flanders is an old island name down here and in fact and indeed the house was still for sale as were many of these houses around here, around this, this area near the tennis courts and--so we got the key and came over to look at it.  It was, I think it was long before 'Psycho' came out, but it kinda looked like the house in 'Psycho' (laughter).  I mean it was painted with you know dark, dark green trim and things were falling, and there were two and three beds in each of--this is a deceptive house, there are five bedrooms.  Where we're sitting currently was part of a big ole' wrap-around porch because what it is, is it's a house from the campgrounds that got moved off the campgrounds, the house actually dates back to around 1870s. So you know we went through the house.  It was supposed to have five bedrooms, we could only find four.  So it's like I was about eight and I'm ready to go now, it's like I'm scared, I'm tired, I--outta here, but of course I'm the only child there's nowhere for me to go 'cause my parents are there (laughter).  So we are peeking along and then my mother gets in the kitchen and she looks back up and she sees a glimmer of light--there's a back stairway, and we went up, they went up the back stairway (laughter) and I sat at the bottom and discovered the fifth bedroom and actually there--there's a small door in one of the bedrooms that leads you down a step and then you're in the back bedroom. And so my father, you know he's like "Um, yeah".  Now, he's done all he wanted to do, he's see it, he's found the house in Martha's Vineyard, it's, it's okay, but my mother takes over at this point.  That's how they always did it and she's like, "Oh, but Jesse look, and if we do this and if we do that and see that light there?  This house has good light, and if we don't do this and we do that financially we'll be able to"--so anyhow.  To make this extremely long story somewhat short, we had booked passage on what was going to be the original, Maiden Voyage of the [SS] France which was going to Brussels [Belgium].  We didn't have a clue at that point in time, but it was going to be the Belgium World's Fair [sic. Brussels World's Fair; Expo 58].  I don't know what the year was, but it can, it's.
Speaker 2: Belgium World's Fair?
Speaker 1: It's the '50s [1950s], it's the late '50s [1950s], and we got our money back, put it down on this house and bought his house for the royal sum of four thousand dollars.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you're about ten, eleven years old?
Speaker 1: I was eight.
Speaker 2: Eight?
Speaker 1: Eight when they bought it, nine when we first got here, so many moons have passed, you know, and so I've been coming up here for well, forty-eight years.
Story_ID: 210095
Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Wow. 14705 111th Avenue [New York, New York] is the house I was born into, if you will.  My mother [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris]--it had a sun porch and my mother had, I guess it was, I'm gon' call it a night-blooming cereus, one of those plants that bloomed at night once every seven years or something like that, and I remember being allowed to stay up to watch it bloom, okay. I remember my fifth birthday party getting a briefcase from a cousin, and a quilt that I still have from my father's [Jesse Brown Harris] mother [Ida Irene Harris], that's dated 1953 so that, yeah that would've been five, my fifth birthday.  Bits and snatches--we had Haitian exchange students, grown women who came to live with us, Madame Dejoie [ph.] and Mademoiselle Bournie [ph.], I remember them by name, I remember sort of turquoisey, sort of art deco wallpaper, my mother had these decorating moments and so one wall of the living room had black wallpaper on it with, it wasn't turquoise it was chartreuse, chartreuse and silver designs in it and I think in, in one of the bedrooms there was a hunting scene and then in my bedroom there were decals with penguins, things like that, so I mean I have bizarre and strange memories.  I mean some of them reinforced by photos.  I mean I remember getting Mary Hartman costume from what was it, there was a circus show, I can't think of the name of the TV show.  At some point as a very young child I was.
Speaker 1: Sealtest [Dan the Muscle Man]--'Big Top' is that the one?
Speaker 2: It could've been something like that, but Mary Hartman was a majorette, I got the little majorette boots with the thing and the whole nine yards.  I was on 'The Merry Mailman' with Ray Heatherton you know at some point in time as a young, young child, and our neighbors were the Seriannis [ph.] they were Italian and they made wine all the time, there was always this little hand coming through the grape arbor in the back yard with, with a bottle of the homemade wine that you know my parents kind of put in punches every Christmas (laughter) after they had accumulated lots of it 'cause they didn't drink it, but it made great punch.  You know so splashing in a wading pool and flag, slate, different colored slate flags in the backyard, kinda thing.
Story_ID: 210096
Speaker 1: What are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay well, those flagstones in the backyard [in Queens, New York, New York]. Smells, my mother [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris] was a baker in the sense that I mean that if she, if we ran out of bread and she didn't have bread she'd make biscuits.  So I guess the smell of biscuits on Sunday morning, and that is the continuum, that I don't necessarily remember from my small childhood but I remember from my more immediate adult childhood if you will.  Smells, smells, I don't really connect any smells with my mother's house, but my grandmother [Ida Irene Harris] watched over me, my father's [Jesse Brown Harris] mother now a little bit in, in the summers.  I mean 'cause my mother was pretty adamant about that, she did not want me raised by my grandmother, not for any negative reason one way or the other, but just because you know she wanted me to be enriched if you will.  So I would go to afterschool programs and ultimately went to the U.N. School [United Nations International School, New York, New York] because it had an afterschool program, but my grandmother lived in the South Jamaica projects [South Jamaica Houses, New York, New York], which was relatively fancy back then and it doesn't necessarily have the connotation that projects do today.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the point, that's a good point because when people hear projects there's a stigma but when they were first created--
Speaker 2: Oh no my parents left--bingo!
Speaker 1: When they were first created they were transition housing, but they were--people, people had jobs in the projects and were striving.
Speaker 2: Oh, jobs, jobs, my parents.
Speaker 1: They were well taken care of too from what I understand in Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: My parents left Brooklyn [New York, New York] and living in all those fine Brooklyn brownstones which they didn't own but where they had a floor that they rented or whatever, to move to the projects they were among the people who opened the projects.  So they were brand new, freshly built, never been lived in before.  Oh, honey the projects of South Jamaica projects were preeminently elegant, I've got pictures of my mother's riding club, The Equestrians [ph.], out of the project kinda thing you know.  My mother during World War II [WWII] when my father was away lived still in the projects and had a grand piano, baby grand piano in the projects, you know I mean the projects were a very different place.  Now by the time I come along they're not quite there, but they are certainly not what they are today. And one of the things about apartment living that always sort of would strike me and shock me is, I remember smelling other folks' dinner, so you know the smell of other folks' dinners on the stairwell. And there was a particular clank 'cause the treads going up to my grandmother's house, 10656 159th Street didn't know I'd know that, ooh!  Phone number, Jamaica 33048, but the metal on the treads would make a sound, you know, your heels you'd hear it kinda clang as you would run up the stairs and she lived in apartment 2B I think, and so all of those things were probably some of the sounds, you know, of my childhood.
Story_ID: 210097
Speaker 1: --And then I, you know, I mean I come from this crazy dichotomy.  I had an extraordinary amount given to me because I was an only child, but I was always very conscious of how extraordinary it was.  I mean I've never really kind of been comfortable in a way with the--you know some of the Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] crowd who take it all as a matter-of-course in their you know sort of--their due.  So it's fascinating to me to begin to think about, you know, those contradictions, and certainly the projects is a part of what grounds me, 'cause you know I remember, I remember those ugly, stinky barrels you know, staying outta the barrels 'cause the guys would always you know grab the little girls and drag 'em into the barrels and stuff to play and what on and what not, but I've always been a reader.  I was very much my father's [Jesse Brown Harris] daughter in that sense but I, I was you know I was the reader, I was the one who my grandmother [Ida Irene Harris] literally forced downstairs, "Go play with the kids" it's like "but I don't wanna play with those kids".  "Go play with the kids", you know kinda thing.
Speaker 2: So did, did you get, get a lot of books from the library (unclear)?
Speaker 1: It was a library thing, I was a 'Childcraft' kid, you know my mother [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris] made sure I had stuff to read, she bought me that 'Childcraft' collection and we read it.  I got bedtime stories from mom and dad you know, all of those things were very much a part of my growing up, and they wanted to be sure that I had the best.  I mean the, the family joke among the three of us and that was the family was that I went to nursery school in a limo [limousine] (laughter), because that was how the nursery school picked up the kids.  I went to a nursery school called D and B Nursery [ph.] and they'd pick up their students in a limo.  So the limo would come and pick me up, and at D and B, gosh I haven't thought about this in years, but they had one of those old fashioned crank record players that they would play.
Speaker 2: A gramophone.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a gramophone exactly, exactly, and then following that I had--what is suspect is probably one of the seminal experiences of my life which is, I went to the U.N. School [United Nations International School, New York, New York].  I am the first non-U.N. connected person to go to the U.N. School.
Speaker 2: Now is this where you started grade school?
Speaker 1: This is where I started pre-K.
Story_ID: 210098
Speaker 1: Tell us about the U.N. School [United Nations International School, New York, New York], you went to pre-K?
Speaker 2: Pre-K, pre-K, I mean I went to, I guess what--pre-K nowadays, I went to nursery school, kindergarten, first grade through junior high school.
Speaker 1: At the U.N. School--
Speaker 2: At the U.N. School.
Speaker 1: How did--how is that accomplished, I mean how was that done?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) How the heck did I do that?
Speaker 1: An ordinary person can't do that I mean you would think--
Speaker 2: Yes you can, yes you can 'cause I was an ordinary person.  My mother [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris] was working at Queens College [New York, New York] at that point in time the U.N. School had just moved from Lake Success [New York] to a place called Parkway Village [New York, New York], and Parkway Village is in Queens [New York, New York] right off Union Turnpike off, Grand Central Parkway.  It's still there and, and I went and took some kinda little IQ [intelligent quotient] test and became the first non-U.N. related child to go.  It had just kind of opened to the public as a private school, and so gosh.
Speaker 1: What was the official name of the School?
Speaker 2: The United Nations International School.
Speaker 1: Okay and what time--when was it that you started?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh!
Speaker 1: Would it have been '52 [1952], '53 [1953]?
Speaker 2: Probably a little--let's see, I don't know what age people start school but I would have been that or younger.  Say people start school at around four or five now, five?
Speaker 1: Yeah kindergarten starts at five.
Speaker 2: At five, okay so it would have been '53 [1953].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So '52 [1952], '53 [1953] somewhere around there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I went through 1961 so, it as much as anything else probably was one of those formative things that, you know, made me who I am today.
Speaker 1: I would guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but--it was extraordinary I mean I--when I was there Ralph Bunche's kids were there--and I remember Ralph Bunche had a son, I--say kids, I don't remember any others other than their son, but the son was always getting five hundred lines (laughter) for doing something wicked, you know.  We were graded every way known to man 'cause one of the things that happened as it was graded on--I mean you--we had different systems so we had the French system which would be one through twenty, and then the Danish system which would be one through ten, and then the English system which would be something else and so it was, it was kinda wild and every year the school would add a grade.  That was how they accommodated the delegates' children until they finally got the full school built.  So I mean I was there when they were adding a grade and I was two grades behind the initial class, and I think that's part of what paved the way for the cooking stuff in many ways because it certainly gave me an ease and a familiarity with people from other cultures.
Story_ID: 210099
Speaker 1: The great apocryphal [HistoryMaker] Jessica [B. Harris] story, which is probably not so apocryphal, is that in kindergarten my best friend was a young man, little boy named Samir [ph.] and Samir didn't speak a word of English, and I didn't speak a word of Arabic, but we had our own little language and I would go over and say, "Samir (unclear)" and Samir would go "Jessica (unclear)," and we were just best friends and, and you know that was it and (laughter) that's how pretty much it's been with me and languages and people from other cultures ever since.  There was a kinda core group of us, there was me, Jennifer [ph.] and Susan Unsworth [ph.], who were twin girls, Danewta--from England--Danewta Malinowski [ph.] who was Polish, Vasunun Irian [ph.] who was Indian about whom I will say a bit more later, Elliot Roberts [ph.] who was English but from Wales as opposed to from England, Ruth Brand [ph.], and that was--you know we grew up together.  We were--I mean my parents [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris and Jesse Brown Harris] didn't live in Parkway Village [York, New York] and they all did so they were probably in and out of each other's houses considerably more than I was, but those were the birthday parties, those were the, you know, the first crush on the same poor boy, the one or--out of three poor benighted boys that were in the school (laughter) at all kinda thing, but, but those were the people who, you know, who were the bedrock of my existence and, and it's very interesting because I, as--I look back on it and the whole kind of question of reflecting on things that you really haven't thought about which is certainly this is, I'm very good at episodic friendships, I'm not necessarily very good at sustained ones.  I say that to say Shika [ph.]--I wrote a book called 'The World Beauty Book[: How We Can All Look and Feel Wonderful Using the Natural Beauty Secrets of Women of Color,' Jessica B. Harris] which came out in 1995.  Shika who had continued to live in the United States after many years returned and married and lived here and had two daughters, bought the book.  Her daughter was reading the book, saw all of these names, said, "Mom, I think you know this person," 'cause we had long since lost touch, comes to New York [New York], looks at the bio, finds Queens College [New York, New York], calls me and we start talking as though we'd seen each other yesterday.  I'm good at that kind of friendship.  The prolonged (laughter) one you know we get sick of each other, we go our separate ways and I never find you again, but that kind of bounce, bounce, bounce may hark back to the U.N. School [United Nations International School, New York, New York] because people came and went and it was a sort of kind of ebb and flow of folk.
Story_ID: 210100
Speaker 1: It certainly accounts for my travel gene, my friends are always saying, "You're always traveling, you're always traveling", but as a child my parents [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris and Jesse Brown Harris] used to tease me because I would say, "Let's go to Poland for the weekend," because the people who worked for the U.N. [United Nations] got home leave every second year.  So every other year they would go home for vacation in the summer, and I always wanted you know, well we were--home was where I was [New York, New York], so I remember once when I was fairly young my parents took me, I must've been about seven, eight, took me to Canada and particularly to Montreal, Quebec and we just had such a grand time because I was away and first of all--and also back in those days people weren't used to seeing, they might be used to seeing black men or black women but, you know, your basic black nuclear family, mommy, daddy, baby was pretty interesting (laughter), so you know people were like, "Oh, look at that" kind of thing, and so that was the travel gene and that was the first thing.  We lived near [John F.] Kennedy [International] Airport when they called it Idlewild [Airport, New York, New York] and you know we'd--Sunday outing, you'd go watch the planes take off and come down, that was a--that used to be a big thing, and I remember joking to my mom and my mom reported to me after I got older, "You used to always say, 'next time I come I'm gonna bring my suitcase,'" 'cause I thought all you had to do was bring a suitcase, so I mean once I got to be adult and traveled a lot 'cause I was the travel editor for Essence for a while, my mother said, "Now you don't ever go to an airport without bringing your suitcase" (laughter) kinda thing, but all of it in some strange way threads back to the U.N. School [United Nations International School, New York, New York].  I speak French--I'm really bilingual because of the U.N. School, I mean people always assume that my parents speak French.  My mother always wanted to speak French but growing up in Plainfield, New Jersey, which she swore 'til the day she died was worse than you know, deepest Mississippi.  She remembers being told, "Rhoda, you'll never speak French--black people's lips are too big, sit down", and so one of the--
Speaker 2: In school?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, in school in front of everybody else in the class.  One of the things that she made sure her daughter did was speak French, which I do, you know.  So it's been this sort of--'cause I keep taking about this interesting progress but certainly the U.N. School was a major building block in it--
Story_ID: 210101
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that stood out as mentors to you at the U.N. School [United Nations International School, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: At the U.N. School strangely not really. I mean the teachers were mentors to everybody but nobody sort of particularly said, "You, under this wing," no.  I've never really had mentors in that strange way.  My parents [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris and Jesse Brown Harris] were my mentors.  I remember teachers, Mrs. Finney [ph.] was the only black teacher for many, many years.  A teacher that I remember and it's interesting I was just listening to NPR about the news about Venezuela.  My kindergarten teacher's name was Pica de Bassero [ph.]--Pica du Bassero [ph.] and she was Venezuelan and I remember one year she went home and brought back for all the little girls in the class a little charm bracelet.  I mean it was you know--precious gifts from beyond the American borders kinda thing.  I had a Mrs. Unachuck [ph.] who was Canadian, I remember, actually I've blocked on her name which is probably a good thing--
Story_ID: 210102
Speaker 1: --As the school [United Nations International School, New York, New York] opened more and more to Americans, you know racism became more and more of an issue and particularly as it moved into Manhattan [New York, New York], it moved from Parkway Village [Queens, New York, New York] into Manhattan to 70th Street and 1st Avenue where it stayed before it moved to where it currently is which at Waterside [Plaza, Manhattan, New York, New York] and I've never even been into the new building--to the new place we always use to talk about, "When we move into the new building, when we move into the new building," I've never been to the new building so there it is. But I remember by that time I was interested in theater and things of that sort and having, you know, school plays and we did all sorts of programs and pageants and you name it and having one of the teachers say, "Well, you know, you'll never be an actress because you're black, so what--you need to think about what else you're gonna do," and my parents [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris and Jesse Brown Harris] you know going in and ripping her head off, and you know that whole kinda thing that you know kinda came to the fore as the school opened a little bit more and became basically what, what it is today, which is a very good private school in New York City [New York, New York] with an international flair, but not that little closed community.  We use to have international suppers and they were basically potluck suppers, and every family would bring something, but I remember doing you know silly things like eating spaghetti with, with chopsticks, and you know funny things like that they would do to, you know, make us all come together, but we really were and are a family, I mean and to the extent where if somebody picks up a phone and tells me tomorrow it's Jennifer Unsworth [ph.], you know whatever it is that she wants, I'm gonna do my best to make sure she gets 'cause this is as close to, you know, to sisterhood as anything gets--
Story_ID: 210103
Speaker 1: You're a food historian and you stated earlier that you, what you concentrate on is, I guess--you're a historian of African food and its--
Speaker 2: Diaspora for want of a better term.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: I look at the food of Africa and how it evolved, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah its existence and--evolved, now in those days, Africa was, this is pre-
Speaker 2: Oh, this is.
Speaker 1: --Consciousness Movement and all that, Africa has really taken it, I mean you had like 'Tarzan' movies and everybody--
Speaker 2: This is pre-independence.
Speaker 1: People didn't want to talk about Africa that much in those days and when you were at the UN [United Nations International School, New York, New York] did you meet Africans actually at the UN?
Speaker 2: There weren't that many, but it was pre-independence so there weren't any African delegates whose children would've been there at that point in time.
Speaker 1: Were they just startin' you know, 'cause (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I remember being at Jennifer [ph.] and Susan's [ph.] house and one of the things that somewhere along the line we started doing was showing home movies or showing movies of some sort, and I remember that, that movie or the newsreel clip of [Kwame] Nkrumah, dancing with the Duchess of Kent.  That was such a staggering image 'cause Nkrumah in this extraordinary kente, you know, wheeling around this woman who was, I don't know the Queen's whatever, at the turnover of power and that I guess would've been one of those markers in terms of time because this is, this is Africa's first independence in the modern realm per se, is Ghana.  So I mean I was at the U.N. School when this was happening.  I was certainly there during [Ralph] Bunche's tenure, but Africa was not foremost at that part, because remember now the majority of independences are in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I left the U.N. School in '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: Yeah, you have Ghana in '56 [1956] and Sudan I think then.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Congo around the time that you left.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: Sixty [1960], '61 [1961].
Speaker 2: So I mean so that I'm already at the next phase of my extraordinarily (laughter) checkered academic career.
Speaker 1: But I just wondered if, if that was discussed at home, the you know the presence of Africans at the U.N. or the--or any--
Speaker 2: No my father [Jesse Brown Harris] was pretty much of the, I didn't lose nothing in Africa school of thought.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's pretty much the (unclear)--
Speaker 2: As were most folks.
Speaker 1: Yeah right. We'd come to that at that point you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know, in 1964 we went to tour the motherland which was Europe.
Story_ID: 210104
Speaker 1: The Civil Rights Movement was kicking up--
Speaker 2: Just beginning to but--
Speaker 1: --then was there--you may have had a unique perspective being in the U.N. School [United Nations International School, New York, New York] back in those days (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't really have that much recollection from the U.N. School days about such things as that and, and I wasn't really on the militant you know cutting edge, so it wasn't--the hits that I took at the U.N. School were more about being American than about being black.  Black was never an issue, I, I've, you know if I've felt anything it was because I didn't have a national costume, it was because I, you know, I didn't have the exotic that everybody else had in my perception, which was very interesting.  Doubly interesting when I, when I come back to look at it.  I told you I would get back to Vasu [ph.].  When Shika [ph.] came back into my life, literally about four or five years ago, we had not seen each other for at least thirty-five years, and just started in talking, I mean her kids call me "auntie" and all of the rest of it, Vasu came back, and Vasu was actually an older friend, I had known her before I knew Shika, and.
Speaker 1: And she's from India?
Speaker 2: They're both from India, Vasu being from Madras [Chennai, India] she's a Shaivite Brahmin, and Shika being I don't know what particular caste or, or where, but I know that she currently lived in, in or her family lives in Calcutta [Kolkata, India], so that they're northern and southern India in that sense, and Vasu and I had literally paralleled each other--she worked at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] and went to NYU and we got our doctorates in sort of parallel time from NYU parallel place and with all of that we started talking and again, perceptions.  I, growing up, had perceived of these children of the U.N. diplomats as just being all of that, and they had looked at me and thought I was all of that, and so this kind of you know looking at each other and sort of counter, counterpoint if you will.  Vasu said that one of the reasons that her parents--she had gone to public school in the United States in New York, I hadn't; and she had gone to public school in the United States.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Where were we?
Speaker 1: You were talking about your friend Vasu.
Speaker 2: Vasu--well Vasu had gone to public school in New York and I had never gone to public school in New York and Vasu recounted to me having been called, you know, "brown monkey" and, "where are you from" and you know, just all of these horrible racial epithets that I had really been sheltered from.  My parents [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris and Jesse Brown Harris] did a very good job of sheltering me from a lot of stuff and in fact that was why her parents had taken her out of public school and put her in the U.N. School, so it was one of those, again, very carefully crafted childhood.  My parents truly made sure that they you know put their little baby that they had waited all these nine years for in this, I can't say box because it would indicate a certain sort of stifling, but in this place where she would be able to be different or something or else or other or fill-in-the-blank.
Story_ID: 210105
Speaker 1: You left [United Nations International School (UNIS), New York, New York] in '61 [1961] now that, is that to start high school at another place?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What--
Speaker 2: Why did I leave, first question?
Speaker 1: Well they didn't go to--did they go to high school?
Speaker 2: Oh yes they did, they went through high school.  I left specifically because, as did most of my friends at that point, because what had happened was the school was--remember I told you we had gotten graded under all these eight zillion systems and we weren't sure who was where or what.  Most parents had decided by that point that their children would be educated in whatever system was going to the be the system that would lead them into university in their home country, whatever it was, and so had mine and so I left UNIS, the U.N. School, to go to the High School of Performing Arts [(PA); Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which brings us to another phase in my wild and checkered career.
Speaker 1: Now this the, the famous 'Fame' High School of Performing Arts?
Speaker 2: Yeah, "I'm gonna live forever," that's it.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, "Light up the sky with my name," yep.
Speaker 1: All right, so did you finish high school there, did you go there all four years?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah graduated from there, went three, three.
Speaker 1: Were there, there any other than yourself, any other famous people there?
Speaker 2: Famous people at 'Fame' at that point in time?  Well I was a couple of years in front of Ben Vereen, I was in school with Miguel Godreau who was Judith Jamison's first husband, let's see famous, famous, oh well Anna Horsford who played on 'Amen,' Anna Maria Horsford.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Who played the daughter on 'Amen,' classmate.  She came to my sweet sixteen; we were very friendly back then, have certainly long since grown apart.  Who all else, but I mean that, that's pretty much--oh, Murray Perahia, the incredible classical musician was at PA at that point in time you know so, yeah there were some good ones.
Speaker 1: Well how did like the School for the Performing Arts?
Speaker 2: Oh, how did I like it!
Speaker 1: And why were you there?  Were you there because you were interested in writing?
Speaker 2: I was.
Speaker 1: Had, had you begun to write or.
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't about writing, you could major in drama, music or dance.
Speaker 1: And you were interested in drama?
Speaker 2: I was interested in drama. '61 [1961] to '64 [1964], I saw, well several things, first of all it was a great family battle.  My father [Jesse Brown Harris] wanted me to go to [The] Packer Collegiate Institute [New York, New York] or, you know, some, or [Brooklyn] Friends School [New York, New York] or one of those things and I wanted to be, I was gonna be an actress or die, you know I--the stage had called, and so, so I auditioned.  I auditioned for (laughter) High School of Performing Arts in drama, music and dance.  I was going, okay (laughter) no matter what.  I got accepted in drama and music and dance was well, when I tell you that I auditioned in something I had taken ballet lessons in about four years prior with my father's sock sewn into the bottom of my leotard to stretch the crotch, that tells you pretty much what my dance audition must've looked like, but I wanted to go real bad and I went, and it was a whole another facet and wonderful and incredible, and just an extraordinary period and the film 'Fame' does capture much of it, and it again was another one of those families.  I just've have had my fortieth college--high school reunion and you know it was one--more of those episodic friendships you know, we were just back, it was as though we had not left each other for five minutes, a whole lot grayer, many of us a whole lot fatter, but--
Story_ID: 210106
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers there [High School of Performing Arts (PA); Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] or, or that you remember or any students that really influenced you?
Speaker 2: Again, I have always been, I guess I've always been an outsider, I mean I, I am as much a participant observer as anything, and that is probably one of the things that sets me up well for what I do with food.  I certainly had friends, I have good friends and Ann Hodack [ph.], Nancy Sutherland [ph.], Anna [Maria] Horsford were people that I spent those three years with, no question.  Did--teachers, Dr. Marjorie Dyke, a most unfortunate name, was the voice and diction teacher, a sort of ramrod straight lady, with sort of steel gray hair, terrifying, you know, who would lead us in our various voice and diction drills and we would say things like, let me think, "To sit in solemn silence in a dull, dark, dock of a pestilential prison with a life-long lock awaiting the sensation of the short sharp shock of a cheapened chippy chopper on it a big black block," you know.  "My name is John Willington Wells, I'm a dealer in magic and spells, blesses and curses ever-filled purses and prophecies, witches and knells.  I've a first-rate assortment of magic and for raising a posthumous shade with effects that are comic or tragic there's no cheaper house in the trade.  Love-potions we've quantities of them and for knowledge if anyone burns I'm keeping a very small profit, a profit that brings us unbounded returns.  I can raise you hosts of ghosts and that without reflectors and creepy things with wings and gaunt and grisly spectres.  Then if you plan it he changes urbanity with an inanity, fatal to vanity, driving your foes to the verge of insanity.  My name is John Willington Wells, I'm a dealer in magic and spells in blesses and curses and ever-filled purses and prophecies, witches, and knells." And I haven't thought about that or said that in forty years.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's wonderful.
Speaker 2: So there, but I mean that was voice and diction and that was Marjorie Dyke and I mean and you crisp and.
Speaker 1: It's like 'Pygmalion' right?
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly, well it's all Gilbert and Sullivan [W.S. Gilbert and Arthur Sullivan], well that was Gilbert and Sullivan and then you know all sorts of other things and what on and what not, but very, very nurturing place, again and I've, I've been the product of, you know, fifty-six years of nurturing, here it is you know (laughter), but it was a very special place in that--simply by a dint of having auditioned and been accepted you felt empowered, you felt special.
Story_ID: 210107
Speaker 1: --Did you feel like an artist [at High School of Performing Arts (PA); Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: You felt like an artist, it was my freshman year, if I'm not mistaken which was actually my sophomore year.  My first year would've been the year the film 'West Side Story' came out and some of the people had actually been in the film.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah that must've been a big deal in New York [New York], 'West Side Story'--
Speaker 2: Whoa, yeah, way big deal, you know, so it was like, there it was the whole you know--and, and the school at that point in time was at 120 West 42nd--46th Street, Broadway half a block away, you know.  It was the most amazing, exciting, extraordinary place to be.  I mean our assemblies were concerts because each, you know, senior class would perform.  I remember being at these--and we'd always have guest speakers from you know all sorts of parts of the world at-large. I remember being--well once you got to be a senior in--particularly in the drama department you would lead a weekly assembly, you would you know lead everybody in the Pledge of Allegiance (unclear). The week that I did it, Langston Hughes was the guest speaker, I mean and so I got to introduce him and you know, shake his hand and know him and all of that, but there were other people like--I'm trying to think of some of the people who had come--well anyhow, can't, but we also had extraordinary teachers, Vinnette Carroll was my teacher, now you want to talk about teachers who were mentors, absolutely Vinnette Carroll, I mean she sort of took a special look at all of the African American students who were there, the black students at that point in time and sort of took us under her extremely--what?  Wonderful wings and sort of moved us and pushed us and nudged us forward.  I mean she would do things like, she had this sort of wonderful booming voice and she came into a make-up class once and everybody was teaching us how to put on make-up base and she said, "These children do not need base, these children have the most beautiful base in the world," you know.  She just, I mean she had the hair pulled back and she wore a little sort of, it was a sort of sterling silver cup thing that went over the pony tail with a pin in it and she was just fierce, ferocious and fantastic.  She was just quite amazing.
Speaker 1: Was there a black theater scene in New York in those days, where that, that was starting to?
Speaker 2: Might have been but I didn't know about it.  I, I'm a good little good kid from Queens [New York, New York], I went.
Speaker 1: Well actually I.
Speaker 2: No, no go ahead.
Speaker 1: Yeah actually, they--Negro Ensemble Company then was really--
Speaker 2: After.
Speaker 1: --cranking up I guess then, and were starting to do plays in the.
Speaker 2: Not by '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Not, not by '64 [1964] they hadn't started yet?
Speaker 2: No, no it would later in the '60s [1960], like '68 [1968], '69 [1969], that's by the time I get outta college [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] and come back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They're starting up and the New Lafayette [Theatre, New York, New York], those are the two poles but that's like four or five years later.
Story_ID: 210108
Speaker 1: What did you enjoy doing the most at--in high school [High School of Performing Arts (PA); Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] or what subject did you enjoy the most?
Speaker 2: Probably dance, modern dance, I just--modern dance was just extraordinary, I mean the whole idea of movement and dance and you know--that this was something that one could do and that could be a discipline was, was ex--you know it's really quite extraordinary and I mean, I very much sort of in went theater, discovered dance.  Dance teacher was named Zanayed Trigg [ph.], one of them, we had several.  I mean in--if you took acting you had to take dance, I mean it was a whole kind of curriculum that was very interesting and very, very strangely crafted and divided so that you took dance, you took make-up, you took your acting courses, your voice and diction and all of those things depending on whether you were a sophomore, junior or senior you took one set in the morning and then you took all of your academic courses the other half of the day so you were always sort of playing flip flop, but you know I was good at French.  I'd come from the U.N. School [United Nations International School, New York, New York] so basically I had skipped a grade, so I mean I didn't go to the ninth grade, I went straight into--from eighth grade straight into tenth, well, yeah straight into tenth and--but I mean I'd already had biology, I'd already had physics, I'd already had a lot of the stuff so the academics were interesting.  The, the shop courses if you will because at that point and that was one of my father's [Jesse Brown Harris] great concerns about PA--Performing Arts--was that it was still shuffling out of having been a vocational high school 'cause it started out as Metropolitan Vocational High School and in fact and indeed [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt had gone to Metropolitan Vocational High School and a lot of people had gone when it was still considered to be a technical school so, you know, that whole question particularly now in retrospect I understand why my father was so exercised about making sure it was an academic school because he didn't want to see his daughter fall into the same kind of trick bag he had been in with Erasmus [Hall High School, New York, New York], but with all of that, the courses that were the acting courses were just, you know, revelations, I mean they were just amazing.  I mean on all sorts of levels. I mean first of all just the cross section of people that I met going from the U.N. School which was still very connected to the U.N., very sort of patrician in its own international peculiarity with the kids of the delegates and increasingly you know as it moved to the West Side, to the east of Manhattan [New York, New York], some of these little East Side kids who would come and, and take it as a private school but then to go into a school where I took a subway to get to high school and you know was ridin' up and down on the "F" train out to, to Queens [New York, New York] and you know had this whole knot of various and sundry folks; and this stop the guys from this high school would get on and that stop, the girls from that high school and it was just this whole kind of plurality of people. Plus as someone who'd lived an extraordinary sheltered life I mean the big wake-up call of sittin' next to a guy in freshman biology who was wearing full eye make-up, and it's not 'cause he's getting ready to go to a class in make-up, it's 'cause that's how he dresses every day.  So all of those things, I mean, now remember we're back in 1961, that was a big ole' deal for a nice little colored girl from Queens.  So just the world expanded and exploded and it was a very, very different special place from the U.N. School.  You know, we would go out to lunch, I'd eat at the automat, you know (laughter).  you'd go, I'd get a Kaiser roll and a bowl of baked beans and you'd put the quarter in the slot and turn the thing and that was lunch, I mean it was just an incredible experience, I mean Capezio, the big dance shoe store was on one side of the street or up the street or somewhere around the corner.  Variety was published up the street it was--
Story_ID: 210109
Speaker 1: Well what did your parents [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris and Jesse Brown Harris] think, did they--
Speaker 2: Well they thought I'd lost my mind, they were very grounding (laughter) shall we say, but they had decided I could do it, so I could do it.  You know I still had my, you know, I mean I went to high school [High School of Performing Arts (PA); Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] I had what--I had just turned thirteen, I mean I graduated from high school I turned sixteen in March and graduated that June, so I must've been thirteen, they were, you know--it was a strange experience for both of us.  I remember the whole traveling by, you know, subway to get there.  The first time I did it, my father took me. We went together, I'd never done that kind of distance before.  It was a--no train change so he took me to the subway, we went, he got on the train went in front of me. I got on the same train, he told me where to get off.  We got off and you know he gave me my practice run and then I got to do it by myself without him and then I was, you know, ready to go.  Subway cost fifteen cents back then, you know.  It was just you know a whole 'nother kind of thing and as I look back in hindsight now I was thirteen, of course all of those things were new and different and of course I would not necessary have been out and adventuring 'cause I mean I really was a good kid.  I stayed in my yard, I didn't necessarily go out to adventure to find out what, you know, other folks might have been doing in their yards.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but you read about what people were doing in other places--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 210110
Speaker 1: When you were in high school [High School of Performing Arts (PA); Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] did--had you decided at that point what you wanted to do for--as a career?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted to teach drama on a college level.  I had pretty much decided that auditions made me just too crazy, you know, I mean it would have been lovely to be an actress but there were several things that came to grip.  Certainly race played a role, but more than that I was born old, by that I mean I've never been an ingenue.  The roles that I played in high school were the nurse in 'Romeo and Juliet,' the nurse or the mammy or the whatever in one of the Truman Capote things--'Madea,' I've always been way bigger than my age up until about two and half years ago and I'm finally growing into it, so I'm really happy, but you know, but I mean I was never gonna be you know little, help me, help me.  People didn't believe it and, I mean, even if I were that inside, it just never played that way to, to anyone so that was part of what informed me about my decisions.  The other part was that my mother [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris] worked at a college [Queens CollegeNew York, New York] and she said, "Look, if you're gonna teach, don't teach in high school with the nine to three, five days a week.  Look at these people that I'm working with and for and see these hours and these things," (laughter) and you know, "you do that." So and my parents were pretty much also letting me go to PA to get that outta my system, which it did in a way and didn't in a way, and so pretty much there, you know, for all of my hand-to-fevered-brow, wanting to be an actress it, it came to me pretty much that, you know, that wasn't gonna happen.  I look at Anna [Maria Horsford], I look at people like, bless her heart, Lynne Thigpen who died not so recently who was on--well it was relatively recently who was on 'The District' and the whole idea of black working actresses who are not stars per se, but who worked steadily, didn't exist.  There were no role models.  I was talking with another friend and said, you know, when I grew up basically you were gonna be--I read it in the bio [biography] of Julia Child, you were gonna be a nurse or a teacher. Lawyer wasn't out there for my generation per se and I never forget that my parents  were thirty-five when I was born, so for all of--for my age along with my having been born old, I've always been more at home with people who were ten or fifteen years older than I am because we shared the same value system because that was what my parents inculcated in another kind of way.  So it was nurse or teacher; doctor really wasn't yet quite on the horizon, lawyer wasn't yet quite on the horizon, that was the unusual, that was the extraordinary.  I wasn't that kind of a rule bender, so teach theater, teach drama on a college level--
Story_ID: 210111
Speaker 1: --Where did you go and how'd you make a decision to go there?
Speaker 2: College.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but where?
Speaker 2: Bryn Mawr [College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, yet another turn, and that's probably about my dad [Jesse Brown Harris] as much as anything.  Having allowed me to have my head for high school and go to the High School of Performing Arts [(PA); Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], my parents [Jesse Brown Harris and Rhoda Alease Jones Harris] now, wisely or otherwise thought, now we gotta make sure she can get a job.  Remember now these are people who survived the [Great] Depression, and as I tell people, I'm a good child--I'm the good child of good Depression parents.  I--my first choice was probably Sarah Lawrence [College, Bronxville, New York] where I no doubt would have majored in theater and been off into the world at-large but, as my parents didn't necessarily say to me but acted on, they knew I didn't have an income on which to live even if I didn't.  Bryn Mawr had no drama department; that was one of the prime lures for my parents (laughter).
Speaker 1: So how did you feel about at that point--
Speaker 2: How did I feel about--fine!  I was, I tell you I was a good kid, I mean it was like it was okay.  It wasn't a--it wasn't a major hassle, it, it was a shuffle, it was a stomp, it was a pout maybe, but it wasn't a real problem.  If it had been a real problem it wouldn't of happened.  There were two tricks in the game, Sarah Lawrence had a little box that said, "If you apply for a scholarship we assume that you cannot come if you don't get the scholarship.  So if you don't get the scholarship, you are not accepted".  Well now remember I'm the child of people who had dreams and who worked to make them happen.  Sarah Lawrence was the most expensive school in the country.  If I'd have gotten in without the scholarship they might have been able to figure out a way to make it work, but it was definitely about applying for the scholarship--didn't get it, didn't go.  I applied to Bennington [College, Bennington, Vermont], I don't remember what happened with Bennington but that was probably too up in the air.  I went to see Manhattanville College of the Sacred Heart [Manhattanville College, Purchase, New York] where they were gonna, you know--recruiting me and what on and whatnot and it was like the nuns were a little spooky, Bryn Mawr was just the place.
Story_ID: 210112
Speaker 1: --Tell us about Bryn Mawr [College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] how--did you do there?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I'm--okay my father [Jesse Brown Harris] committed 'Lovejoy's College Guide' to memory (laughter) when I--oh, honey, college population, entrance requirements, his daughter was going to school, he had to know about it all, I mean.  Bryn Mawr also looked like a college, and when I went down, and I don't really even remember how it became Bryn Mawr more than anywhere else I think there was a little bit of recruiting going on, but I really don't remember.  It felt okay, it felt fine.  Ironically a neighbor who'd become a friend, not well--neighbor in the large sense of neighbor not in the immediate sense, Arlene Southern [ph.] whose daughter--well who, who lived not that far and whose daughter and I were similar ages, her daughter went to Bryn Mawr--actually because my father had told them about it.  So she had already been down there for a year, April Southern [ph.] and as it materialized and I don't know that my father knew this at time we were thinking about it.  I had a cousin, who would have been second cousin or something, some relative, Christine [ph.] Philpot who had gone to Bryn Mawr and we had gone down for my interview on a weekend that was a Penn Relay [Penn Relays; Penn Relay Carnival, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] weekend, and Christine lived in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and we had gone by their house after the interview and it was just a sort of strange thing and I remember a couple of years later, maybe a year or two after I had been accepted and actually gone, Christine sort of looked and thought, said to me rather disdainfully, "Well, I never thought you'd get in."  I was like, "Thank you very much" so, but I did and it's all kind of fluid and I'm not really clear on how that happened.  I know that there was some question about Latin, because at that point Bryn Mawr had as its entrance requirement or people thought it did, that one must've had a certain amount of Latin, but I'd had it at the U.N. School [United Nations International School, New York, New York].  I hadn't had it at high school, and I was actually the first person in--maybe to this day the only person from PA [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] to go to Bryn Mawr (laughter), but as I tell people, I've had this extraordinarily checkered academic career because it, it's this quirky U.N. School, that's one kind of world, to performing arts that's completely diametrically opposed that's another kind, to Bryn Mawr that is still a third and very different kind of place.  So now I am in a seven-sister college that's all girls, that's, you know, uber-WASP [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant], that's academically rigorous.
Story_ID: 210113
Speaker 1: Were there any other black students there [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: There were six in my class and there were several others, Sheila [S.] Walker was two classes ahead of me, April Southern [ph.] was a class ahead of me.  There were, you know there were several.  It wasn't phenomenal, I mean six out of 150 wasn't it, but we were there and, and we were very there, and Bryn Mawr is a whole nother kettle of fish.  In Bryn Mawr I majored in French, I--they didn't have a theater major but I had a college theater, I got active in college theater, I worked in freshman show [Banner Show], I learned all sorts of strange and interesting things.  I learned that one of the things that I really begin to understand about race in this country is much of it is economic, much of it is historic.  The young women at Bryn Mawr taught me that the ones that were likely to be racist--to say something, to do something, to whatever--were the ones who, like me were scholarship students, the ones who were somewhere in that continuum, the ones who had enough money, whatever enough was or plenty of it, could care less.  They either liked you or they didn't like you.  Who you were and what you looked like was not their issue.  Very interesting lesson to learn, and I mean and, and really learned it there in a funny kind of way.  The French major thing--I did a junior year in France.  My first major, major personal up-against-it, can't, you know, it's the big elephant in the room race question came in France, where everybody's supposed to love black folks so much--
Story_ID: 210114
Speaker 1: When did you go to France?
Speaker 2: I went to France for my junior year [at Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] which would have been '62 [1962], '63 [1963], and let me think now.
Speaker 1: Was that from fall of '62 [1962] to fall of '63 [1963] or--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. So I went in--I went into college '61 [1961], '60 [1960], no wait a minute, '60 [1960], no it must've been, no I graduated '63 [1963], '64 [1964].  How does that work, '61 [1961], '62 [1962], '63 [1963], '64 [1964].  It is '62 [1962], '63 [1963], I must've gotten out of UNIS [United Nations International School, New York, New York], '60 [1960], '61 [1961], I can't figure it out.  I must've gotten out of UNIS in '60 [1960]--'60 [1960], '61 [1961], '61 [1961],'62 [1962], '63 [1963], '63 [1963] '64 [1964].  No, I'm, I'm wrong altogether, that's high school [High School of Performing Arts (PA); Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], flash forward to college, I go outta college in '68 [1968] that's, that's what the problem is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it wasn't '63 [1963], '64 [1964], I was in Paris [France], well I was in Bryn Mawr from '64 [1964] to '68 [1968] and I would've been in Paris from '66 [1966] to '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which was just before the eventement--the whole Parisian academic revolution really, the Daniel comme bon dite [ph.] and all of that, that stuff.  So we're at point and time when the world is changing yet again, because of course now the Civil Rights Movement is up full, full blown, independences are taking place and it's becoming the anti-war movement, what [Senator George] McGovern?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he run, he runs in '68 [1968] you know.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Vietnam War.
Speaker 1: No '72 [1972] actually, he runs in '72 [1972] actually, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, but who's running before?
Speaker 1: McCarthy, [Senator] Eugene McCarthy was in.
Speaker 2: McCarthy, Eugene okay then that's what it is, but the Vietnam War all of that very much on the horizon and happening, and happening at Bryn Mawr and doing all of these things.  Along with that--now I'm in France for a year and the same thing is going on internationally now.  Okay, because in that '66 [1966], '67 [1967] the independences are hitting Africa, the students from former French-speaking colonies some of them are in Paris, some of them are not.  I go to France with Sarah Lawrence [College, Bronxville, New York], Bryn Mawr doesn't have a program so I'm in France with Sarah Lawrence, in Paris.  I'm living with a family and I really desperately wanted to live with a family, okay.  I start out living with a lady whose name is Mademoiselle Vaschron [ph.] who lives on the Rue Gue du Sac [a Evreux] and who is a little old maid who has a funny apartment that's divided into two contiguous rooms and her room and there is no real family life or interaction.  She comes home, makes her little food and goes to her room and I'm basically rooming with another American student who is also going to Sarah Lawrence and whose name was Nancy Schroder [ph.], and while we get along, I really wanna be in a French-speaking universe.  Well Nancy moves out to live with a lady and I go and have dinner with Nancy on an occasion or two and the lady at some point expresses to Nancy that she is looking for someone else to live--
Story_ID: 210115
Speaker 1: This is a point at time at which, you know, there's this whole sort of group of Americans who are going through junior year abroad, very few blacks, but some and the American embassy [U.S. Embassy Paris, Paris, France] keeps a list of rooms that people want and, but they will say, you know, "photo required," okay?  This is the American embassy.  They will, you know, it's, it's all very subtly done, but it's all done.  Anyhow I had been to dinner with Nancy [ph.] and we're sitting and I leave, and it's, it's, again a single person with a daughter, but you know it was more of a family than Mademoiselle Vaschron [ph.], may she rest in peace, but you know I said, gee that would be nice, Nancy and I had you know, enjoyed each other's company a roommates 'cause I've never really had roommates, and she asked the lady.  Well the lady goes ballistic, "Aw no, I couldn't have one of those in my house.  I've done the colonies," this, that and the other, blah, blah.  It's a big ole' ugly, ugly, ugly thing and you know, smacks you in the face.  You know here I am, what, eighteen, across an ocean, literally, you know, own my own, you know.  It's not about calling, call once a month, maybe at that point.  It's about writing letters and there is this issue that you know has been there all along, but it's never been treated quite this way in my life, and so, you know, it's like, oh, okay this is, this is Paris [France], well welcome to Paris, ain't this interesting (laughter)?  So much for my believing about the expansive French who all love black folks so much.  Obviously, I didn't move in, didn't want to at that point, even you know if she had changed her mind which she subsequently did do.
Story_ID: 210116
Speaker 1: Found another family [in Paris, France], the Bretailles [ph.] who were actually a family--mommy, daddy, and lots of babies--and had an extraordinary year and in fact and indeed the--I'm still in touch with 'em, I go to Paris every year in January on my mother's [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris] birthday and some years we have a family reunion, some years we don't, but I mean they have basically become closer to my family than anything else.  I took my mother to Paris for her eighty-fifth birthday and we had the birthday at a Moroccan restaurant that was owned by a friend of mine and every single member of the family that I spent the junior year with, save one, and that was because she couldn't come because she couldn't afford to get there, came to dinner with their wives and it was amazing because at that point in time they had lost both mother and father and my mother knew more about them than their wives did, their spouses because she could look at Jacque Antoine [ph.] and say, "Oh, you look so much like your father," and look at, you know, Laurence [ph.] and say, "you sound just like your mother," and, and, you know, so we really have--you know, it's, it's--I gotta weird family (laughter).  You don't have enough tape to talk about my extended international family, but any how that's, that's how, that's part of Bryn Mawr [College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania].
Story_ID: 210117
Speaker 1: I get in college theater [at Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania], my crowning senior production is 'Medea,' so I'm back in the theater again.  I major in French, which is part of the junior year abroad [in Paris, France].  I learn my--one of my interesting life lessons which is, life is like tennis if you wanna improve your game, play up, you know because that's how you learn things that you otherwise might not know.  I had a ball, I had a ball. I was part--actually Marcia Young, Whitney Young [Jr.]'s daughter was in my class.  She is now Marcia [Young] Cantarella, I think she's just recently become widowed.  I was reading a bulletin a few minutes ago, a few hours ago at this stage (laughter), interesting, interesting point in time, and particularly since there were so few of us.  I must say though I am in touch with none of 'em, we didn't bond that way.
Speaker 2: Was it because?
Speaker 1: I think it was time and place, I think it might be personality, I think it might be any number of things.  I have one friend from college that I am in touch with, and that's interesting because we were very close, but it's, it's not the same as the--well the junior if you count that, I've got one friend and one family from college (laughter) that I am in touch with, but it didn't, it didn't mesh the same way.  You know, we went our separate ways, we left.  I remember my parents [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris and Jesse Brown Harris] saying at graduation from college that they were very amused by the fact that after the ceremony everybody was in a hurry to leave.  As much as we had, you know, liked it, it was sort of, been there, done that, time to go now kinda thing.  Although I still feel very attached to Bryn Mawr, we'll see.
Story_ID: 210118
Speaker 1: We're finishing Bryn Mawr [College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Okay we're finishing Bryn Mawr, well the next phase is a quick one, I do a graduate degree, une licence lettres, at the Universite de Nancy [Universite Nancy 2; University of Lorraine] in Nancy, France.  So basically it is a Queens College [New York, New York] program that takes you over to France for a year. So it's a graduate year in France and it's interesting for several reasons.  One is because it brackets the change in the academic structure in France.  I was there '66 [1966], '67 [1967], and then I'm back '68 [1968], '69 [1969] and what college means in France has changed radically.  Okay, the method of instruction, the way they're doing things.  Aside from the fact that the first year I was there, I was there with Sarah Lawrence [College, Bronxville, New York] and it was pretty much about private tutoring.  We didn't do a lot of the big lecture hall things, but that system is broken down in France, and now France's educational system is really becoming more Americanized, if you will--smaller classes so on and so forth, and I'm out in what is the capitol of la Lorraine [France], which is Nancy--Nancy--which is interesting but it, it again was a case of (laughter)--how you gonna keep 'em down on the farm after they've seen Paris [France]?  You know I had been in Paris; I had lived in Paris for a year.  I had you know, family in Paris, friends I Paris, knew how to get around in Paris and I was not in Paris and that pretty much sums up that year.  I come back to New York [New York]; I actually had begun teaching summer class in Queens College the summer following returning from France, teaching French.  When I return to New York, I take a job, oh my mother [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris] has gone to--well actually I'm offered two jobs.  I'm offered a graduate assistantship in French at Queens College and I am offered a job teaching French in the SEEK [Search for Education, Elevation and Knowledge] Program [Percy Ellis Sutton SEEK Program] at Queens College, which would have given me a lecture position in the--in that and I choose the lecture position in French and start teaching French in the SEEK Program at Queens College, which is the beginning of my--what will become August 31st, thirty-five-year tenure with the SEEK Program at Queens College.
Story_ID: 210119
Speaker 1: I go back to Queens [College, New York, New York], it's not a place that unfamiliar to me because my mother [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris] had worked there and had worked there most of my life, well certainly most of my memorable life, so I certainly know my way around.  I am, at the same point, a graduate student, which is interesting because I'm working now on taking the two or three courses that are left between having license and finishing a master's [degree] and then writing the dissertation and or the thesis and I--I'm still living at home, I'm living with my parents [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris and Jesse Brown Harris], and so I got it easy I ride up with mom (laughter) every day, go teach and take the bus home, get home and it's, it's fine, you know, it's fine for a while.  I sat myself difficult goals as always.  I decided that since my degree was in French, I should write my thesis in French--nobody else was doing that, they were all writing theirs in English, so I struggled through it with the gentleman who at that point is the dean of faculty, so it's always the sort of strange dichotomy because, you know, he was the person and yet in the SEEK [Search for Education, Elevation and Knowledge] Program [Percy Ellis Sutton SEEK Program] where it is extremely militant at that point, I mean because the SEEK Program at this point has become particularly the one at Queens College is the touchstone.  It's the, it's the jewel in the crown that is the jewel in the crown, so I mean we've got two competing things.  The SEEK Program at Queens College in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] was a college within a college.
Speaker 2: Now pronounce that program again the--
Speaker 1: S-E-E-K, Search for Education--
Speaker 2: SEEK, okay.
Speaker 1: --Elevation and Knowledge and it is basically a--what they call nowadays an open access program, it's--started out as pretty much a [President Lyndon Baines] Johnson-era poverty program that kept on going.  It was originally designed to provide access for African Americans, meaning up South African Americans and Hispanics, meaning Puerto Ricans (laughter) into the City University [of New York, New York, New York] system.  It's like a HEOP [Higher Education Opportunity] Program now, and that was one of the reasons that I choose to teach in it 'cause that was you know what I wanted to do you know I mean.  I had this incredible kind of duality in the sense that I'd grown up in Queens College, I knew everybody, everybody knew me, I was "Rhoda's kid," so that when I got on campus as faculty, one of the first things that happened was I got appointed to the committee of six--
Story_ID: 210120
Speaker 1: Committee of six [at Queens CollegeNew York, New York] being, you know, one of the pretty high flying faculty committees that had rights of yay and nay over a variety of things, including appointments and things like that.  Well the people in the SEEK [Search for Education, Elevation and Knowledge] Program [Percy Ellis Sutton SEEK Program] went ballistic, "We don't know who you are; we don't know your politics; we don't know anything about that."  I resigned from the committee of six and proceeded to go underground as in increasingly underground as in--way, way under the radar.  I have not yet shown up on the radar (laughter).  I am that far underground.  It wasn't an interesting time because of course French was bougie [bourgeois].  My background was uber-bougie.  I have always been me and therefore caught more flack than anybody walking on two feet needed to catch in the space of a lifetime, and probably the space of about two years.  It was a time when people were marching and setting in and sitting down and changing things, and I was right along there with them, but I remember people sort of always looking at me, going, you know, we don't know you.  I also remember people standing up frothing at the mouth and saying, "We're ready to die for the SEEK Program."  Those are the same folks who are still on Queens College campus but who are no longer teaching in it and who now don't want to be bothered with the students, so, sometimes living long gives you good perspective (laughter) on some of this stuff.  Anyhow all of that being said, that's how I started out teaching in the SEEK Program. I started out teaching French.  I taught French for about six years and then there were all sorts of retrenchment issues, city budget went kafuffle, people were being dropped right, left, front and center.  It was right up when I would've have come up for my certificate of continuous employment [CCE] which is essentially lecturer tenure and I don't even remember what happened, and I probably could go back and reconstruct it, but I--I'm fired, which totally terrifies me, except that in the whole arbitration and grievance process, no, no it doesn't show up there, because in the whole arbitration and grievance process (laughter), they realize they can't do that.  So they hire me back as an instructor in the French department and then move me to I've forgotten what, and the upshot is I had all along from pretty much through the time of my return to New York [New York], and this is now seven years down that line so we're now about 1970--oh, end of the '70s [1970s], let me say that, but starting in about '74 [1974] I had started writing.  I started writing for a newspaper, and I probably need to go back a little bit before I even get into that.  When I got out of college [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] and got back to New York after the graduate year in France [Universite Nancy 2; University of Lorraine, Nancy, France], I hooked up again with a group of friends from [High School of] Performing Arts [(PA); Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York]: Loretta Green, Anna [Maria] Horsford, a gentleman named Al Brown and the three of them worked with Ellis Haizlip on 'Soul!'
Story_ID: 210121
Speaker 1: So you got involved with 'Soul!'?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't get involved with 'Soul!' absolutely, but I got involved with them tangentially because we formed our own little organization that we called Roots and I think it was around or--I think it actually was before, in fact I know it was before the Alex Haley book ['Roots: The Saga of An American Family,' Alex Haley]. And our mission at some point was to take a newspaper that was called the Black American, it was published outta Harlem [New York, New York] by a man named Carl Offord and probably best known for its slightly off-color headlines like, "Didn't God make titties, illustrations page three" kinda thing, and we were gonna take it and transform it with his, you know, kind of permission into a paper for the black arts, 'cause this was the Black Arts Movement increasingly becoming a part of things. And everybody was given a mandate-- "You do this; you do that; you do the other."  Well at the end of probably two months, I'm the only one that's still gettin' on the train and taking my articles up to Mr. Offord who was publishing them and sooner or later I have this portfolio of articles and take that and take them to, let's see how did that work?  Take them I think to Encore at that point which was being published by Ida Lewis, but also at that same time once I get back and get my, my master's [degree] which is in French, but French theater with a thesis on "Le renouveau de 'Dom Juan' sur la scene contemporaine" which is three contemporary versions of Moliere's 'Dom Juan.'  I enroll in NYU [New York University, New York, New York] in their department, what was at that point their theater department, which has become their performance studies department, to work toward my doctorate.  Basically because I'm just taking a couple of courses 'cause I figured that's good way to meet some guys, ha, ha, ha.  Well three years later, or two and a half years later, I've taken all of my courses, have met no guys, but have also in the course of this writing peregrination started to write for the [New York] Amsterdam News, and so I become the theater critic for the Amsterdam News, get to be the first black lady.  I believe I've been told to vote for the Tony's [ Tony Award] which was kinda fun and great.  This is the point at which 'The Wiz' is coming out, this is the point at which a lot of that sort of--
Speaker 1: This is the late '70s [1970s] in '77 [1977], '78 [1978]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, exactly, so it's 'The Wiz,' it's, you know, what is it, all, all of that stuff that comes out after 'The Wiz,' and you know up to, you know it's a major moment for Broadway in general 'cause it's the '[A] Chorus Line,' it's--
Speaker 1: It's 'Sophisticated Ladies'--
Speaker 2: It's 'Sophisticated Ladies'--
Speaker 1: 'Bubbling Brown Sugar' and all that--
Speaker 2: It's 'Bubbling Brown Sugar,' it's all of it--
Speaker 1: 'Cats' (laughter) everything--
Speaker 2: Nope not 'Cats'--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That, that wasn't part of that?
Speaker 2: The 'Cats' is after, but it, it's all of the, it's all of that kind of nucleus of stuff, so it, it's you know Broadway is beginning to, to turn into new things and becoming a new genre and I'm right there enjoying that.  Gosh, from there--well that and Encore are parallel, at some point Encore morphs into my writing for Essence but by '76 [1976], 'cause this is actually earlier, by '76 [1976] I'm writing for Essence 'cause my first article in Essence comes out in '76 [1976].  Encore is earlier so it's probably '74 [1974], '75 [1975] and I am not sure which part of that overlaps the Amsterdam News stuff because I think the Amsterdam News is sort of straight after the Black American.
Story_ID: 210122
Speaker 1: What--the subject matters that you were writing--
Speaker 2: It's theater.
Speaker 1: --for Essence was theater, too?
Speaker 2: No, Essence was book reviews, I was the book review editor for Essence and then I morphed from being book review editor at Essence to being travel editor at Essence, and I was travel editor at Essence in the end of the '70s [1970s] up to probably about '80 [1980], arguably maybe '81 [1981].
Speaker 1: It was an interesting period of time for black people in terms of travel abroad in those days and I think there's a book--Sylvia Ardyn Boone who wrote a book ['West African Travels: A Guide to People & Places,' Sylvia Ardyn Boone] about travels in West Africa.
Speaker 2: Sylvia Ardyn Boone wrote a West African guidebook that I reviewed and then unfortunately loaned to somebody.  I had two copies of it and now I have none which makes me very annoyed.
Speaker 1: But you know Festac '77 [Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, Lagos, Nigeria] occurred a lot of black people went to Nigeria.
Speaker 2: Well, all of that, all of that.
Speaker 1: A lot of people went to a lot of political travel with.
Speaker 2: All of that, all of that stuff was going on.
Speaker 1: A lot of political travel with--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the 6th Pan-African Congress I think was in [Dar es Salaam] Tanzania.
Speaker 2: Well.
Speaker 1: A lot of people went over to that.
Speaker 2: Well '77 [1977] is 'Roots.'
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The world changed, you know 'Roots'--I, in my tenure as book review editor I did three or four things of which I am inordinately proud.  I interviewed Alex Haley before 'Roots[: The Saga of An American Family,' Alex Haley] came out, I talked to Alice Walker when she wrote 'Meridian' which was before everybody went crazy about 'The Color Purple' [Alice Walker].  I talked to Toni Morrison when she was writing 'Sula.'
Speaker 1: Now she had written 'The Bluest Eye' [Toni Morrison]--
Speaker 2: She's written 'The Bluest Eye' period, that was it.  At the same.
Speaker 1: She wasn't big yet?
Speaker 2: No, not at all she was an editor at Random House and we used to go out and have lunch and we'd have lunch once every two or three months and I remember at one point in time, because I also know her, this is you eight zillion things and we really will be here all night.  One of the people who taught with me at Queens College [New York, New York] with whom I became very friendly, and you know we sorta went out four years and it opened any number of incredible doors to me was a gentleman by the name of Samuel Clemens Floyd, III and Sam[uel] Floyd was a former neighbor and best friend of James Baldwin's.  So through Sam, I met Jimmy [James Baldwin] and [HistoryMaker] Maya [Angelou] and Toni and Paul Marshall and Rosa Guy, and all of that crowd, I mean so at some point as Vertamae [Smart-Grosvenor] who was tangential to that crowd on another level said to me.
Speaker 1: Vertamae Grosvenor?
Speaker 2: Grosvenor, yeah, Vert said, "You know, [HistoryMaker] Jessica [B. Harris], you're gonna be the one who writes the story," 'cause I was the kid.  I am fifteen to twenty years younger than all of 'em and so I get to be the Dorothy West of the second Harlem Renaissance at some point, but they were extraordinary days.
Story_ID: 210123
Speaker 1: And that was an awful large parenthesis to get back to the fact that what happened at Queens College [New York, New York] was because I had, had this career as a journalist it was proposed to me that I teach English instead of French, and so I started--I switched from teaching French to teaching English and I've taught English ever since.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So that was the reason for that long digression, but that digression begins to bring up all sorts of other things which gets us basically into writing and, and you know how I got started writing and stuff like that.
Speaker 2: 'Cause you're developing a, a rich, rich group of contacts and, and experiences to--
Speaker 1: Oh, it's--you don't know the half of it, we don't--there is not enough time left in the day to even go from there, but I mean, but you know so that's a whole 'nother group of folks, but now while I'm doing the travel--well my dissertation is on the French Speaking Theater of Senegal.  So I go to West Africa for the first time in 1972 before 'Roots,' okay which is a very different West Africa okay.  We did some very interesting and not necessarily good things to ourselves and our own image when we went to Africa to particularly Senegal, post-'Roots,' a couple of things triangulated, one was that 'Roots' came out in I think it was '77 [1977].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In '77 [1977] or '78 [1978], I think it's--somewhere within a year's space, a group called International Weekends [ph.] started doing back-to-back charters outta New York City [New York, New York], $299 round trip, New York [New York]-Dakar [Senegal], everybody went, and some of us didn't behave terribly well particularly--I must say this about my sisters, black women who got over there and saw these extraordinary, gorgeous black men who had been in short supply (laughter) on this side of the Atlantic [Ocean] and who were over there and--we didn't you know, we didn't shall we say polish our shields terribly well, so that you know how black Americans are regarded in some parts of western Africa today is very much an outpouring of, or not an outpouring, but an offshoot of those days as much as anything else, you know, we were not, shall we say, well behaved.  It's interesting to have seen it before and after because I went in '72 [1972], I went back in '75 [1975].  I went--by the time we get to '77 [1977] I'm travel editor [for Essence] now and I think my banner year was something like '78 [1978] and I went three or four times to Senegal in 1978 alone, so I mean it was one of those kinds of crazy back and forth things.  Once I'd become travel editor I start doing an extraordinary amount of travel, and basically start seeing this world that I will then subsequently write about in cookbooks and I think for the last two years that I'm writing for Essence I do a column that's called the "Go Gourmet" that alternates with the regular travel column, so six months a year I'm traveling and specifically writing about food and then that takes me into food and things like that--
Story_ID: 210124
Speaker 1: Were you always interested in writing about food or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Did it just come as a--
Speaker 2: I, only child, my mother [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris] was a trained dietician, I always ate well, I always, because I was an only child if she was cooking I was in the kitchen, and I remember all of this other stuff that I've been talking about, the U.N. School [United Nations International School, New York, New York], the ability to get along with people in other cultures, the ability to eat foods from other things, the research coming out of the Bryn Mawr [College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] component.  I guess the performance not afraid to be a fool in public part from, from [High School of] Performing Arts [(PA); Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] maybe, all come together to--start this food thing rolling.  What happened was in the course of, of the writing and particularly in the course of the Essence, you know, I met any number of PR [public relations] people.  One of whom, let's see if I can get this was, Barbara Cullen [sic.], oh no wait, Cullen-Taylor [ph.], Barbara [A.] Taylor; Karen [N.] Cullen I think, a woman that was--there was a public relations firm named Cullen-Taylor [sic. Cullen & Taylor] they operated in Manhattan [New York, New York] in I guess in the mid-'70s [1970s], they were extraordinary.  If anybody wanted the top of the line PR people they'd go to them.  It's two extremely elegant ladies, and I was having lunch with one of them one day and just casual conversation and she says, you know, "You need to write a book."  I said, "Yeah, yeah, right sure," and she said, "no, I mean that," and she says, "and I have a friend who's an editor at"--I don't remember the publishing house but somewhere, big publishing house and she said, "I want you to go see her."  So the editor's name was Joyce Jacks [ph.], I went to see her, talked to her about some of these things and she said, "No, she's right you do need to write a book, write me a proposal," and I wrote a proposal for a book that was going to be a third world women's beauty book and she bought it, and I started writing on it, and at some point in time she left the publishing house which in publishing terms means that my book was orphaned; I didn't have an editor who was committed to it because it wasn't something that the editor had bought, I mean and I went through two or three editors in the course of one or two years' contracts that they had given me to finish the book.  The upshot being that on the day the book was finished, I go to see the ultimate editor, the one who would've been challenged with, you know charged with finishing it up and she informs me that they decided not to publish it. It's like--when you write your first book, that is not what you want to hear on the day you go to turn in the manuscript.
Story_ID: 210125
Speaker 1: So I am devastated, crestfallen, evil, fill-in-the blanks.  I do by that time however have an agent, I'd sold the first book without an agent otherwise some other things probably would've happened but by this time I have an agent and so Joyce [Jacks (ph.)]--my agent solves that problem, comes to me and says, "Okay, now what do you wanna do?"  And at this point we're now in the early '80s [1980s], '83 [1983] or something like that, and I said, "I don't know what I wanna do."  I had also finished mydissertation, I had just finished my dissertation 'cause my father [Jesse Brown Harris] died in '85 [1985], and there were a couple of things that I knew I could do that would make him rest more easily for want of a better term.  One would be get married, and that wasn't gon' happen 'cause there was nothing on the horizon, and the other one was get my doctorate, so I had, had virtually a ten-year leave of absence.  It was so long that I had to reapply for admission [to New York University, New York, New York], but you know with the conniving of my advisors and the commitment of my advisors and the you know the good will of the ancestors, I reapplied for admission, was accepted.  The reapplying for admission means I didn't have to pay that ten years' worth of entry fees, so I got off like a big ole' fat rat with that, and applied for--finished my dissertation in you know like super record time and got my doctorate. So in the post-partum depression after the doctorate, this is when all of this, you know, madness happens with--now I have an agent, what do you wanna do?  I don't know, maybe write a cookbook, you know because I had done the stuff at Essence and I you know I started thinking about food and started connecting, and it was like, well you know, what do you wanna write a cookbook about?  I said, I don't know, maybe foods made with pepper and chili from around the world.  That's it--
Story_ID: 210126
Speaker 1: 'Hot Stuff.'
Speaker 2: 'Hot Stuff: A Cookbook in Praise of the Piquant' [Jessica B. Harris], it came out in 1985. Is--in the fall.  My father [Jesse Brown Harris] died in May of the year, he never knew me as book author.  I had, at some point I remember putting his hand on the galley, but he was in a coma at that point and so I--I know that he knows but I--he never saw it, per se, and that started a whole another point of my life.
Speaker 1: Now 'Hot Stuff'--how did you approach it, did--was it just recipes or what did you do?
Speaker 2: I've never been able to, I mean apparently I have been one of those people whose worked at creating a genre, I didn't do it to deliberately it just happened.  I've never been able to just deal with a recipe.  First of all because I kind of, I believe that recipes don't exist in a void, and I believe, I can't cook from a recipe, so that's the first step I need to say.  I need to be upfront about that.  I really am an improvisational cook.  I was reading many of these, you know, oh, bits of Julia Child's and just how much she truly despised the whole idea of improvisational cooking, but I really think that most African Americans do the same thing with food that we do with jazz--we do riffs on it.  I mean and a recipe is not static, it may say a tablespoon or a teaspoon of salt, but is it Diamond Crystal or Morton['s]?  Morton's are saltier than Diamond Crystal, if you're using fleur de sel, well first of all you'd be wrong 'cause it's finishing salt.  Are you using sea salt?  Salt has different degrees of saltiness and taste and so unless a recipe is absolutely hideously specific even up to an including ambient temperature in which the dish should be cooked, it's all subject to fluctuation, so I really don't think of recipes as being you know, static in that sense.  I also am somebody who's always been intrigued by the back story.  What's the history, why is that there, and so in order to do 'Hot Stuff' I wanted to know more about peppers and chilies, so I did sorts of things, you know, the researcher in me, the, the Ph.D. person in me did things like, I read Marco Polo's diaries about looking for the spices.  I read parts of [Christopher] Columbus' diaries about the new world chilies.  I looked at different kinds of chilies, I discovered the Scoville Scale.  Who knew somebody had tried to measure the heat scale of chilies, I, you know, I, I went through all of that, I mean there's much in there that has long since been bypassed and much in there that I would currently, gladly recant but for that moment in time, that was pretty interesting and it was one of the first books out that talked about chilies before the United States became chili heads.  I mean 'cause we're all eating chilies now, one sort or another you know, Reliable Market [Oak Bluffs, Massachusetts] up the street here--and this is uber-WASP [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant] territory--sells jalapenos fresh, you know it's all very interesting in that sense.
Story_ID: 210127
Speaker 1: It seems to me, just as a lay person with no education on this subject, that most of the hot pepper foods come from hot countries.
Speaker 2: Well there's something that I call the Chili Belt, well I mean I don't know that I called it, but there's something that is a chili belt that is I don't remember the exact number of degrees but so many degrees above and so many degrees below the equator and that is the area in which chilies, first of all, grow naturally and it is the, the area in which they're eaten naturally.  I mean chilies act as a natural thermostat.  They say in Ghana, "A good pepper will make you sweat," that's what you wanna do if you're hot, 'cause if you don't sweat your body doesn't regulate its temperature.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And so they really do perform a thermostatic function.
Speaker 1: Yeah does--do peppers play a role in the preservation of food at all?
Speaker 2: Yep, um-hm, but the other thing is, and this is stuff that folks still don't necessarily even get today--peppers are all new world, before the what the--what we food historians call the Columbian Exchange, which is to say before [Christopher] Columbus got here and unleashed the foods from this part of the world to the rest of the world, there were no chilies anywhere else.  I mean, so there were no chilies in Thai food, there were no chilies in Africa, there were no chilies in Indian food.  You begin to think about that.  You begin to realize--
Speaker 1: Some Indian food is very hot, I mean was it a.
Speaker 2: A lot of it is very hot, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Has a--I mean is it all because of chilies or.
Speaker 2: Much of it is because of chilies but there other things, there are any number of peppers that I call pre-Columbian peppers, I mean for example in, in western Africa there is the long pepper, there is the well, what is this grains of paradise for which the Grain Coast was named which is a cardamom relative.  There are cubebs, arguably not the same kind of heat as chilies, but heat, different kinds of heat, black pepper if you bite enough of it and certainly green corns, preserved green pepper corns are hot as well. So there are of those kinds of things, but that's kinda some of the stuff that I learned in the first book ['Hot Stuff: A Cookbook in Praise of the Piquant,' Jessica B. Harris] and then that came out and was a reasonable success, in fact in some ways, it's been or as more successful than any of the other books--
Story_ID: 210128
Speaker 1: It ['Hot Stuff: A Cookbook in Praise of the Piquant,' Jessica B. Harris] had paperback sale, it actually had a British sale, and I wanted to do a book, that was, a book that was close to me and the publisher wasn't really interested in it, and it was a book that I really wanted to do. And I had written 'Hot Stuff' for the grand and royal sum of four thousand dollars.  Four thousand dollars seems to be a big figure, it's what my parents [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris and Jesse Brown Harris] paid for the house here [Oak Bluffs, Massachusetts] (laughter) is maybe what gets us started and stuff, and it certainly is what I got for my first book, and it's like, but I really wanna do this book, "Well we can't give you any more money than we gave you for your first book".  It's like, okay, that's the nice thing about having a full-time job, I was still teaching at Queens [College, New York, New York], and I said, I really wanna write this book and that's the book that came out called 'Iron Pots & Wooden Spoons: Africa's Gifts to New World Cooking' [Jessica B. Harris]. And it's the book that started me off on what is arguably still the journey that I'm on.
Story_ID: 210129
Speaker 1: It ['Iron Pots & Wooden Spoons: Africa's Gifts to New World Cooking,' Jessica B. Harris] was about connections, and it was a book that was a direct outgrowth of a combination of things ranging back to the U.N. School [United Nations International School, New York, New York] to the working as a travel editor at Essence to the things that my mouth told me as I traveled, and that whole kind of ability, which I was very fortunate to have been perhaps eating with a family in Senegal one day and then, I don't know, two or three months later be in South Carolina and have a bell go off that goes, wait a minute, you've tasted this before, is basically what the genesis of that book was and the whole idea was to start talking about the connections between the food of Africa, and the food of this hemisphere, and that was the beginning of a tracing of what I call a culinary continuum. And it lead to all of the subsequent books up until the book that is going to come out in September, which is sort of slightly different book, different subject. And so that book is kinda like the key book in a way.  It was reissued I think in--
Speaker 2: It is, it's been out a while, you know, I've seen it over and over.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well no I mean it was published in '91 [1991] but it's been reissued again in I think 2001 or something like that and a ten-year anniversary kind of reissue, although it doesn't say ten-year anniversary, and that's the book that made people start to look at me if you will.  A lady named Nancy Harmon Jenkins who was doing a series for the New York Times called "Cooks on the Map" said, "Hey, you know I wanna," and she called me up you know I'm minding my own business you know (laughter) teaching school [at Queens College, New York, New York], and she called and said, "no, no I wanna talk to you and I wanna come out and I want you to cook dinner and I want to interview you", and she came all the way to Brooklyn [New York, New York] and interviewed me and sat down and, you know, we had a lovely conversation.  She came out with this amazing article about me, that was the first that I'd ever read that I was a culinary historian, and what happens, I think, in many cases is when somebody tells you are something, then you kind of have to step up to the plate and be that something, because it, you know, it tells you something you didn't even know.  I mean I didn't know there was anything such as culinary history.  I had no idea, I was just writing a book about connections, I was writing about--a book about things that my mouth told me, you know, things that I knew, things that I didn't know necessarily that I could explain or even wanna try to explain, but things that I just knew were real and that were about black people and how we eat in the [African] Diaspora, and by the time that came out I had been you know back and forth to certainly western Africa enough.  Western Africa for me being mainly the French speaking countries, the Senegal, Ivory Coast [Cote d'Ivoire], Benin, Togo, but equally Ghana, I had been to Morocco, I had, you know, had a fair familiarity with some of the, you know, totemic foods if you will of continent. And that 'Iron Pots & Wooden Spoons' sort of traced this continuum and, certainly, arguably, four out of the five subsequent books after that have just been about more detailed stops on the continuum.
Story_ID: 210130
Speaker 1: We've got 'Sky Juice and Flying Fish[: Traditional Caribbean Cooking,' Jessica B. Harris].
Speaker 2: Well 'Sky Juice and Flying Fish,' traditional Caribbean culture is just that-it's traditional Caribbean cuisine or cooking is about the food of the Caribbean, it was the next stop.  It's, it looks island by island at the kinds of food that were eaten, or that are eaten, and then provides recipes and you know headnotes and little essays, and that's kind of become what my cookbooks do--they give an overview and then essays and headnotes and recipes and then Caribbean lead, not so much lead to but Brazil.  The introduction in 'Iron Pots [& Wooden Spoons: Africa's Gifts to New World Cooking,' Jessica B. Harris] really talks about drawing a line, a line from West Africa to South America and then moving that line up.  So 'Tasting Brazil[: Regional Recipes and Reminiscences,' Jessica B. Harris] look at the immediate hit, which is South America, which is specifically Brazil where I've spent a fair amount of time, and it looks also pretty specifically at the Afro-Brazilian cooking of Brazil, particularly the cooking of the State of Bahia [Brazil] which is the kind of capitol of Afro-Brazil, and so it looks at a lot of the dishes that come out of the Candomble houses, the Candomble being the Bahian version of the Yoruba religion as celebrated in that city [Salvador, Brazil].  I have spent a lot of time in the Candomble houses particularly in Casa Branca do Engenho Velho [Salvador, Bahia] which is the--arguably certainly one of the two or three oldest Candomble houses in Bahia which would then arguably make it one of the two or three oldest in Brazil, and I am proud to say that I am an initiate in Casa Branca, so my time was spent not just observing but also participating in a way and that--informs that book in another kind of way, although it is a cookbook, it is not the deep text of the food of the gods, which is a whole 'nother book which at some point my get written because one of the ways that the food of Africa has survived in this hemisphere is in the various ritual meals of the various African religions that survive in the hemisphere be it Vodun, be it Candomble, be it arguably Macumba, and so on and so forth.
Story_ID: 210131
Speaker 1: And even in North America and some of the--
Speaker 2: To a certain extent in North America.  There have been some studies in the Sea Islands that look at, look at some of the Islamic things, like a rice cake that's called saraka, which takes its name from Sara [sic. Sadaqah] as in offering, as in alms, so that there are, there are twists and things that, that do happen.  One of the big differences between those two books which would say the Caribbean ['Sky Juice and Fly Fishing: Traditional Caribbean Cooking,' Jessica B. Harris] and Brazil ['Tasting Brazil: Regional Recipes and Reminiscences,' Jessica B. Harris] and the book that--well actually there are two books that are on the pile immediately after it, but the one that would immediately follow it in terms of the culinary continuum which is not that one, but which is 'The Welcome Table[: African-American Heritage Cooking,' Jessica B. Harris] is that that the Caribbean and Brazil were, in many ways, colonized by Roman Catholics who did different things.  Most Protestants didn't baptize their slaves because baptizing them would acknowledge them as human beings and, you know, that then creates a whole 'nother set of problems, the Roman Catholics baptized, and so you have two different kinds of things going on.  I don't know which was better or which was worse.  At some point I always use to say if I ever were forced to go back and get another doctorate I would want do it on comparative colonialism because I think it's absolutely an astonishing subject and we really don't know what we're talking about in terms of who we are in the hemisphere until we start looking at these different influences, but that being said, the allowing of drums being played, the allowing--however outlawed it may have been--of the survival of traditional religions, happened in another way in places that were Roman Catholic from the way that it happened in places that were Protestant, and if you start to think about that and look at that, the only place that was largely Roman Catholic, and that in fact was a part of the Caribbean for much of its history, is New Orleans [Louisiana], and in New Orleans we have the food.  We don't know--don't necessarily have it specific or particular to each Loa or Orisha, but we have a lot of the surviving food in a different kind of way.
Story_ID: 210132
Speaker 1: There's some surviving religion I guess there are two in--the Hutu and--
Speaker 2: Sure the Hutu, absolutely, I mean we've got the surviving religion.
Speaker 1: And the drums.
Speaker 2: Working roots.
Speaker 1: Congo Square [New Orleans, Louisiana]--
Speaker 2: Well Congo Square absolutely, it's the only place in the continental United States where the drum wasn't outlawed.  You start thinking about it the Georgia Slave Codes outlawed the drums, I mean so many other places, I mean once you start getting to the Sea Islands then there were so few whites on those islands for so much of the year that nobody knows what was and wasn't going on but that's where you got the (unclear) shots, that's where you've got some of the food in another kind of way, so we have it we just have had to use it differently, show it differently, transform it differently so it doesn't come above ground in the same kind of way.  One of the dishes that you can eat today if you go to Senegal is a dish called (unclear)--(unclear) ain't nothing but Hoppin' John.
Speaker 1: A popular dish in--yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, you look--
Speaker 1: Which is beans really--
Speaker 2: It's rice and--
Speaker 1: Beans and rice.
Speaker 2: It's black-eyed peas and rice you know and throughout the [African] Diaspora some kind of legume, black-eyed pea, gunga [sic. gungo] pea, Congo pea, gandules, what have you, certainly that Gunga, Congo, gandules give us the African sonority that even hints at its name, and rice being eaten for good luck at the holiday season.  So we've got all of these things.  It's just about playing connect the dots and that's part of what I do as I try to play connect the dots.
Speaker 1: Now these are dots that have been almost banned in the black community for many, many years.  People didn't want to talk about connections to Africa, and.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly, but not so much recently, I mean, I was on--
Speaker 1: Well recently, yeah--
Speaker 2: TV once--well not TV, actually on drive-in, call-in radio when the 'Welcome Table[: African-American Heritage Cooking,' Jessica B. Harris] came out and I didn't even remember what town I was in but it was funny because a black lady called, and she was fascinating, absolutely fascinating because they, you know, had announced, you know, [HistoryMaker] Jessica [B.] Harris who has written this book and who is a Ph.D. and who--this that and the other and she just could not get wrapped around all of that. It's like but she's a Ph.D. and she still wants to talk about our food, you know, well how can she do--she's not like the other Ph.Ds., what--how can she--I mean it was wonderful in a way and it was certainly validating in a way but she really--the Ph.Ds. that she knew, or that she thought she knew, would not have been interested in grandma. And I mean one of the things that I like to warn people about and that I hope I don't do is hop over, what I call, hop over the quilt to get to the kente [cloth]. Your grandma wore a quilt, she didn't have kente. And so you know the 'Welcome Table' to me is the bedrock book, 'cause that's the book that has my baby pictures in it, that's the book that has, you know, my grandma's recipes in it.  That the book that has the food that I grew up eating, you know it's the food of the American South and that's a whole 'nother step on the [culinary] continuum; it's another area, another way, another possibility, so that, you know, when you start to talk about the continuum it shows up different ways in different places. And, you know, and the beat's still going on.  So that that is, you know, how it winds and how it wanders.
Story_ID: 210133
Speaker 1: So we've gone from defining it to now working that, or dancing that [culinary] continuum if you will.  I'm gonna leave the next one out and come to the last two, which are the most recent two on the continuum, 'The Africa Cookbook[: Tastes of a Continent,' Jessica B. Harris], which basically looks at the other side, so it takes it from this side to that side.  What was the stuff and arguably it's not was, because African food has evolved, too.  We talked about chilies earlier but that whole idea of there was no corn in Africa, there was no cassava in Africa, there were no tomatoes in Africa, there were no chilies in Africa, oh they don't eat a lot of potatoes but there weren't any potatoes in Africa before 1492, so all of this stuff is getting there just around the time, I mean if you think about it wasn't Elmina Castle [Elmina, Ghana] built in 1493 or 1491 or something like that, so just about the time that this massive de-population.
Speaker 2: Elmina being a slave castle right--
Speaker 1: Elmina being a slave castle on the Coast of Ghana, so what is it Sao Jorge da Mina 'cause it was Portuguese, 'cause it was the Portuguese.  So this, this repopulating, this complexion change of the new world as a result of slavery, enslavement--and all of those things sort of triangulating again at the same time so that, that food if it had arrived was only beginning to get embedded. Okay 1492--by 1592 the slave trade is pumping folks into Brazil, Mexico, Veracruz [Mexico]--all of that part of the world is already being transformed.  By the time you get to 1692, the Caribbean is being transformed, and by the time you get to 1792 and beyond, the United States is being transformed, and in that crucible of those three hundred years, 'cause by the time you get to 1892, four hundred years, the trade is over, but in those intervening three hundred years, this food is anchoring itself in Africa and bouncing back and forth across the Atlantic [Ocean] in all sorts of ways.  You asked at the very beginning of this what was my favorite food and I said okra. Why?  Because okra is indigenous to Africa, and wherever you see okra in the world, Africa has been--wherever, that includes southern India where they call it bhindi, that includes the Middle East where they eat a lot of it, that includes the world and so looking at this whole migration of foodstuffs and how this stuff gets out and gets into the ebb and flow and how it starts to transform things is really a way of looking at history.  And Zora [Neale Hurston] used to say she looked at the world through a spyglass of anthropology, Zora Neale Hurston.  I look at history, if you will, through the spyglass of the plate--
Story_ID: 210134
Speaker 1: And you do write a lot of history, just in glancing through these books, there's a lot of history covered here.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: A lot of culture being discussed.
Speaker 2: And as I increasingly write I get more and more involved with the history because it really is about the history.  History is way more interesting to me than the two cups, one cup, three tablespoons, 'cause I told you earlier I can't follow that anyhow (laughter) so.
Speaker 1: And I suppose history is more, is more real with some food in it than it is with just a series of heavyweight championships of conquests and so forth.
Speaker 2: Well yeah, but also it a way that makes it immediately apprehendable to everybody.  You don't have to be a scholar, you don't have to have a high school degree, a college degree or even a grade school degree to know dinner, but if somebody comes to you and say, "What you got on your plate for dinner?" and you say, "I got some chitterlings and some black-eyed peas and rice and some collard greens with some hot sauce, and maybe some cornbread or some corn pone," and that person can get back to you and say, "well you know your history's on that plate," 'cause the corn pone comes from the lake with the Indians [Native Americans] 'cause the word pone is basically a Native American word, and the corn was part of the three sisters: corn, squash and beans, because they grew in symbiosis.  The corn provided the stalk, the beans grew around it and the squash could shade things.  That's the corn, the rice--most of us don't know still to this day that West Africa has its own native rice.  We all think of rice, China, rice, Asia.  West Africa has its own native rice, it's a wet rice, it grows a particular way, it is its own genus and species, it's oryza glaberrima.  It's that rice that made the wealth of Carolina, and that agricultural system is a phenomenal book called 'Black Rice[: The African Origins of Rice Cultivation in the Americas,' Judith A. Carney] that runs all of that down, but the whole idea of the task system, the dikes and the raising and lowering of water, that's now how they grow rice in China.  That's how they grow rice in Senegal, that's how they grow rice in Liberia, that's how they grow rice in Sierra Leone and it's that rice, that agriculture, that rizzi [ph.] culture that is what happened in South Carolina. So, all of those grand mansions on the battery and all those grand ole' South Carolina plantations.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Built on African agriculture know-how.
Speaker 1: There's even, there's a plantation in Darien [Georgia] I know in Georgia where on the [Georgia] Coast, you know, near where they grew rice that has a film about how rice was grown and some of the most shocking you know information I've ever heard about the--slavery was in that film about how intense the labor was in rice.
Speaker 2: Labor intensive, I mean but if you think about all of the things, I mean cotton was the okay one, cane is horrific.  I mean I was just down in Guadalupe [Mexico], if If you look it's like a wall, and what you're gonna do with that wall with everything is razor sharp.  I mean I'm not saying that cotton was easy 'cause those cotton bolls are pointy, and will pinch you and its got thorns on it, it will cut you, it will scratch you.  Indigo is toxic okay and swamp--rice, you standing in water.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Mosquito-infested water--
Speaker 1: Often a hundred degree water.
Speaker 2: And we're talking BQ, before quinine, okay?  So all of this stuff is unbelievably labor intensive, but the African agriculture could be labor intensive because you were working as a group for the community, very different from working in bondage for somebody else altogether.
Story_ID: 210135
Speaker 1: I noticed here just in your place a number of books on Haiti and Haitian-- there's a book with pictures of Haiti from 1492 to, to after the [Haitian] Revolution in 1791 and, and just you know--have you been to Haiti quite a few times?
Speaker 2: I've been to Haiti a lot in fact I've even written a guidebook section on Haiti.  I took my mom [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris]; I drag my mom a whole lot of places after my dad [Jesse Brown Harris] died.  My mom and I had fifteen years' worth of traveling and learning each other and teaching each other and one of the places that I took her was Haiti and in fact we were there just before--it's gonna do it again--sorry.  Okay, Haiti.  Well I dragged my poor ole' mom to Haiti and she got off the plane and said, "This is a very special place in God's world".  Haiti is a most amazing place, it is beautiful, beautiful.  The people are extraordinarily industrious.  I mean, the poorest of the poor may beg, but they're also working.  I mean, if there are leftover orange peels, those orange peels are out in the sun drying so that they can make a liquor out them.  We talk about how, you know, fancy and fine and highfalutin we are about being ecologically sound and we recycling everything, nothing goes to waste, old tire, car tires become shoes.  Everything has a use, old plastic bags aren't just hanging on the side of the road being garbaged, they're being braided into rugs, I mean and, and it's done with such an elan and such panache and such a sense of aesthetic and art as to be totally breathtaking if you can see that and it's all about, you know, I guess it's glass half empty, people glass half full people you can't ignore the other part, but you can also see the other side.  It's a very interesting, very special place.
Story_ID: 210136
Speaker 1: 'Beyond Gumbo[: Creole Fusion Food from the Atlantic Rim,' Jessica B. Harris].
Speaker 2: Okay, the minute you write a book and it comes back to you, the first thing you wanna do is tear your hair out and say, "Oh no! I wanted to do that differently, say something else, move beyond that," whatever.  So 'Beyond Gumbo' is really a looking again, if you will, at some of the same things that I covered in terms of 'Iron Pots & Wooden Spoons[: Africa's Gifts to New World Cooking,' Jessica B. Harris], but expanded and I'm ready to go back and do that again.  The sub-title of 'Beyond Gumbo' says a little bit about what has happened in the interim.  The original--the first book was 'Iron Pots & Wooden Spoons: Africa's Gifts to New World Cooking,' and this one is 'Beyond Gumbo: Creole Fusion Food from the Atlantic Rim.'  So there are two things operating here, one is that I'm looking now at the whole idea of the region as being a rim and what I did was I took two big culinary buzzwords fusion food, 'cause everybody's talking fusion food which I think is often confusion, but the other--everybody talks about Pacific Rim food okay.  The Atlantic Rim is the rim that this hemisphere grew out of.  We didn't come from the West to the East, we went from the East to the West, and the whole idea of the Atlantic Rim which then encompasses all of the points that we've come from or many of the points--all of the departure points that we've come from for sure, and all the arrival points that we've landed at--though when you start looking at that rim and working that rim, that's when you really begin to be able to make those connections in another way, and then I take the word Creole, part of it is because I've got a house in New Orleans [Louisiana], and Creole is a word that's on my mind, but the other part of it is because we tend to be--it's an unusual term to use for the United States but--insular in the United States or certainly chauvinistic.  We don't see ourselves even as black Americans in a world picture, and it's about a world picture.
Story_ID: 210137
Speaker 1: If we look at ourselves individually as X, or Y or Z and keep living life on this peculiar little hyphen that we've all started doing, we're African American or we're Caribbean American or we're Jamaican American and each one narrowing us down even more into our own little enclaves, Queens American, or whatever, if we don't enlarge that, we lose our power, because when we become hemispheric there are a whole lot of us, there are way more of us if we become African American or Afro-American or whatever we wanna do with that in the hemispheric sense then if we do it in, what a friend of my calls, the United States-ian sense. And so Creole, if you look at it, you begin to think, Creole, but Creole is also criolla which is also crioula and it really is about what happened when Africa met Europe in the Americas, and there's nobody who is here whether, you know, of African descent who is not Creole.  Now that doesn't necessarily play in New Orleans [Louisiana] where they're being very specific about it, but in the interim, in the--I guess absolute sense it becomes the case of all of us including those Creoles in New Orleans. And so 'Beyond Gumbo' ['Beyond Gumbo: Creole Fusion Food from the Atlantic Rim,' Jessica B. Harris] starts out with about five or six or seven pages--or at least four or five--of definition: what is Creole?  And it ends up with my taking basically a linguistic tact, Creole is a mixing of two, in the linguistic sense it's languages, but in the culinary sense or in the--the sense in which I'm using it for the book of two beings if you or two ways of being in which the result becomes greater than either of the two that produced it.  So that the whole idea of a Creole culture really then takes on a whole 'nother kind of thing.  It takes on another kind of international way of connecting these dots, and in fact in that book, the food is done in flights, so that you'll see a corn cake, and you might see two or three variations of it.   You'll see a chicken stew, and you might see two or three variations of it.  You'll see all of these things and how they connect.  So the connecting of the dots is a little bit--even more evident perhaps in that one.  When you get to the beverages I mean there's a caipirinha which is a Brazilian white rum, limes, sugar.  You get a Ti' Punch, white rum, lime, sugar--one's from [State of] Bahia [Brazil], one's from Guadalupe [Mexico].  You get a mojito, white rum, spearmint lime, soda water, I mean you start connecting the dots and so 'Beyond Gumbo' also expands the territory.  I still have more stuff I would like to do.  At some point I'd love to do a book on, on Central America, Afro-Central American.  It's a part of the world we really don't even look at but Veracruz [Mexico] and Belize and, and the Carribes who are in Belize and just all of--Panama, all of that part of the world, that connects to Africa as well.  Some of those recipes, just a few turn up in 'Beyond Gumbo' but that's a whole nother thing and then as a final book in this series, 'cause I mean somewhere in my head I see these as a box set 'cause they're all related and they all depend on each other one way or the other.  I see East Africa and what happens when East Africa moves into Asia.  So you get Yemen, you get Saudi Arabia, you get southern India.  You get all of those places that also have their Africanity, and then that takes me a long way from home.
Story_ID: 210138
Speaker 1: You've got a book called 'A Kwanzaa Keepsake[: Celebrating the Holiday with New Traditions and Feasts,' Jessica B. Harris]--
Speaker 2: Okay, well that's the last of the cookbooks.  It actually came out in '95 [1995] which was the same year as 'The Welcome Table[: African-American Heritage Cooking,' Jessica B. Harris] and that is basically a holiday book.  A lot of things came and sort of triangulated, and one of--some of the things that were interesting and some of 'em were very sad.  I wanted to do a holiday book. I started looking at Kwanzaa.  I don't have any children.  I think Kwanzaa grows in importance if you have children.  I think by the time you get to be my age your holiday traditions are pretty much set, and you know?  I grew up with a Christmas tree, I'm going to have a Christmas tree.  Now, I may have a kinara with my Christmas tree, (laughter) but I'm going to have a Christmas tree 'cause that's my tradition, that's what I knew, that's what I grew up with, that I was inculcated with, that is part of me. And I love the holiday and I don't see any point in giving it up.  With children, however, I think that the values and virtues of Kwanzaa are pretty extraordinary, and I like the idea of the holiday.  Are there parts of it that make me a little nervous?  I mean there are parts of it that get a little too--I mean I've heard.  I mean it's not so much parts of the holiday, it's parts of the way that some people celebrate that get almost militaristic, and that, you know, I don't want--I don't like it in anybody else, (laughter) I don't wanna start it either, but the whole notion of being able to know where you're from.  It, it's certainly why I've written most of the cookbooks.  It is important and it is a way--Kwanzaa is a wonderful teaching tool for, for children, for young adults, for people growing up in any kind of household--Christian, Islamic, atheist.  It allows you to know where you've been.  It allows you to understand about honoring ancestors and honoring ancestors is probably, if anything the leitmotif or leitmotif to everything that I've done.  It's all about talking about those backs that brought you over.
Story_ID: 210139
Speaker 1: You know, there's something about ancestors and food and history that seem to go together so well, and I don't how you might--you can articulate this, but there's a movie called 'Antwone Fisher' that Denzel Washington directed--
Speaker 2: --which I've never seen.
Speaker 1: Well the opening scene is--this boy is dreaming, he has no parents, but he's dreaming about his ancestors.  He goes into a--they open this barn and there's a table there with--first of all there are people dressed in African garments, 19th century garments, you know, 20th century, from various stages '30s [1930s], '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s].  There's hundreds of 'em and they're all welcoming him to this table that's filled with food, and they're all standing around the table and he walks in, the scene wouldn't be the same without the food you know, and it's the most beautiful scene in the movie, the opening scene and the rest of the movie is about him trying to find his identity, who he is.
Speaker 2: Find his, yeah.  Well, I mean I think that well the book that came out the same year as the--['A] Kwanza Keepsake[: Celebrating the Holiday with New Traditions and Feasts,' Jessica B. Harris] was the 'The Welcome Table[: African-American Heritage Cooking,' Jessica B. Harris].  I mean I think that whole notion particularly coming out of enslavement, and, you know, the bottom line is arguably all of us who are blacks in this hemisphere share that whole notion of enslavement.  I always somehow or other end up quoting this which is Nicolas Guillen said, you know, "And we will know each other by the fragments of chain in our eyes," and I think we do.  I mean I think that whole notion of that's what we share.  Now the food on the plate and the importance of the food on the plate is very directly related to those fragments of chains.  We spent so many years, so many decades, so many centuries without, that when you talk about wanting to talk about a city called heaven, it's gotta have food, it's gotta have bounty, it's gotta have overflowing.  Man's idea of heaven, in a way, is very much based in what was lacking.  I say that and as I say that I'm thinking about Islamic heaven--it's a garden.  Why is it a garden?  It's the heaven of people who grew up in the desert.  Our heaven is a bounteous heaven filled with food, you know overflowing plates.  It's--our nexus for communion, it's where we meet.  It's where we solve our problems.  It's where we solve our difficulties and I think that extends even beyond African Americans certainly for us that's it.  I mean if you can get five folks to sit around the kitchen table, you can probably solve their problem. But if you look at it, all of the armistices in the history of all of the world wars, tables. All of the mediation, tables--okay?  The table is an extraordinary potent spot, extraordinarily potent spot.  What transpires and transacts is transformational, transformative.  Christian religion, centers around that Last Supper, table, the Catholic mass, table, okay?  I mean when you start talking about western civilization and arguably we are a part of that, whether by choice or by force, that table is right there at the center of everything.
Story_ID: 210140
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Oof! Here goes another tape--that we don't forget where we're from.  I mean and I mean that very profoundly I mean in, in this whole lengthy discussion of me.  It's very obvious to, to see that I have had incredible opportunities that are not given to everybody.  I like to hope that I have remained grounded, I think that it's important for others who may have these singular opportunities, and I say that particularly perhaps because I'm here, here being, Oak Bluffs, Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts. And I look around and I see children of privilege, but who don't necessarily know that they're children of privilege because to them the privilege seems ordinary and not necessarily privilege, and I think it's important that we know privilege when we have it.  I think we need to keep that.  First of all because it keeps us humble and that's never a bad thing, second of all, 'cause if you end up for whatever reason not having the privilege, you know how to function.  We did a lot of things interestingly and strangely and not necessarily to our betterment.  I think you know the great debate about segregation and whether it was the best thing or not the best thing.  In terms of what we lost when we lost community.  We need to be careful that we don't raise children to think of privilege as normal.  Do we really believe that we are going to be an absolute and integral part of this nation?  I'm not sure how optimistic about that I really am, and if we don't think that's gonna happen, then what does that mean in terms of how we rear our children?  I don't have any children and people always say, "Oh," you know and I say, "wait, I got everybody's children" 'cause on August 31st I will have sixty brand new ones, which means I get sixty kids a year [at Queens College, New York, New York]. They are mine, they are in many ways more mine than they are their parents, but it is important to, to respect that.  We need to start respecting ourselves and respecting you know our talents.  We need to start or continue in some cases 'cause it's not you know, this is not a mandate or the scrolls coming down from the mountain tablets.  We need to love each other more across our differences.
Story_ID: 210141
Speaker 1: --When you start talking about hip hop, you know, we start talking about contemporary music, contemporary actions.  I'm all for thug life, but what does it mean.  I'm the one that wants to know.  Do you know what a thug really is, or is just a term?  Do you know the derivation of the fact that it actually goes back to ancient India and who they were, or is it just something that happens?  How do we see ourselves?  How do we see our children?  I mean to all of those parents whose kids show up in my classroom [at Queens College, New York, New York] with their little you know French Foreign Legion do-rag and their baggy, baggy pants and their undone sneakers and one leg up in the jeans and the other leg down and the big ole'--to those parents.  What do those parents want for those children?  I don't know, it's a question mark.  I only know how to approach it the way I was raised with it, so one of the things that I do (laughter), and that I'm getting' ready to go do it another two weeks, is make 'em take off the do-rags, make 'em take off the earphones, make 'em turn off the cellphone, make 'em face forward and teach 'em what I think I can and what they want to lean of the what I think I can, but I always have these questions, it's like, if I had a child and he was eighteen and going to college, would I let him go outta my house looking like that? And I don't know the answer 'cause I don't know what eighteen year olds are in the home context.  I know what they are when I get 'em, and in some cases all they're really asking for is somebody to say, "Hey, you know, maybe you don't need to wear that today."  So when I say I think we need to love ourselves a little bit more, some of us probably need to tell our kids, maybe you don't need to wear that today.  I tell people I'm a happy dinosaur, in some ways it really does take that proverbial village, and we need to start being that village more about our children.  Okay, so one of the things that I would hope for the future to get back to the answer to your question, was that we will pay more attention to our children, listen more to our children, teach more to our children and love more to our children.
Story_ID: 210142
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done, is there any major thing that you would change?
Speaker 2: Nah.  I tell the world that I live somewhere between Edith Piaf and Frank Sinatra.  "Regrets I have [I've had] a few; but then again, too few to mention," and Edith Piaf was that I don't regret a goddamn thing.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Story_ID: 210143
Speaker 1: What would you see at this juncture? 'Cause you still have a lot of writing left in you, I believe.
Speaker 2: I hope.
Speaker 1: What would you see at this juncture as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Gosh, you know it's so funny, I mean this, awful sorts of strange things that have triangulated from me this year.  This is archival so it doesn't even matter but I happen to know that I'm getting in October a lifetime achievement award [Southern Foodways Alliance] and it's like, I'm too young, I don't have a legacy.  I mean it, it's rather frightening to have people sit and talk about legacy.  Maybe I'm reading too much into the term, I mean I guess we all have a legacy.  Everybody's got something.  My mother [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris] probably summed it up best, 'cause you know her friends would sort of show off their grandchildren.  My mother would say and there, I think, seven when she died, actually I hope eight, but it was like "I've got eight grandchildren.  They sit on a shelf or they sit down nicely, they behave themselves and they're all dressed in leather," 'cause every book that I wrote she would have her first copy leather bound and so I guess that's my legacy.  I hope it's not my ultimate legacy 'cause I got more stuff I want to do.
Story_ID: 210144
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Gosh, as someone who had a good time, who enjoyed life to the absolute fullest, who ate well, party hardy, partied hardy--heartily, loved deeply and thought profoundly.
Story_ID: 210145
Speaker 1: --I get the impression that you love to entertain and you like conversation and people to come over and that sort of thing, so I--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do, I do. I mean, I love people, I love cooking for people, I love to entertain people, I love to sit down with people.  Somebody years ago sat on that front porch and said, "Good conversation is hard to come by."  Good conversation is one of the hardest things in the world to get and when you get it, it is something to be cherished.
Story_ID: 210146
Speaker 1: This is my mother [Rhoda Alease Jones Harris] and me, I think I was maybe one or probably two, I mean from the size of me, one or two and it's a photo that she had at her bedside, and so when she died I put it by my bedside.
Speaker 2: This was 1949 or '50 [1950]?
Speaker 1: Forty-nine [1949] or '50 [1950], exactly.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Okay, my mother and father [Jesse Brown Harris] at our house in Queens [New York, New York] on Anderson Road, 17975 Anderson Road, and this is a Christmas morning so what we did was we would open our presents Christmas Eve and then we'd always save back one for Christmas morning over breakfast.
Speaker 2: That's my father and he is on the deck of the Ole' Islander, this is coming up to Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts], one summer for vacation.  I don't know what year but it's early on.  It's probably in the late, well early '60s [1960s], I would guess, late '50s [1950s] early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You might want to give his name, too, just for.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is my father, Jessie Brown Harris and my mother, Rhoda Alease Jones Harris, sittin' on the front porch of our house in Oak Bluffs [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: This is my mother's father, Arthur Dempsey Jones who was a Baptist minister in Plainfield, New Jersey.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is my mother's mother who is Bertha Philpot Jones who was his wife.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Okay this is my fiftieth birthday, this is in New York [New York] at a restaurant called Mesa Grill.  Left to right it is me, the birthday girl, my good friend Theodora Comaclou [ph.] and her husband Tao Feiel Comaclou [ph.].  They are both from Benin, West Africa and Tao Feiel was the head of Air Afrique airlines in New York City [New York, New York], although I had met them twenty years prior in Africa and on the end is my mother and she is wearing jewelry that she made.
Speaker 2: Tail on the shot.
Speaker 1: Busy tearing up my dress and scratching up my legs.  My great-grandparents on my mother's side, Samuel Philpot and his wife, Rhoda Cobbs Philpot. And this is out in front of their house, I believe it is in Roanoke, Virginia.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I know of an artist in Chicago [Illinois] named David Philpot.
Speaker 2: I know and I've always wanted to meet him because we are related, I've seen pictures of him and he looks like family, so please tell him.
Speaker 1: Does he?  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: I've seen a picture of him in a book and he looks actually like the great-grandfather if you think about it.
Speaker 1: This is, I believe, my great-grandmother on my mother's side again, Rhoda Cobbs Philpot just in a different picture when she was younger.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is my mother, Rhoda Alease Jones Harris and this picture was taken in January of 2000 and she died in May of 2000, and she is wearing jewelry that she made.  This is a photo that was taken by [HistoryMaker] Chester Higgins [Jr.] who is a good friend of mine.
Speaker 2: That's a beautiful shot.
Speaker 1: Is he on the island, too, sometimes?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know if he's ever been up here.  His wife's [Betsy Kissam] family has a place up in Maine and so they go up there.  This is my father, Jesse Brown Harris, and this is a picture that was taken up here on Martha's Vineyard.  This was the year before he died, so this would be 1984.
Speaker 1: And this is my mother Rhoda Alease Jones Harris and my father Jesse Brown Harris [at Oak Bluffs, Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts]--
