Story_ID: 613565
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers project.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: William Robert Harvey, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, R-O-B-E-R-T, H-A-R-V-E-Y [HistoryMaker William Harvey].
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 29, 1941, Brewton, B-R-E-W-T-O-N, Alabama.
Speaker 1: All right, Sir what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Currently I'm president of Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: T--I don't know, what is today's date?
Speaker 1: Fourteenth.
Speaker 2: Okay, today is May 14, 2010.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're in my office on the campus of Hampton University.
Story_ID: 613566
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions that are kind of a warm up.  First one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I like vegetables, I like turnip greens and mustard greens and zucchini, squash, black eyed peas, cornbread and if I had to have add a meat in there I would say probably chicken, either fried or baked.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: That's easy. My favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: No, I, I like all times of the year, I like the four seasons.  One of the things that I like about Hampton [Virginia] is that we have the four seasons.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, my wife [Norma Baker Harvey] and I have a home in Hilton Head, South Carolina [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina], and I would think that that probably is our favorite destination.  We, get down there as often as we can.
Speaker 1: All right and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, I am bottom line oriented, I'm results oriented and I talk about results orientation and the bottom line often.  So, I would suspect that, that would be one of the things that would crop up often in my conversation.
Story_ID: 613567
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [W.D.C. Harvey] side.  But, we'll start with your fa- your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Her name was Claudis, C-L-A-U-D-I-C-E [sic.], Parker, P-A-R-K-E-R, Harvey, H-A-R-V-E-Y [Claudis Parker Harvey].
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was born in, in Monroeville, Alabama, but, I don't know the date of her birth.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Would you suspect it was around nine--1920 or so, or?
Speaker 2: May very well be, I just don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  What do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace the ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: I know her mother [Mamie Parker], know of her father [William Parker], know of her, her grandmother and father.  I did not know them.  And I know--I knew a number of my mother's aunts and uncles.  And I knew all of her brothers and sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they have any stories that have passed down through the family about what they were doing you know say at the turn of the century or during slave era or Civil War or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the stories that was passed down was that when my, my mother's father, my, my maternal grandfather passed in Monroeville, Alabama.  My mother's mother, my grandmother left Monroeville with I believe nine children and went to Pensacola, Florida.  My mother's mother was from that area not Pensacola.  She was from a place called Bagdad [Florida], which is outside of Milton, Florida, which is I suspect about thirty miles from Pensacola.  She took the children back to that area, just up and left.  And the story goes that she left to, that is my grandmother, my mother's mother left about thirteen thousand acres of land that my grandfather had amassed.  And in Alabama there was a law, and I'm not sure if it's still there now or not, that if you didn't pay taxes after seven years on a piece of property then it went into the public domain, so however much it was and there some dispute as to whether or not it was thirteen thousand acres or thirteen hundred acres, or exactly what it was.  But, all of that property was lost because my grandmother really didn't have any business sense.  She knew that the breadwinner had passed and she had nine children and she wanted to get back to Florida, where she had support and comfort and just up and left the property.  So, again even though there is some dispute as to the amount of the land, however much it was she left the house and the land.  And went back to, to Pensacola, Florida and that land was just lost.  So, that's one of the stories that I've heard that the, there are other stories about the fact that my grandmother's mother was full blood Indian, Creek Indian who married a black man.  So, that side of the family is basically black and red, Native American and African American.  So, I've heard stories about that as well.  So, those are two stories that I heard often.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there any speculation in the family that your grandmother, you're mother's--this is your, this is your mother's mother, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Would have, was had, some, some danger she was trying to escape from to when she moved to Florida?
Speaker 2: I don't think it was danger.  I think that the fact that she nine children and the breadwinner was, was dead.  She didn't work, she took care of the nine children and she didn't have any income.  And she left to go back to Florida, Pensacola, where she had a support system.  As far as I know that was the reason that she just up and left.
Speaker 1: And this is I guess I'm speculating this was would be during the, the Depression [Great Depression] I, I imagine?
Speaker 2: I think that it was during the '30s [1930s]. I'm not sure but, because my mother and father met and married in 1939.  I was born in 1941, so it was before then.  And I could have easily been the Depression era, the late '20s [1920s], early '30s [1930s].
Story_ID: 613568
Speaker 1: Well, did your mother [Claudis Parker Harvey] have any stories of growing up that she shared with you that you can share with us?
Speaker 2: Well, there were a lot of stories.  I don't know if I can share any of them because I'm not sure that any of them come readily to mind.  But, I remember my mother saying that her father [William Parker] always treated her rather special and some of the other siblings didn't particularly like that.  Because she would always, he would always tell her that he didn't want any other boys talking to her.  And he was gonna get two big dogs to walk with her wherever she went.  One on each side to make sure none of the boys would talk to her, so it was those kind of family stories.  And perhaps there were others that were family stories.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, did she have a chance to go very far in school in, Alabama?
Speaker 2: My mother graduated from high school; she did not go to college.  She, she was the salutatorian at her high school [Bethlehem Industrial Academy] in, in Monroeville, Alabama.  But, she did not go to college at all.  Well, I guess I'll take that back, because after we were born and out of the house, she actually did go back and take some courses at a junior college.  But, when she graduated from high school, she did not go to college at all.  And it was only after she had married and had grown children, did she go back and just take some courses.  She was not in a degree granting program.
Story_ID: 613569
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was Willie W-I-L-L-I-E, D.C., two middle initials, Harvey [W.D.C. Harvey].  And the D.C. didn't stand for anything.  Back during those times it's my understanding that a lot of black folk would give their childrens, give their children certain names like Colonel and Major and D.C. so that the white folks wouldn't call 'em by their first names.  They would have to call 'em either in this instance D.C, or Colonel or Major.  But, my father's two middle initials were D and C but they did not stand for anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a, can you give us his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My father was born May 28, 1905 and I think that he was born in a place called Boykin B-O-Y-K-I-N, Alabama, which is out from Brewton, Alabama, but I'm not absolutely sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, is, is there any lore about your father's family that, that is passed own about what they were doing, you know earlier in the.  Now, he was born in 1905 so that's?
Speaker 2: He was, he was older than my mother [Claudis Parker Harvey].  There's always lore.  I mentioned that my, my mother's side of the family was African American and Native American.  His side of the family was African American and Caucasian.  His grandfather, whose name was William Harvey [ph.], was a product of a white person and a black person.  And his, so his great-grandfather was white, his great-grandmother was African American.  And his grandfather was 50 percent white and 50 person black.  So, he came from that line as my mother came from African American and Native American line.  There are a lot of stories about my father.
Story_ID: 613570
Speaker 1: My father [W.D.C. Harvey] was a civil rights leader. He was a building contractor.  And he was a civil rights leader in Alabama.  And I think that some of the leadership qualities that I have today and actually practice today, came from my father.  During that time and we're talking about the 1940s and '50s [1950s].  There was no public accommodation in the South.  So, there were homes when civil rights leaders passed through a particular town, could stop and get a glass of tea or a meal or spend the night.  There were homes all over the South, you know, it was almost like an Underground Railroad, although it wasn't underground.  And my home was one of those, so those luminaries of the Civil Rights Movement, Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], his brother Reverend A.D. King [Alfred Daniel Williams King].  There's a man named LeFlore [John L. LeFlore], Asa Philip Randolph [A. Philip Randolph], and number of people, stopped by my home often for that obligatory tea or meal or to spend the night.  And my father allowed me to sit in when they were there, either at the dinner table or just in our living room.  The only proviso was that I could not speak; I could listen but I couldn't speak.  And I think that I gained a lot of my listening skill by attending those sessions, because as I said I could, I could listen but I could not speak.  And so many of the plans that were being formulated at that time I actually knew about them before the public knew about them because they were discussing them with my father and getting my father's input.  And, and the like.  Also, I knew about some of the promises and perils of leadership because they would discuss those as well.  The unfairness of the racist bigoted system and how that wouldn't deter them from what they wanted to do.  The criticism in the black community of some of them and how that wouldn't deter them.  And I remember, and I'm not sure who said this, but I use it often now myself.  I heard one of those luminaries talk about the fact that they wear criticism like a crown.  Because there were people who criticizing what they were doing.  Some of them thought that they were going too far too fast.  Some blacks thought they weren't going fast enough far enough.  But, they had their own agenda.  And I think that that helped to shape my life, listening to my father and these leaders, talk about their goals, their objectives, their promises, their problems and the perils of, of leadership.  So, that's something that has stuck with me to this very day.  I'm recounting it to you now, but I, I recount it often.  Because it was something that helped to transform me to be able to sit and to listen to what these people what you are seeing on the news and, and on television were talking about.  And planning and even commiserating about.  So, I got a lot of stories about my father and his role as a civil rights leader.  And he was the president of all the civil rights organizations at one time or another, in our area.  The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and other kinds of organizations that may not be national in scope.  And the reason is he was a building contractor.  He was not dependent on whites for his livelihood. As a matter of fact his, his territory was mostly Northwest Florida. Pensacola [Florida], Panama City [Florida], Milton [Florida] and he did some work in southern Alabama as well.  But, again some of the people who were middle class blacks, teachers and others could not afford to get involved because they would get fired.  Well, my father who was the most courageous man that I've ever met in my entire life, A) was not afraid of that and B) was not dependent on the, the white power structure to provide support for his family.  So, aside from his quest to end injustice he had those other things going for him as well.
Story_ID: 613571
Speaker 1: Was he able to finish school himself, or, or?
Speaker 2: No, my father [W.D.C. Harvey] didn't even finish high school because at the time that he came along blacks--they only had an eighth grade school for blacks.  So, he finished the eighth grade.  But I can tell you as one who has attended and graduated from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and been around some of the leading intellectuals of the 20th and the 21st century my father was the smartest man that I've ever met in my entire life.  My father did things that I marvel at today and tell people about him.  As I said he was building contractor, never went to college, never took any classes on, on, on anything in college.  But, specifically he used to draw his own plans.  He did not have an architect to do that.  He had a card table set up in my mother [Claudis Parker Harvey] and father's master bedroom.  And I remember he had a three sided ruler and he would draw plans for commercial buildings and very large homes.  As a matter of fact, my father's business was on a upper end, mostly whites.  Whites who were going to build, back then big mansions, commercial buildings.  My father apparently was very competitive because he got a lot of those contracts.  Well, he would sit up late at night drawing plans without the help of an architect nor did he have any draftsmen classes.  And he would draw the plans of course he would build the buildings.  Then he had crew, now you've got subcontractors you got electrical and plumbing and carpentry and, and the like.  But, he had all of those people on my payroll, carpenters and plumbers and pipefitters and roofers and electricians and the like.  All of them were on his payroll, at that time.  And as I said he would sit up and draw plans for, for major, major buildings.  Now, I am not sure of about what I'm going to tell you, but, I think that my father may have built the first mall in this country.  It was in Pensacola, Florida, it was called Navy Point Stores.  It was, it was marketed as 100 stores under one roof.  It's kind of like the big box stores now that you see, it--with, with all of over the country now.  Whether, it's Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.] or Kmart [Kmart Corporation], or the like.  Because it wasn't a mall like individual stores under one stores under one roof.  It was a great big structure, much larger than a football field and there were a hundred stores under there.  As I said, it was kind of like today the big box Walmarts and Kmarts and the like.  But, my father built that in Pensacola, Florida and it was called Navy Point Stores.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, he was always a high end builder and a very smart man particularly in math.  And all of this was self taught.  He was a terrific reader, as am I.  And I picked a lot of that up from him, because he always had really tons of books available in our home for my sister [Anne Harvey Allison] and me.  Much of many of which he had read, some he had not.  But references and encyclopedias and the like.  So, he picked up all of his knowledge from books; he was self taught.  But, I believe without any real emotion that he was the smartest man that I've ever met.
Speaker 1: Now, did he have some sort of mentor when it came to the draftsmanship and contracting and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: As far as I know he didn't.  He may have but as far as I knew he didn't.  You know I know of kids when I was a kid who could just draw nobody taught them, but they could draw.  You know in school, they would start drawing a likeness of us, nobody taught them, they just had that god given ability.  I believe that my father had that god given ability.  Now, there may have been somebody that I just don't know about, but I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did he work all over, let's see he, he built this, the store you just mentioned (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Navy Point Store.
Speaker 1: Navy Point Stores.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That is in Pensacola.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, did he work all over the South?
Speaker 2: No, he worked mostly in Northwest Florida and South--southern Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: His headquarters was in Pensacola, Florida.  But, he built homes and subdivisions and commercial establishments in Pensacola and, and Panama City, Florida.
Speaker 1: So, what, what did he call his business, what was his official business?
Speaker 2: It was Harvey Builders [ph.].
Speaker 1: Harvey Builders.
Speaker 2: That's what he called it.
Story_ID: 613572
Speaker 1: Is there a, a story about how your parents met?  Will you tell a story about that?
Speaker 2: If it is I don't know it.  As I said I know that they married in 1939, I was born in 1941, but I never heard or if I did hear I don't remember how they met.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you consider their personalities and their talents and their dispositions, which one of them do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Both, actually, you know, I've talked about my father [W.D.C. Harvey] being a leader, being a civil rights leader.  My mother [Claudis Parker Harvey] was the quiet type. She sang in the choir, she was a, a big Christian woman.  She attended church and encouraged us to do the same thing.  She was a probably for thirty or forty years was the chairman of her circle which is a missionary circle.  That used to meet every, every Monday at five o'clock at our home.  And she was a, a deeply religious woman.  Yet, she was a deeply practical woman.  For an example, something that I use that she says every day almost is that, "If you have a dollar you can't go to the grocery store and buy a dollar and twenty five cents' worth of groceries.  So what you got to do is to--you got to fit the cloth to the pattern."  She also used to say that, "Nothing fails but a try."  I think that, that I got my tenacity from her.  I got a lot of my sense about, about economics from her.  I got a lot of my leadership qualities and courage and other things from my father.  So, I think that I was a pretty good combination of my mother and my father.  Both of whom I think were simply the best.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, tell me about, now do, do you have siblings?
Speaker 2: I have one sister [Anne Harvey Allison].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is she younger or older?
Speaker 2: She's younger.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's younger.
Speaker 1: All right, by very many years or?
Speaker 2: She was born in 1945, so I'm, I'm about four, four and a half years older than she is.
Story_ID: 613573
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I can remember going to kindergarten.  I can, I remember my kindergarten teacher was Mrs. Branch [ph.].
Speaker 1: (Unclear)?
Speaker 2: My first grade teacher was Mrs. Willis [ph.].
Speaker 1: What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: It wasn't a school, I we went to her home and that's where she had kindergarten.
Speaker 1: Oh, oh.
Speaker 2: Mrs. Branch, it was at her home.  The school that I eventually went to for elementary school and junior high and high school was Southern Normal School and that was a school that was in Brewton, Alabama.  And it was a boarding school although I did not board.  They had both a girls and a boys dormitory.  But, I also have memories of my aunt. I called her Sissy, her name was Martha Hollinger [Martha Harvey Hollinger] and her husband who was Edd Hollinger.  I was born in their home, I, I have memories of them, I have memories of their home.  I have memories of my uncle giving me guidance on a number of things.  My Uncle Edd Hollinger was a barber.  And at that time he was one of the top African Americans in Brewton.  He had a fairly large barbershop right downtown that catered only to whites.  All of the barbers were black and all of their clientele was white.  So, we have memories of that, I used to see my uncle, who was more like my grandfather, Edd Hollinger, he would get up every day and shave.  I have memories of him with a straight razor sharpening it on a, they call it a (pronunciation) strap but it was a strap, sharpening the razor and then lathering up and shaving  and then putting on a suit every day.  And he would walk--they didn't have a car--he would walk to his shop, which he owned, in downtown Brewton.  I was the only shop in downtown Brewton owned by an African American.  And as I indicated, his entire clientele was, was white.
Speaker 1: Now, now that, that's almost like a throwback to the 19th century when the black barbers, you know, almost exclusively served white clients, if you?
Speaker 2: I think it is a throwback because when I knew my uncle, he was old then and he had owned that shop I don't know how long.  But, he'd owned that shop a long time and if I were to guess, and that's all it would be a guess, what probably the 1890s he was cutting hair probably, but I don't, I don't know, I don't know that.  It certainly was a throwback, because as I said he owned his shop in downtown Brewton.
Speaker 1: That's the, the insurance magnate in Atlanta [Georgia], I can't think of his name, the one that's got the big house over by--
Speaker 2: Jesse Hill?
Speaker 1: No, the other one started off as a barber, you know, with a shop like that, with a number of chairs, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Well, the, what you're saying is absolutely correct and it was acceptable (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Herndon [Alonzo Herndon].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was acceptable and nobody ever bothered him, because his clientele was white.
Story_ID: 613574
Speaker 1: So we were just talking the barbershop and the, you know.
Speaker 2: I was talking about the palatability of the fact that he owned property at a time when in, in, in, in, in the downtown Brewton [Alabama] when every other shop was owned by whites.  But, it was acceptable because he was catering to whites.  And he, he provided employment, I don't know how many, but I would suspect that he had fifteen barbers.  I mean I really don't remember that but I know to me it was always a lot of them.  And of course that was the obligatory shoe shine stand, where there was the man who was a older black man who shined shoes.  You could come in you could get a shave you could get a haircut, you could get your shoes shined.  And my [paternal] uncle [Edd Hollinger] did all of that, and his, the people that worked for him and with him.
Story_ID: 613575
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a very happy life.  My, I've talked to you about my father, my mo- mother [Claudis Parker Harvey], my [paternal] uncle, my aunt--I didn't talk too much about Sissy [Harvey's paternal aunt, Martha Harvey Hollinger], who also worked, she wo- she would walk all over the black neighbor and carried insurance.  I remember after I got up and got my license sometimes I would drive her because, I didn't want her to have to walk.  I can remember her with an umbrella in the heat of the day, to help shield the sun off her head.  So, I had a very pleasant--I can, I don't remember this but my mother and father told that my Uncle Edd Hollinger the one that owned the barbershop when I was born, they had an icebox.  And he said, "I got to get that boy a refrigerator for his milk."  So, he bought a refrigerator.  And I was told at the time that there were two or three refrigerators in Brewton [Alabama], three owned by whites and one owned by him.  Everybody else had, had iceboxes, where the ice man would come along and you would buy either a twenty-five pound ice or fifty or seventy-five pound of ice and that would go up top.  And it would keep the goods cold down in the bottom.  But, my uncle bought a, a refrigerator for me.  I even remember the name of it, it was a Frigidaire.  Because a lot of people used to say that, you know, would you go into the Frigidaire and get me some ice water.  Just like people say Xerox [Xerox Corporation] for copying.  Well, Frigidaire was one of the first and they kept that for a very long time.  And I remember after I got up and made some money I bought my aunt--my uncle was dead then--a new refrigerator.  But, I've talked about my aunt and my uncle and my mother, and my father.  But, some of the other kinds of things that I can remember very vividly.  Because my father would not allow us, as he said, be second class.  You got to remember that during that time I said earlier that there were no public accommodations.  Also, even during my time, they had white and colored water fountains.  The white water fountains were refrigerated the colored was just straight out the tap.  My father would not allow us to drink from the colored water fountain.  We would, he made us when we wanted water we had to drink from the, from the white water fountain.  And the, thing about it, I can remember being in a department store once and one of the clerks saw me getting ready to drink out of the white water fountain and she started to stop me and manager told her, "No let him go. That Willie Harvey's [W.D.C. Harvey] boy.  You know he's kind of crazy."  So, that kind of thing we had that time at the service stations and in other places, the bus stations the train stations.  They had men, women and colored bathrooms.  My father would not allow us to go into the colored bathrooms.  So, I have memories of those days.  I also have memories of playing tennis over at the white tennis courts with other white kids.  I remember once my cousin Rayford [Rayford Harvey (ph.)] and I had just finished playing tennis with some white kids and the police came up and stopped us and really raked us over the coals about playing on the white tennis courts.  So, I went home and told my daddy.  My daddy went down to the city hall and got the mayor and said that by the end of the week that they had to have a tennis court where I can play, if they weren't gonna let me play there, or else he was gonna have some demonstrations and marches coming to Brewton.  And by the end of the week they had tennis courts.  So, I have pleasant memories of even some things like water fountains and bathrooms and getting tossed off of tennis courts because all of that had pleasant endings for me.  I remember once when I was going to my mother and father, my sister [Anne Harvey Allison] were taking me to college at Talladega College [Talladega, Alabama] it was north of Montgomery [Alabama] but south of Talladega [Alabama] where I went to school.  And we stopped and it was a Gulf service station [Gulf Oil].  And Daddy filled up and then he told the attendant that he wanted--, "My son needs to go to the bathroom."  So, he got my father the colored keys.  He said, "No he's a male." They had male, female and colored.  He said, "You give me the key to the male 'cause my son is a male," and the attendant told him he couldn't do that.  "Well, you take your gas out of my car then 'cause I'm not going to do business with you."  And I had recalled this story 'cause I can remember it very, very vividly.  This his guy had on overalls was a stereotypical southern redneck type.  And he stood there didn't exactly know what to do and he, he finally scratched his head and said, "Well just go on, go on, go on take the gas and go."  So, we got a free tank of gas because the man did not want to let me use the bathroom that was labeled male.  So, I have those kind of stories.
Story_ID: 613576
Speaker 1: Tell me now, you, you said you started school in two ladies' homes, right?
Speaker 2: Kindergarten in a lady's home (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Kindergarten, all right.
Speaker 2: Mrs. Branch's [ph.] home.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And then you went on to the, was there, I, I take it was a segregated public school and?
Speaker 2: It wasn't public, it was private.
Speaker 1: Private?
Speaker 2: Segregated school yes.  It was a private school in Brewton, Alabama.  And I went on to first grade there.  My first grade teacher was Mrs. Willis [ph.].  But, it, it was an elementary school at Southern Normal School [Brewton, Alabama].  It was a I don't know how many acres but if I were to guess I'd say they probably had about two hundred acres.  They did some farming and that's the school that I indicated had dormitories for, for, for boys and girls.
Speaker 1: So, this is a private school, a boarding school basically?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And not a, not a public school that was segregated.  You know for colored students and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: It was a private elementary and high school for Negroes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: As it was labeled at that time.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  And you know, most of the students were, were stayed on, on, on, on the campus?
Speaker 2: Probably half and half.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because they had really it was a beautiful old setting, it still exists today, although the school doesn't exist, but the buildings do.  They had a very, very nice girls' dormitory, very nice men's dormitory.  It was affiliated with the Dutch Reformed Church of America.  And they provided some support.  We paid some tuition I don't think it was very much, I don't remember what it was.  But, I went to, I started school when I was five because I was able to read very well.  And I actually skipped a grade from the first grade to the third grade because I finished all of the first grade books the first semester.  And then started on the second grade the second semester.  And then I skipped from the first grade to the third grade.  And then I started when I was five and that's why I graduated so early.  I was actually fifteen in--as a senior in high school.  I turned sixteen right before I graduated on January the 29th.  And we graduated in April.  So, about three months before we graduated I turned sixteen, but that was because I started early and then I skipped a grade.  Because again then teachers cared about the students, they prepared the students, and as I indicated I was reading really on a third grade level by the time I got to first grade.  And finished all of those books and went into the second grade.  Same thing with the math and the problems.  We had all of that in, when, when I was four years old.  So, those teachers cared about what they were doing, they cared about the students.  They imparted knowledge in a very good way.  And I was not the only one.  And that worked very well, certainly for me.
Story_ID: 613577
Speaker 1: So, were, were they because it was out of the Dutch Reformed Church were the mo- most the instructors white or was a mixture?
Speaker 2: No, all of the instructors were black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, we used to have white, whites come down from Iowa and Michigan and other places, for a week or two.  And they would lecture, provide classroom instruction.  But the instructors I don't recall having any white instructors except those that came down for a week or two.  And they'd go back to Iowa, Michigan, where they had large school and population.  Hope College [Holland, Michigan] for an example is a Dutch Reformed school.  So, no I didn't have any white instructors.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there, is there a history behind the school with, is there a black educator behind the, you know?
Speaker 2: There is.
Speaker 1: That's prominent, okay.
Speaker 2: There is, his name is Dooley [James Dooley].  And I can certainly find out, but I don't remember what Professor Dooley's name was.  I always heard my father call him Professor Dooley.  And he started the school there for, for Negroes and he also incurred the wrath of the white community.  And I remember a story that my father [W.D.C. Harvey] told me once, that the word came out down in the community that they were going to get Professor Dooley and lynch him.  And my father even though he was a boy at that time and I believe that he was in the seventh or eighth grade,  he got on a horse, his horse and road through the town the, the black neighborhoods almost like Paul Revere, alerting people that they were going to try and take Professor Dooley.  So, the community rallied is my understanding and I've heard it from a number of different people and pretty soon there were four hundred or five hundred blacks that had come out to Professor Dooley's house.  And some of them had guns and most of them had pitchforks and axe handles and axes and sticks, bricks and things like that.  And when the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] did come I understand and when they saw all of these people they actually turned around.  So, Professor Dooley and I don't remember his first name, but I always heard, not only my daddy but others talk about Professor Dooley.  I can obviously find out his name.  He started the school and he provided the wherewithal for the education of the black people at that time in that era, in that era and that area.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now the, the, the time period when your father was thirteen I guess that would have been about 1918 or so?
Speaker 2: Somewhere in there, that's right?
Speaker 1: That's the really one of the most dangerous periods for lynching in the South.
Speaker 2: Oh it was very da- very danger I mean, they, they lynched folks and they were going out to lynch Professor Dooley.  As I said not only did I hear that from father I heard it from others.  But, the townspeople rallied to his defense.  And as I said only a few of them had rifles and, and pistols most of them had things like as I said pitchforks, and axes and axe handles and sticks and bricks.  And things like that.  And they rallied behind him and I understand that they, they kept a vigil for a couple of week out there and then it just kind of died down.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now the, the, there used to be quite a few schools like the one you describe in the South, Piney Woods and I know in Mississippi [Piney Woods Country Life School, Piney Woods, Mississippi].  And there's some others that you know the school that Whitney Young's father had in Kentucky [Lincoln Institute, Lincoln Ridge, Kentucky] and other school in.
Speaker 2: Well, Piney Woods and Southern Normal [Southern Normal School, Brewton, Alabama] and there's one in South Carolina that I'm blanking on they were all on the same models, all on the same model.  And I'll tell you something else which has a Hampton connection.  Most of them also were on the model of Hampton.  When Booker Washington [Booker T. Washington] was here and General Armstrong [Samuel Chapman Armstrong] who founded Hampton [Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], founded Hampton under the concept of the heart, the head and the hand.  And Booker Washington left here and founded Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal School; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] under the same concept.  And there were a number of colleges and secondary school and other school that were founded in the South under that same concept and Southern Normal was.  Piney Woods was, Voorhees [Voorhees College, Denmark, South Carolina], I've been trying to think of it.  Voorhees was there were schools that were founded for people like, by people like Professor Dooley on the Hampton model that General Armstrong pioneered in this country.
Story_ID: 613578
Speaker 1: Did you have favorite teachers in, in school in Southern Normal [Southern Normal School, Brewton, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: I'm sure I did, and I had several.  I had physics professor was a Mr. Snowden [ph.]. I actually had a typing professor named Mrs. Andrews [Rheutelia Andrews].  Interestingly enough, even though I was a boy I was the fastest typist in my class.  And Mrs. Andrews used to call me her little pet.  Some of the kids didn't like that, but I was so fast. She was always a favorite.  There was a, there were, there were others Mrs. Young [Mai Young], who, who was a guidance counselor.  And there were others but they, the physics professor, the typing professor, Mrs. Young who was a guidance counselor.  Mr. Young [Kenneth B. Young] who was a director of Southern Normal when I was out there, I remember very fondly.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, well so, so you went all the way through high school there?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Is that correct, okay?
Speaker 2: Graduated in 1957.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you graduate with, with honors, or did they have honors, you know, in the regular course?
Speaker 2: I don't know if we had honors.   I graduated I can tell you what my, my grade point average was a 89.9 and I don't know, I don't recall only thing I recall is the valedictorian and the salutatorians and I was neither.  I think was about third or fourth, but my grade point average was 80 point, 89.9.  Probably if we'd had honors it would have been honors.  But, I don't recall that designation, so I didn't get that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, looking back on it would you say, you're high school experience was, was better than it would have been had you'd been in a, in a public school and, and?
Speaker 2: Well, I, you know, I can't say.  I know that my high school experience was absolutely terrific.  Because I mentioned earlier going back to the elementary days, the junior high days, the high school days.  We had teachers that cared about you, I, I played football, played tennis, played basketball.  It was enjoyable I was telling some people today that I had here that every place I've ever been in life I've enjoyed it, every place including my army career when I went to Europe and served at Seventh Army headquarters [U.S. Army Europe] as a history writer.  Every place I've been Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], every place I've been I've enjoyed that a great deal.  And my high school days I have with fond memories.  I had a class reunion here of my high school classmates about two years ago.  And all of us still get along so very well.  And I'm glad that we did, that I did have that, because Southern Normal has closed now.  But, one of the guys, from Chicago [Illinois] actually, died about three months ago.  Guy in my class named Samuel Stallworth, he lived right around the corner from me.  And he was here we enjoyed each other had a lot of stories to tell.  Some I can't put on camera, but we enjoyed it very much.  And my high school days were terrific, you know.  Thinking back on some of my girlfriends, some of the stories that I could tell about that and probably won't.  My, my, my athletic competition and, and so many things--
Speaker 1: Okay so--
Speaker 2: --very good.
Speaker 1: You played football you said?
Speaker 2: I played football, I was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --called a split end at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I played basketball, I was a better basketball player than I was football, at that time because I was, I was pretty small.  But, I always had a very good shot in basketball.  My father [W.D.C. Harvey] built me a basketball goal and it was the only place in Brewton [Alabama] other than the schools that where there was a goal.  So, every afternoon and on Saturdays that's were all the boys would be at my house.  And I always had a very good shot, so even though I was small.  When I went to college at Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama], on my freshman year physical I was 5'5", a hundred and twenty-five pounds.  On my senior year physical I was 6'2", 180 [pounds], so I grew every year.  My mother [Claudis Parker Harvey] used to say I would come and my pants would be half up my legs but I had a terrific growth spurt between my freshman and senior years.  So, I was relative small. I always had sure hands.  I could catch the ball in football pretty well.  And I would go over the middle and that's were absorb a lot of blows.  I remember one time I think I almost got knocked out, didn't get knocked out, but I caught the ball, hung onto the ball.  But, basketball was a better sport for me, because I had such a good shot, even though I was small.
Story_ID: 613579
Speaker 1: I know there's difference today between the discipline model in the black colleges [HBCUs] and certainly in a boarding high school.  Was there, was there like a very strict, was the discipline very, very strict there at, at?
Speaker 2: The discipline was very strict. There were, there were standards, there were rules there were regulations.  And the staff the teacher and others made sure that we adhered to them.  I think that, you know, all of us are products of our training and our experience.  One of the things that I do now here at Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] is to try to maintain standards.  In a world where a lot of standards are going by the wayside, some people don't like it, some people do.  But, for an example here at Hampton we don't allow fellas to wear du rags, we don't allow them to wear the undershirt, the wife beater shirts.  We don't allow them to walk around with the pants hanging below the butts, you know.  Some people said when you correct them, well that's my heritage, no, it's not your heritage and we just don't allow it.  And we don't mind you going somewhere else, if you're gonna be here, you can't do that.  Well, that's the kind of school that Southern Normal School [Brewton, Alabama] was.  It had standards, it had rules, it had rules of conduct.  And one of the things that it did was to reinforce my own family values.  My mother [Claudis Parker Harvey] and father [W.D.C. Harvey] really preached to us about discipline, about honesty and integrity, respect for other, respect for oneself and responsible action.  They always used to say that, everybody makes mistakes, everybody makes mistakes, but what we got to do is to, if we make a mistake own up to it.  Correct it and move forward.  And I think that, that has helped me as well.  So, based on my upbringing at home and the schooling at Southern Normal, not only the intellectual aspect but the fact that it, it had standards.  And I think that, that's a good thing.
Story_ID: 613580
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduation [from Southern Normal School, Brewton, Alabama] had you, I, I suppose you'd planned where you were going to school.  You, you knew you were going to Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama] at that point?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No, I'll tell you this and we probably need to cut this off now.  I had my heart set on going to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], I had a scholarship to Morehouse and my guidance counselor Mrs. Young [Mai Young], that I talked about earlier.  Was a friend of my family and Mrs. Young told my mother [Claudis Parker Harvey] and father [W.D.C. Harvey] that she thought that in her words said, "The, the girls gonna eat him up if he goes to Atlanta [Georgia].  He needs to go to a small place." And they said, "Where?"  She said, "What about Talladega?"  She had gone to Talladega and I did get a partial scholarship to Talladega. It was less than what I actually had to go to Morehouse, but because my folks believed in the wisdom that Mrs. Young was imparting, I went to Talladega.  Stayed for four years, enjoyed it a lot in some instances probably enjoyed it too much.  If I hadn't enjoyed quite as much my grades might, would have been better.  But, got involved in the Civil Rights Movement, helped a fella Charles Ray, found a civil rights organization, in Alabama, of college students.  He was the president, I was the vice president.  And we actually--when SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was founded they used our bylaws as a model to start SNCC.
Speaker 1: Well, what, what was the name of the organization?
Speaker 2: You know I was trying to think as I was talking and I'm not sure I remember.  I saw Charles Ray about five years ago and I don't really remember and it was fairly short lived because Charles Ray was the impetus behind it and he enlisted me and I helped him, get this, this organization started.  But, he was in Huntsville, Alabama at Alabama A and M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama].  I was at Talladega.  Did all kinds of wonderful things. I can remember we were in the church in Montgomery, Alabama the night that the White Citizens' Council surrounded it.  Matter of fact I spoke right before Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] spoke because we were down showing solidarity to the students at Alabama State [Alabama State College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama].  And we actually spoke and there's a fella who's over in Norfolk [Virginia] nigh--now named Guy Hogan [Guy T. Hogan] that took us down to Little Green (Unclear), there were three of us.  I think it was Ruby [Ruby Burrows], can't think of Ruby's last name, a fella named Joseph Durant [ph.] and I.  He took us down and I was the one that was designated to speak at the, at the church and I spoke right before Dr. King came on.  And then D- Mr. Hogan, who was a math teacher, we didn't know that trouble was coming but he just said that we needed to get back to Talladega.  So, we actually left right after I spoke and offered the solidarity of the Talladega students to the Alabama State students and to the movement that they were doing in Montgomery.  We actually left and then much to our surprise the next day we saw on the newspaper were the K- the White Citizens' Council had surrounded the church.  And I think that they had to call out the National Guard.  Were gone by that time, but we were in the church at that setting that night.
Speaker 1: This is in Montgomery you say?
Speaker 2: Montgomery, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was at the Dexter Avenue, Dexter Street, Dexter Avenue Baptist Church [Dexter Avenue King Memorial Baptist Church, Montgomery, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Dexter Avenue Baptist Church, yeah.  This is during the--now the bus boycott was like '56 [1956], '57 [1957], right [sic.]?  And this is the early part of?
Speaker 2: I didn't go to Talladega until '57 [1957], so what the incident that I'm talking about had to be after that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know to what extent that coincided with Rosa Parks and not moving to the back of the bus.  I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that was being resulted, by.  I think that was resulted somewhere in '57 [1957], in the beginning of '57 [1957].
Speaker 2: Oh, was it had to be '57 [1957] or '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I just don't remember the exact time.  An interesting sidebar, Rosa Parks used to be the director of our faculty dining hall here at Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], at one point.  So, that's just a interesting little tidbit.
Speaker 1: So, when you, when you were pre, well, well, while you were president?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Before you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was back during that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not absolutely sure about this but I think it was after she left Montgomery.  She came here because she was looking for work, it may have been before, I just really don't know.
Speaker 1: Yes, in- interesting someone can be in a history making pos- what do you do after that?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Can you really run a dining hall after that, I mean?
Speaker 2: Right?
Speaker 1: I'm sure she could, but.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, how do you--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --how do you wind down from that?
Speaker 2: Well, knowing Mrs. Parks, and I didn't know her, but knowing what I read about her, I'm sure that whatever she did she would have done with, with great deal of grace and a great deal of terrific work ethic.  And a great deal of principles and reserve as to what she was doing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right.
Story_ID: 613581
Speaker 1: You, you went to Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama] and this is in 1950?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-seven [1957], I went to Talladega.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, oh we were talking about the, or, organizing you did with the brother named Charles Ray, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Charles Ray, right.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now did you get into that right away in, in Tall- Talladega, or did you?
Speaker 2: If was my freshman year, I can't say it was right away I don't know if it was the second semester or what.  But, you see I came out of that kind of background was an organizer and civil rights leader.  So, that was something that was a natural phenomenon for me.
Speaker 1: So, you, you, you as we, we were saying earlier and I, I, I probably didn't explore it enough but you met Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Ralph Abernathy and others who came to sit at the table and talk to you.  Did you know E.D. Nixon out of Montgomery [Alabama] and?
Speaker 2: E.D. Nixon was one of the ones that would come by my home.  Now, remember these are my father's friends not my friends.  I mean I didn't know them, but I, my father [W.D.C. Harvey] would allow me to sit at the, at the table or even in the room when they came by.  And as a fellow in Mobile [Alabama] his last name was LeFlore [John L. LeFlore]. I don't remember his first name but I remember a LeFlore in Mobile and Nixon in, in Montgomery, and King, and I remember his--Dr. King had a brother named A.D. King [Alfred Daniel Williams King]--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --so, all of those people as, as, are the ones that I'm talking about along with some of the, the, the names that everybody would know.  The Dr. Kings or the A. Philip Randolphs and, and so forth.  But, the point was that our home was one of those home, there were, there were probably literally hundreds in the South and it was almost like, I said it was an underground railroad.  People knew in every city where they could go and just get refreshed or go to the bathroom, or get a glass of tea, or, or a dinner or a lunch or even if need be to spend the night.  Well, my, my home was one of those.
Speaker 1: Now, did, did your father ever get into any trouble, I know they, one point in Birmingham [Alabama], they bombed Fred Shuttlesworth's house [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth], you know.  Did your, did your father ever experience threats or that you know on his own home, home?
Speaker 2: My father experienced threats.  We never did have any bombings on our home.  But, my father did experience threats because he was so active.  But, fortunately we never had any, any violence.  Anybody shooting into the home or, or bomb- bombing the home, as others did.  So, we did not have that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, of all the figures that you met when you were a youth, who came by the house.  Who was or can you even say who was the most impressive one for you (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, I (unclear) the ones that came by the most was this man named LeFlore out of Mobile and A.D. King.  So, those were the ones I probably would say that I was most impressed with.  But, the reason is they were the ones that were coming by the house more than, than others.
Story_ID: 613582
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about Tall- Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama]?  Now, that's a, a, a college I think founded by was it  Amer- the American Missionary Association, (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Talladega was one of those American Missionary Association schools.  Founded I believe in 1867 and it was a basically a liberal arts school.  At that time I remember see a Ebony magazine article that indicated that Talladega graduates had, had the highest percentage of going onto graduate school than any other college or university, in the country.  And I enjoyed my, my stay at Talladega, as I say between civil rights and basketball and other things, I probably enjoyed it a little too much at times.  But, it was a wonderful stay there, made some lifelong friends, I've, I talked about having a reunion here of my high school folk [from Southern Normal School, Brewton, Alabama].  I've had about three or four of my Talladega classmates here at Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  We still are in contact.  As a matter of fact I've hired several here.  Got a couple that are administrators, faculty and, and others.  So, I had some lifelong friends there, made some lifelong friends there.  And, and enjoyed my stay there and, and pleased that I went to Talladega.
Speaker 1: So did you play basketball on the team?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did. I played basketball. I was looking at a picture, oh, six or eight months ago. I can't believe I was ever that young.  I tell you, you talk about baby faced I was clearly baby faced.
Speaker 1: And, now you grew dramatically at Talladega?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: 5'5" to 6'2"?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, I mean, that, that must have improved your game some I guess?
Speaker 2: Well, probably, probably but I grew every year as I said.  My freshman physical was 5'5", 125 [pounds].  My senior physical was 6'2", 180 [pounds].  I've grew a little bit that year, I'm right now, I'm a little bit shy of 6'3", I'm about 6'2" and three fourths.  So, even my senior year I grew a little bit.  And then I stopped.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, how'd the team do, did you win, was it (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We weren't a very good team (laughter). We weren't a very good team.  And I was not a very good player.  My very best game was against Fisk [Fisk University] in Nashville [Tennessee], that I, I made thirty-six points, but that was my very best game.  Most times it was more like five, or six or seven or eight points.  I really wasn't very good; the team wasn't very good and I certainly was not very good.
Speaker 1: Okay, well it sounds you're, you had a, you had, you had your moment though?
Speaker 2: I had my moment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had my moment, you know, those are the moments when you're unconscious. Everything you throw up there goes in.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, did, did you, did you run for class officer or anything or, or, or?  Did you hold any positions at, at Talladega?
Speaker 2: I was I had several positions, I was the, if I could remember.  I was the chairman of the colloquium board, was it called colloquium board -no that was Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] I think.  This one was the debate team, chairman of the debate team.  I was on the debate team, but I was not the president.
Story_ID: 613583
Speaker 1: One thing I do remember fellow named Randolph Edmunds [ph.] was the president of our class.  And he was the president of the student body and one Christmas we had a fella who was a Ph.D. now, who teaches at Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama].  Who came back from West Palm Beach, Florida, whose name was Arthur Bacon, is Arthur Bacon, and he came into Anniston [Alabama] and went into the white waiting room.  Now, this is in 1960 and he got beaten up.  And the people that beat him up they found.  And they put 'em on trial one guy got off and another guy was having his trial so, Randolph and I wanted to go and demonstrate.  So, we got the student body all riled up and we went over to Anniston to, to demonstrate.  So, Randolph and I actually lead the line.  A long line of students in twos, marching around the courthouse for justice.  We left because it got pretty violent.  They started beating on my fellow students.  I never got hit, but I was walking beside at one point Randolph and I had broken up because we led the line.  And then when we made the circle he and I were trying to provide the leadership and we were no longer together.  I was with--walking with a guy named James Cole, who did get a law degree from Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  He and his wife Ada [Ada Cole] and my wife Norma [Norma Baker Harvey] and I were there at the same time but at Talladega.  None of us were married.  And I was walking by James Cole and he had prescription glasses.  And one guy came along, one white guy came along and hit James Cole in face with a chain, right across his eyes and it broke his glasses.  And glass was stuck in his face.  So, we continued to march and I was actually picking glass out of Jim Cole's face.  As I said Jim went on to Harvard got a law degree and he's now down in Fort Lauderdale.  He and his wife are down in Fort Lauderdale, Florida.  But, it started getting pretty violent and that was an, an instance.  So--
Speaker 2: Was that around the time of the bus burning in Anniston the '60 [1960]--I know I think it was '60 [1960] or '61 [1961] when they burn the bus?
Speaker 1: It was, it was around that time.  Anniston was a hot bed for the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK].  And actually we did not know that.  But, we went over there nevertheless and as I said it started getting kind of violent and so Randolph and I made the decision that we were going to stop and go back.  And we did, interestingly enough we had one fella I remember he had a '59 [1959] black Ford.  I can't remember his name, but he was a music professor who had taken some students over there and on the way back there were some people chasing him and shot at the car and I think hit the, hit the gas tank. And kind a like in the movies the car was running out of gas and, and as the story goes I was not there.  I didn't see it but as the story goes he pull off and kind of hid behind something and because they were being attacked and shot at.  For about a week we had guns and other things because we had heard that the Klan was going to come on campus because we had, had the nerve to go and protest the injustice of one of our fellow students and classmates, Arthur Bacon who had gotten beaten up because he was coming back home from, from West Palm Beach, Florida and got in, went into the white waiting room.  But I think that the word got around because a lot of us went down and bought ammunition and things like that from the hardware store.  And we were told by a maid actually that they were going to come on campus.  And then we were also told by the same maid that, that after they found out that we had guns and ammunition and the like that obviously being the cowards that they were they didn't show up, which is probably good because, there clearly would have been some bloodshed because we did have guns and pistols and rifles and shotguns and people in the community who knew of what was going on volunteered to give us the guns so that if the Klan had come on campus we would have had clearly some kind of shoot out.  So, quite frankly I'm glad that it didn't, it didn't happen, but for, for several nights we stayed up all night waiting for 'em.  And I remember one particular guy who was so frustrated that they didn't come that he was just shooting out of the back window of the dormitory.  Because he wanted them to come, because we felt like that we were doing the right thing.  But, I'm, I'm thankful that they didn't come.
Story_ID: 613584
Speaker 1: Now, there's tradition in Mississippi, I don't know if the same is true in Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama], but in Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi], there's sort of a tradition that the white racism groups really don't go over to their campus to, you know.  I think that rarely do they go over there.  So, it's kind of a haven for civil rights workers in terms of, a meeting place and a place where they can spend the night and talk to white people about civil rights.  And meet at the same time eat, you know, together and that sort of thing.  Was Talladega the same kind of place in Alabama?
Speaker 2: I don't think so, I don't think so.  We didn't have a lot of civil rights activity at Talladega other than that was done by the students.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I don't, I don't think that that was the case at Talladega.  Talladega kind off the be- beaten, pa- path (background noise).  Tougaloo is in Jackson [Mississippi], which is a large city and Talladega is kind of off the beaten path.
Speaker 1: How did the administration feel about what the students were doing?  Cause as, as you said the students are, are initiating this act, this civil rights activity basically?  So, how did the school administration feel about that?
Speaker 2: I can tell you, our president was Dr. Gray [Arthur D. Gray] and I had a conversation with Dr. Gray and Dr. Gray said, "I'm not gonna tell you to go or not to go or what to do.  But, if they come into my home I'm going to defend my home."  And so, that's all I needed that was tacit approval right there.  So, I shall never forget that.  That's what Dr. Gray said.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was the name of your student group did you have a, was, well I guess formally organized or some, some, someway?
Speaker 2: It really wasn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It really wasn't, we, we got together.  Dr., Dr., after Dr. Gray told me that, then I went back to Randolph Edmunds [ph.] was the SGA [student government association] president and he and I got the folk together.  We did not have a formal civil rights group to participate in that march.  These were just students of Talladega who were going to protect and try to strike out against what we considered an injustice.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, had you, had the students been, beneficiary of nonviolent direct action, action training?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, they only the ones that had been in involved was those of us that had gone to Montgomery [Alabama].  And I told you about being at the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church [Dexter Avenue King Memorial Baptist Church, Montgomery Alabama], which it was Ruby Burrows was her name.  Ruby Burrows, who's a lawyer now, Joseph Durant [ph.], who has a Ph.D. and I think that there was one other fella the name Willie Lee [ph.].  And there was Guy Hogan [Guy T. Hogan] who was the professor and I, were at the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church at that particular time.  And none of us had any kind of training.  Back home I had worked in the shadows of my father [W.D.C. Harvey].  And others had done some things back home.  But, we didn't have any kind of formal civil rights organization that I recall.
Speaker 1: Okay. Just doing your part and, and having enough I guess wherewithal to know how to move and do things.
Speaker 2: Well, we, we, we, we organized the people.  We got cars we went over to Anniston [Alabama], which was about as I recall about thirty miles away.  We marched, we, we got beaten, I did not.  Some of us got beaten and we left and we went back and as I said we had vigils for three, four, five nights after that.  But, all of that was pretty spontaneous and ad hoc.  It was not a part of a, an organized group.
Story_ID: 613585
Speaker 1: Now what was your major at, at Talladega?
Speaker 2: It was history, United States history.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And a minor in economics.
Speaker 1: Were you always interested in history?
Speaker 2: I can't say I was, to tell you the truth.  At different parts in my life I'd said I wanted to, to, do and be different things.  I can remember back in, in high school [Southern Normal School, Brewton, Alabama] I'd said I wanted to become a doctor then.  I said I wanted to become a lawyer.  I was accepted to a least one law school, only one I applied to.  And then later on in life I said that I wanted to make my mark in education and business.  And I've been fortunate in that I do things long term.  I've been president of Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] for thirty-two years.  I've owned 100 percent of Pepsi Cola Bottling Company in Michigan [Houghton, Michigan] for twenty-five years.  And I've been married to the same woman [Norma Baker Harvey] for forty-four years.  So, I do things long term.
Speaker 1: When you graduated from Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama] that's what, what year is this?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-one [1961].
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-one [1961], okay.  So, did you go onto graduate school at that point, or did you--
Speaker 2: No, we, we went in the [U.S.] Army, my cousin Rayford Harvey [ph.] and I went in the Army we that was in, in February '62 [1962].  We graduated in April or May of '61 [1961].  And then that's when we went to Dayton, Ohio, and Detroit, Michigan looking for job.  And we couldn't get one because basically because people knew that we had to go into service and they didn't want to hire us only for three or four months.  So, we stayed around with family in both of those places.  We had family in Middletown, Ohio and family in Detroit.
Speaker 1: Now, this is the migrated, migration pattern for Dayton and Detroit basically people come from other places but Alabama seems to be the, the most popular, you know, origin, you know in the South for populations of Dayton and Detroit after World War II [WWII].
Speaker 2: Well, there probably are reasons for that. First of all geography it is just straight up the country.  Secondly there were jobs.  You know, in Detroit you had the auto industry. In Dayton, you had a number of other kinds of factories and other things.  So, there were jobs.  So, you didn't have to go except anywhere, where else rather than just straight up the country.  And there were some who stopped in Dayton and maybe some that went to Detroit, some went to Chicago [Illinois].  But, basically it was looking for jobs.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, what, what bra- did you, you joined the Army, right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, ha- you'd, you'd been trained in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] and that's why (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we didn't have ROTC.
Speaker 1: You didn't have, okay.
Speaker 2: No, I actually went to basic training I went in, I went into service as an enlisted man, went to basic training?
Speaker 1: Now, why didn't you, I sorry, why didn't you and your cousin chose to enter the service as enlisted men in 1962, when the draft is still going on then I know?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But, you, you guys are graduates you know.  You're smart, you had good grades did you think you'd get in an officer candidates school in the Army.
Speaker 2: Well, both of us did go to Officer Candidate School but, the real reason we did it is we didn't have a job.  We wanted to go some place where we could make some money and then there was the draft.  And we felt that the--at some point we were going be drafted anyway.  So, what we said was: A) we don't have a job and B) let's go in and get it over with.  Serve our country and get out so we can get on with our lives.  Now, that's the, that's the truth.  Not any other reason other than we didn't have a job and wanted to get in and get it over with because at some point we felt like our draft number was going to be called.
Story_ID: 613586
Speaker 1: When you all entered, the country was just starting to get involved in Vietnam, I think (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: Right, so in the beginning stages.  John F. Kennedy's president [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] and there are military advisors I think, they had gotten a little bit past the advisory point in '62 [1962].
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So, describe, what, what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, I did not go to Vietnam.  I think that in one of the bios that I saw that I'd gone to Vietnam.  But, I did not go to Vietnam. I was actually sent to, to Europe.  I was sent to a place called Vaihingen, Germany [Vaihingen an der Enz, Germany], which is, which was Seventh Army headquarters [U.S. Army Europe].  It was, it was run by a three star and I and others used to write anniversary messages for the general.  And we were history writers for the [U.S.] Department of the Army.  And that was very good duty.  We, we, we did a lot of traveling.  I used to go all over Europe, France, Spain, Italy, England, other places, during that time.  I was young, single, enjoyed life quite a bit.  I was in places I'd never been before.  And enjoyed my Army career.  I tell people that I actually grew up in the Army because some of the, I think attributes that I have now.  I acquired then the discipline.  Interacting with other people, whites, blacks.  I had never really interacted with whites before other than in an adversarial kind of capacity.  But, when I first went to basic training I was made a squad leader and I remember very, very vividly I had some, some young men there from Appalachia I had, and they were, they were pretty much hillbillies too.  I also remember I had some Jo- Jones boys from Chicago [Illinois].  And they were in my squad.  And there are some stories that I could tell about, that I probably won't either.  But, the fact is (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, the Jo- the famous Jones family, they, they?
Speaker 2: Well, they weren't famous then, they may have become famous later. I don't know what happened after they got out of the service, after we left.  But, they, the, these Jones boys were from, from Chicago.  One was kind of tall, brown skin and the other ones was kind of muscular and, and dark skinned but they were Jones. Both of them were from Chicago and they were in my squad.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they're not the Joneses?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know who the Jones are.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah there was a famous kind of a gangster family Joneses, I think from well they might have been from New York actually.  But, go, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Sorry.
Speaker 2: And as I said I had these, these, these young men from Appalachia and I had the, the Jones men from Chicago and others.  So, I, I, I, I had never en- really interacted with an urban setting like that or Appalachian setting like that.  So, I learned a lot about people.  Learned that people are people. They may look at things differently because of their experiences and their background so that helped me.  The discipline helped as well.  I give you one example of the discipline. When I went to Officer Candidate School, we had to clean the latrine or the bathroom at night, have it ready for inspection in the, in the next morning so, that means that we would go to bed at night, we'd get up the next morning we couldn't use the latrine so you had to hold your water until we went to breakfast, came out of breakfast went to our first class at eight o'clock, and then at nine o'clock, you talking about everybody making a beeline for the bathroom.  Then that's what we'd make a beeline for, the bathroom at our, where we were taking our classes.  So, you know, when you, when you're told that you can't do something, there probably isn't anything that you can't do.  And I use that just as one example.  Because I can't imagine now, of course I'm a lot older now as well.  I cannot imagine me getting up at six o'clock in the morning and having breakfast including coffee and water and juice and still not going to the bathroom and sitting in a class for an hour and then having to go to the bathroom at nine o'clock.  But, we could not use the latrine because we had cleaned the latrine.  Spit shined the latrine the night before and we couldn't go in there.  We couldn't use the water, we couldn't brush our teeth.  We couldn't, we, we couldn't eliminate in any fashion, but you learn how to do those thing under adverse conditions.  So, that said to me that there is virtually nothing that you, that you can't do.  But, what it is, is simply discipline and discipline is very important.
Story_ID: 613587
Speaker 1: Travel to places I've never been before, the discipline that I've talked about.  Interacting with people at all levels, and from all cultures and all places urban, rural Appalachian and the like.  I learned a lot when I was in the [U.S] Army and I've very, very appreciative for it.  Which, is one of the reasons that I got into the reserves [U.S. Army Reserve].  So, that I could, could continue to associate and give back.  And when I was in the reserves I was used as a model for a citizen soldier.  All right, here I was president of a university [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and I was a lieutenant colonel in the reserves and sometimes the commanding general or the chief of staff would ask me to make a speech at the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] or to go with him someplace.  And I would do that, they made, they, they made some video clips of me.  They made some posters they made some other kinds of things, under the whole concept of citizen soldier.  So, enjoyed very much, and I felt like that I learned a lot when I was a, a, a, a member of the armed services of this country.
Speaker 2: Okay, what, what, what were you duties as an historian, for the--
Speaker 1: We were writing the official history of the Seventh United States Army [U.S. Army Europe].  There was a major who was the Seventh Army historian.  There was a captain and there were several others of us who were history writers.  And we produced three quarterlies and an annual report.  So, it was like contemporary history of the Seventh United States Army.  At that time it was headquartered as I indicated in Vaihingen, Germany [Vaihingen an der Enz, Germany].
Speaker 2: How do you, how do you spell that?
Speaker 1: I don't know I think, it's V-A-H-I-N-G-E [sic.], but, I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, well I have, well I have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, it's right outside of Stuttgart [Germany].  So, you could, Stuttgart, you know S-T-U-T-T-G-A-R-T.  But Vaihingen was right outside of Stuttgart.  Stuttgart was the big city.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Vaihingen was basically where we were, it was patch barracks in Vaihingen, Germany.
Story_ID: 613588
Speaker 1: When you got out of [the U.S. military] service that was 1964 or so?
Speaker 2: I got out of the service and then I went to Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].  I started a master's degree at Virginia State.  There again it was a wonderful learning experience for me.  I had an opportunity to meet my major professor whose name was Dr. Edgar Toppin.  And he was the first black man that I'd ever known to write a book.  That I'd had ever known, I've read books but I had never known this person personally.  Dr. Toppin had written at that time about four or five books.  He was my major professor.  Another thing that I found interesting and learned from him was that, the major schools were trying to get him.  But, he wanted to stay at Virginia State.  It's kind of like so many people have try to interest me in leaving Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], with more money and what they thought was perhaps a better position.  But, if you're happy and you feel like you're making a difference then I really learned that for Dr. Edgar Toppin that you don't need to go anywhere else.
Story_ID: 613589
Speaker 1: Dr. Ed- Edgar Toppin, I was just mentioning off camera that he was one of the mainstays of the Association for the Study of African American Life and History.
Speaker 2: He was a fine man but he was also was a fine scholar.  And as I said and I don't know if it was off camera or not but the fact is that he was the one who planted in my brain that if you are happy where you are you don't need to go anywhere else.  Because, after he had written about four or five or six books, the major schools are trying to get him to come to serve on their history faculty.  But, he stayed at Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].  And the fact is that I've had a number of offers and opportunities to leave Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] to go to some major schools and other major jobs that I've just flatly turned down because I felt like, as Dr. Toppin's said to me, he was happy and he was making a difference.  So, he stayed at Virginia State.  He was a scholar of the first right and he was a gentleman of the first right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was happy to be at Virginia State and he did he feel he could do more for, for black people if he stayed in Virginia State, is that a part, is that part of it?
Speaker 2: I don't know if he felt he could do more, I could just, only tell you what he said to me.  A) he was happy, B) he felt that he was making a difference.  He was happy personally, he was happy professionally.  He was doing what he wanted to do.  He was teaching, he was writing, he was lecturing.  And he felt that he, if he went someplace else he might would have gotten more money but he couldn't have been any happier.  So, he and his wife [Antionette Toppin] and family enjoyed being in Ettrick, Virginia.  They had a home there.  And he had some folk like me and others who he helped to shape and he was happy doing that.  He was happy writing his books, he was happy lecturing.
Speaker 1: Do you have any stories about Dr. Toppin that you can share with us?
Speaker 2: Nothing other than what I just said, that I had the utmost respect for him.  He was the first man that I, I had ever met, that the first black that I had ever met that had written a book.  He was an intellectual of the first order.  I, I think I said ea- earlier that every place that I've ever been I've enjoyed and I've learned.  And I learned from him a great deal, as a scholar, as a researcher, as a human being.
Story_ID: 613590
Speaker 1: Now, what was your thesis about?
Speaker 2: Well, actually I never did a thesis, I finished all of my course work and I got accepted to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I never finished my thesis.  I can tell you what it, it was supposed to be about and I actually have a first draft.  And I've even thought about the fact that I might turn that in and go ahead on and get my, get my master degree if they will, if they will want to have me now at Virginia State [Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].  Because I finished all of the course work and I finished my thesis, and my thesis was on the black Medal of Honor winners up until that particular time.  And I started with the Civil War and came right on up and I did a lot of research in the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.], and in other places.  And I actually have a first draft and one of the things that Dr. Toppin's [Edgar Toppin] has said to me a lot of times because after I became president here [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], he got me involved with the, with, with some of the associations, here in Virginia.  And he said, "Bill [HistoryMaker William Harvey] why don't you let me have that, that draft that you did all those years ago," and I never did, 'cause I wasn't quite satisfied with the first draft.  So, I never really got a master's from there even though I finished all of my coursework and actually still have a first draft of my thesis, which was on black Medal of Honor winners.
Story_ID: 613591
Speaker 1: Harvard accepted you as a student in, in what school was it?
Speaker 2: In the Graduate School of Education [Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to Harvard (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How, who did that come about, I mean did, did, so, you, you applied obviously applied for it but, what, what happened, I mean?
Speaker 2: Well, at that time I'd gotten married, I met and a, and a even though I tell people I didn't get a M.A., I got a MRS, from there.  Because I met my wife [Norma Baker Harvey] at Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] and I said earlier she and I have been married for forty-four years.  And she clearly then and now was the love of my life.  And we got married and then we moved to Alabama, where I was the deputy director of a three county OEO [office of economic opportunity] agency.  And at that time I, I, I was doing a lot of speech making in colleges and universities on a number of different things that I had been involved in.  And so, I kind of set my sights on being a college president then.  And then I looked around at those schools that had programs in higher education administration or college administration depending on the nomenclature.  And I did as I advise young students to do today.  You write to about seven or eight because it's not always objective.  Sometimes, most times, it's subjective.  Because I got accepted to some of the better schools and some of the others I won't call names did not accept me.  But, Harvard was one of the ones that accepted me and, although I had to go up in the summer, I supposed to prove myself.  And I took three courses and I made three A's.  And then we went on and I eventually got my degree in three years from Harvard.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a course to train you to be a college administrator?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, yes, there are a number of schools including Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia] starting a Ph.D. program in, in educational management.  And this was a program that was training those who wanted to be college administrators or go the superintendency route.  Say to be a superintendent of a school in Chicago, Illinois.  As a matter of fact there's a fellow named Professor Herold Hunt [Herold C. Hunt] who had been the superintendent in Chicago who was one of our professors.  So, some folk wanted to go that route, other folk like me wanted to go the college administration route.  So, the good thing about Harvard and my program was we could tailor it to our needs.  So, I took courses at the Harvard School of Ed, Graduate School of Education, at the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], at the Harvard Kennedy School of Government [John F. Kennedy School of Government, Cambridge, Massachusetts], at MIT Sloan School of Management [Cambridge, Massachusetts] all of those things were tailored specifically for me.  And I mean everybody could do that it wasn't anything that I had that others didn't have.  And it was a great time.  The dean became our friend and he later hired me.  And then he became, he and his wife Nancy [Nancy Faust Sizer]--his name was Ted Sizer [Theodore R. Sizer], Nancy--became the god parents to our oldest child Kelly [Kelly Harvey].  So, it was a great time, I enjoyed Harvard a great, great deal, the intellectual aspect the other aspects.  And my wife and I went clam baking in Maine.  And skiing in the Waterville Valley, New Hampshire, going down to the Garden [Boston Garden, Boston, Massachusetts] to watch the Celtics [Boston Celtics] play, also watching the then Boston Patriots.  And they had a guy there name Jim Nantz [ph.] who had gone to Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York], who became a good friend of ours.  He and his wife Cathy [ph.] would come over to our little apartment and we would visit with them.  So, I said every place I've been, it's been a great ride.  And we enjoyed Harvard a great deal.
Story_ID: 613592
Speaker 1: Now about, 'bout what year is this now, when you're, you're, what--what year did you finish up at Harvard [Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: In '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, now when you finished Harvard's program in 1972 I would guess now correct me if I'm wrong you would have been one of the, the few black admin- college administrators that act- that, that was actually trained in admin- co- college administration (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous), I don't, I don't' know about that, I thought you were going someplace else.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And now, I'll answer where I thought that you were going.  At that time there were only two black administrative officers at Harvard, that with corporation appointments.  Now, there may have been someone with a title of director or something.  But, at Harvard then, I don't know about now, you got corporation appointments.  Which means that the, the corporation, the, what is considered the board of directors or trustees.  It's a Harvard corporation.  I had a corporation appointment, there was a fellow named Archie Epps [HistoryMaker Archie C. Epps, III]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --who, was dean of students in the college.  And Bill Harvey [HistoryMaker William Harvey] who was the assistant dean, in the Graduate School of Education.  As I said there were other administrators and then later there were many others.  But, at that time there were only two.  And when I left to come back south all of my mentors including my friend and mentor and boss Ted Sizer [Theodore R. Sizer] didn't want me to leave.  They said that my star could rise faster if I had stayed at Harvard.  But, I've always been a planner just like we planned to go to Harvard.  I wanted to come back south and use whatever talents and energies that I had at a predominantly black setting, that's I what I wanted to do.  And there were those then and perhaps those now who think that if you are president of a majority school so how you might be a better off that your president of minority school.  Well, for me I wanted to chart my own destiny and, and I wanted to come back to the South, and I did.  And so, I left. As a matter of fact I had to, had to three options when I left to come back to the South I could have stayed at Harvard, I was offered dean of freshman of Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire].  I was offered the associate dean of the graduate school at the University of Connecticut at Storrs [Connecticut].  And I was offered the executive assistant to the president at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  I took assistant to the president at Fisk.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, that was by my own choosing.  And then I stayed at Fisk for two years.  Then I went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and stayed there six years.  And then we came here [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] thirty-two years ago.
Speaker 1: What I was suggesting in my question was that there were very few black college administrators who actually trained in college administration.  It was a new kind of a field I guess of, of, discipline that was emerging and--?
Speaker 2: I, I think one could say that it was emerging because I am familiar with a number of programs at a number of schools that had programs in higher educational administration.  I don't know exactly how many.  But there were others as well.  Because the other place that I was going if I had not gotten to Harvard, was I was going to University of Indiana.  There was a fellow there named August Eberle [August W. Eberle] that I was really very much attracted to he, he was the one that had talked to me about Indiana.  Indiana had one, Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York] had one.  There were others that had them as well at that time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a, it seems as though we interviewed Harrison Wilson [HistoryMaker Harrison B. Wilson] a couple of days ago.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And he's a very, he's, he followed a very similar path.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: You know, the same Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana].  He's a, he's an assistant at Fisk.
Speaker 2: Right, Harrison followed me into Fisk.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know if he told you that?
Speaker 1: No, I, I can't remember, he, he said a lot, but I, I couldn't remember (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I left Fisk, to go to Tuskegee to be a vice president, the president, Dr. Jim Lawson [James Lawson], hired Harrison.  So, Harrison came, in, into my office and my chair and my spot when I left.  I used to like to tease him about that a lot (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, but he, he, I think he, he sort of dramatized in his interview that his, his training was so much different than the former president of Nor- Norfolk State [Norfolk State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] when he came in and he--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, and so it was like a different kind of, you know, style of leadership even though he might--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --even though he might he really admired the former president.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They were, you know it's a different thing.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 613593
Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you-- when you were the assistant at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] could you see with your recent training at Harvard [Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, Massachusetts] things that perhaps the previous administration ha- could not see or, or could you visualize things that they had not thought of.  In terms of how the, the school was administered?
Speaker 2: I never looked at it that way.  I always looked at not what they didn't do, but look at what I could do.  And what could I bring to the table.  And I remember I wasn't at Fisk but for two years before I got a vice presidency at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  But, we were undergoing a governments restructuring at Fisk.  Fisk had some turmoil that had some student uprisings and other things.  And I'd written several articles about the fact of shared governance that people who have to live by decisions ought to have input into the decision making process.  Doesn't mean that their will shall prevail but they ought to have input.  Now, that's really what captured the attention of the then President Jim Lawson [James Lawson].  Because they had some uprisings and I think they had a building that had been burned or something.  And Jim Lawson and the board of Fisk, wanted to restructure the governance.  And so, Jim actually is the one that called me and, and I responded went down to talk to him.  And, and when I got there he, he put me in charge of the staff in charge of restructuring.  Because the board was involved and I remember the Honorable Wade McCree [Wade H. McCree] who was out of Detroit [Michigan] I believe he was a federal judge, was the chairman of the governance committee and he was on the board.  And [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin was the chairman of that board and he was on the committee.  A fellow named John King [John Quill Taylor King, Sr.] who was president of Huston Tillotson [Huston Tillotson College; Huston Tillotson University, Austin, Texas] was on the board.  And I was the staff director of it.  But, the chairman of that committee was Wade McCree and we met pretty much for six or eight months.  And we restructured some things and we, we brought students into some things.  Faculty into some things--
Speaker 1: Was Gerald McWhorter [Abdul Alkalimat] there, at that time?  Seems like--
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He may have been, he was not, I mean I know who Gerald is but, I don't, he was not very prominent if he was at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, we, were able to restructure and so, some of the things that I had learned at Harvard, such as governance.  Really prompted me to go to Fisk to be involved in that restructuring and my doctoral dissertation was on the governance of higher education.  And I went all the way back to Bellona, Italy, which was the first shared governance model in the world.  So, I think that yes my training at Harvard certainly helped.  Dr. Lawson and Fisk starting immediately with that restructuring of governance around the concept of shared authority.
Story_ID: 613594
Speaker 1: Now, were there, were there some aspects of your training that really didn't work in the black colleges [HBCUs]?  I've, I was--spent a lot of, time, time in theatre and, I don't know, they trained us in audience development.  And a lot of the aspects of audience development trend- trending into university didn't necessarily work in the black community.  You know, we had to adjust some of, so how did, how did--
Speaker 2: I never saw that.  To me whether or not it's Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], we got some of the same issues.  The, the major difference is a school like Harvard has $38 billion in its endowment and Hampton has 250 [million] in its endowment.  We had 29 million when I became president and it has grown and we're very thankful for that.  But, if you're dealing with people there are, there are certain things that would be the same whether it was University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee] or Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  I have--there's been a book written on me ['Dreaming No Small Dreams: William R. Harvey's Visionary Leadership,' Lois Benjamin], that talked about my ten points of my principles.  My ten principles and it starts with vision and it ends with results.  And in between you've got academic excellence and you've got fairness and courage and the like.  And all of those things are going to go into play if I were the president of Harvard or the president of Hampton.  Now, what you got to look at is the different scale and the different nuances and as I said the different aspects of the endowment. Thirty-eight billion compared to 200, 250 million.  So, you can't do everything, but I think that it's pretty much the same.  I really do believe that If I had stayed at Harvard or if I become president of a, of a major white school, I'm not sure that I would have done the things too much differently.  I believe in a fairness, I say that in my, my, my principle that I believe in fairness because even to my enemies I want to be fair.  So, I, I just believe in that.  I believe in, in, in vision, a lot of the things that we've done here at Hampton, is because of vision.  You know, the Bible says that people without vision perish, and I believe that.  I believed in bottom lines or the bottom line.  Because the fact is that I don't care what you do. If you don't achieve your bottom line then, it's all talk and no action.  I believe in action, I believe in results and I believe in the bottom line.  So, all of those are parts of my, my ten point model for higher education.  And I don't see me doing anything any differently if I had been the president of a major white school.
Story_ID: 613595
Speaker 1: I guess some of the differences I might, if I look back at that era and a lot of white campuses in the '70s [1970s] there were initiating coed dorms and that sort of thing.  And a lot more campus freedoms that existed on a campus like Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] or Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] or some, you know, or Tennessee State [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] or some others.  There were I know there're rules while coed dorms are being initiated say at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] or some place and, and Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] you gotta take your hat off in class, every class, it was, that was the rule, you know and (unclear).
Speaker 2: You, you have to do that Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] today, as well.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  But those are, you know, those are.  So, I'm just saying the rules are different than tradition. Is--at one time Hampton had the same tradition as probably a lot of Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to (unclear) take your hat off too, I don't, you know.  But, in 1970, you know, people didn't worry about that apparently, but, but can you kind of.  Did you have to adjust the policies at Fisk when you were on, on that committee to reflect the changing times, or?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I have I think I said to you earlier that when I go back to Southern Normal School [Brewton, Alabama], high school, with Mr. and Mrs. Young [Kenneth B. Young and Mai Young] they believed in standards then I did then and I do now.  And I'm not sure that one can or one ought to adjust one's standards.  Now, sure there are things that you do differently with the times and with the clientele.  But, I'm not sure that there are a lot of things that one does differently if you've got standards and you don't want to compromise those standards.  I'm not judgmental on people and I genuinely care about my students here.  One of the reasons I believe so strongly in standards is because I care about them and I believe that they're gonna be better off, if they have standards.  But, yes there are differences and in some school are more liberal some are more conservative.  Now, I could tell you to talked about coed dorms.  When I became president here at Hampton thirty-two years ago, we got a coed dorm.  I didn't change that when I came, it was already here.  And it's still coed.  So, but, but it's, it's the only one.  There were black schools [HBCUs] that had coed dormitories and there were some black schools that maybe relax the rules.  There were some that did not.  But, sure there are, there are differences and a lot will depend on what part of the country you're in.  You know, if you're in New England or in some parts of the North, there are, they have more left wing politics there than they are in, in Florida and Alabama and Georgia.  And, and even indeed Virginia.  So a lot will depend on where you are.  One of the things that I have come to recognize, realize and appreciate that people are different.  And what we need to do is  to not be judgmental about the differences.  We need to appreciate and be sensitive to the differences, you know.  There are things that they do in New England that they just don't do in the Southeast.  But, that doesn't mean that the New England is right, South is wrong or that South is wron- right and the New England is, is wrong.  So, I think one, one has to appreciate the differences of different people and once you do that then I think that everybody's a lot better off.  Part of the problem comes when people don't appreciate the differences of, of the training, of the experiences, or the views and they become to judgmental based on their own training, experience and background.
Story_ID: 613596
Speaker 1: As you approach it now, do, do you--does--do the school administrators here periodically review I guess policy in terms of you know, changing times and?
Speaker 2: We do it all the time.  We have two meetings a, a week with the full administration, full cabinet.  That's Tuesday afternoon and Friday mornings and our, our bylaws and charter gives the administrative council the authority to, to make policy as, and that's internal to the university.  And we do that all the time.  Because everybody that sits around that table is over something here at Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia].  And we've made, we've made policy changes, we've, we've done a lot of things.  I also meet once a month with the student leaders.  And we made a lot of changes by getting the input from the student leaders.  Once a month I meet with the faculty. I'm the chairman of the faculty.  They will have an opportunity to not only hear what I've got to say but to ask me any question when I finish my opening remarks I always say without a doubt, "Are there any questions of anything that I have said or questions that I have not said?"  So, we don't have a, a, a faculty senate or a representative body that represents the faculty.  Every faculty member can come in the faculty meeting, and ask the chairman a question.  The same is true when we have the town hall meetings with the students.  And then with the student leaders, we meet with them once a month.  And there are a lot of things that we have done, even some of the, the buildings that we have built.  We've gotten input as to what we wanted.  When we built the new student center, the students said that they wanted an indoor track, they wanted a offices for, for all of them in one place rather than being scattered around the campus, they wanted a ball room, they wanted a food court, they wanted a theatre.  They've got all of those things.  We incorporated what they wanted, which goes back to my philosophy of shared authority.  People that have to live with decisions ought to have input into the decision making process.  Again it doesn't mean that their will shall prevail, but they input in to the decision making process.  That has worked well.  Now, I am sure that there are those that might think that Hampton is too strict because as I said earlier we don't allow du rags on campus.  We don't allow the wife beater shirts.  We don't allow people to walk around with the pants below the butt.  And, and there may be those who say that because of those rules that they ought to have a right to walk around showing their underwear. We don't think so.  And if there are those who think that, we tell them not to do it, and if they really want to do it, there are a lot of other institutions that they can go to where they can do that.  But, they can't do it here at Hampton.
Story_ID: 613597
Speaker 1: What about in terms of student idealism and you know, students that have the same kind of feeling deep down that you had when you were in school at Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama] about changing society and the world, the, is the, is the college [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]--is--does the college kind of provide outlets for those students who just kind of find it, listen to 'em to find out what they're, they are trying to do?
Speaker 2: Oh there's no question about that we have a big service component.  We believe very strongly in service.  We got students that are involved in so many concrete things, with other organizations.  Boys and Girls Clubs [Boys and Girls Clubs of America] with, with AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] awareness, with other kinds of, of things.  Just about every group here and we probably have two hundred groups are involved in some kind of service aspect of what, what they want to do.  Because we, we, we feel strongly that, that character drives the individual and service helps to build character.  So, if students want to try to get involved, we are very much involved with the presidential election and other elections.  Not only did we encourage that, we helped to organize the students for Virginia, students, Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] students for Virginia.  There are those who wanted to do it for Republican side they could have done that as well.  But, I helped to organize that. The SGA [student government association] president was the president of the students for, for Vir- for--students for Obama in Virginia.  So, there are a lot of outlets for them to be able to get involved as they do on a daily, daily basis.  I think that we got some outstanding students.  This past year the SGA president Matthew Washington, we had the, the, the Miss Hampton [Nikole Churchill], there was a little controversy about her being non-black and she handled that so well.  The, the senior class president Christian Cheairs, we just had some good people who provided great leadership to their fellow students, men and women.  And they have great opportunities to do pretty much anything that they want to do.
Story_ID: 613598
Speaker 1: You asked a question about has fundraising changed, and the answer is yes.  When I first came here [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], I could either call or write the CEO of practically any major corporation in this country and get in to see them.  Now, everybody has keepers, I can still get in but I got to make a case to get in.  I just, just can't call up the president of AT&T [AT&T Inc.] and say I'm, "I'm gonna be in New York in three weeks.  I'd like to get on your calendar."  And what I used to do to is I would write a letter and say, "I'm gonna be in New York from Monday through Friday," whatever dates it's gonna be, "I'd like to get on your calendar at any time during that time."  And probably 98 percent of the time I could get in to see the chairman and CEO.  Now, when I do that, then I get calls and letters back that I've got to explain what I want and how long I'm going to take.  And everybody has handlers now.  Everybody has keepers.  So, that's a major, major difference because a lot of times when you and sometimes instead of seeing that CEO you get shunted off to another person or another committee.  Now, the CEO has the authority to make decisions like that.  I remember I saw--I met with a guy in, in Pennsylvania who was the chairman of Gulf Oil company.  He and I really hit it off.  He was a white guy from Mississippi and he and I hit it off.  We went to lunch together and then I went back and he was going to New York and he offered me a helicopter ride up there.  I didn't take it 'cause I had some more business in the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area.  But, just as a result of that meeting we got an endowed chair, from Gulf Oil company, because a CEO can do that.  Now, if I tried to get an endowed chair from one of these oil companies I'm probably gonna have to be go to a committee or go someplace else. (Cough) Excuse me.  But so that--there is a difference, there is a difference, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 613599
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question. Sir, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a pretty broad question, as to the hopes and concerns of the African American community.  I come out of an era, were we were very much interested in education and justice.  And I think that those are still chief concerns, if you look at the fact that right now, black colleges [HBCUs] make up about 4 percent of all of the colleges and university in the country.  Yet, we graduate about 30 percent of those that get bachelor's degrees.  And when you look at the STEM: science, technology, engineering and math, we graduate about 40 percent.  You can look at the fact that 75 percent of all the Ph.D.'s coming from those who had gone to black schools or getting Ph.D.'s from black schools.  Eighty-five percent of all the doctors, there's clearly a need for, for black higher education.  There's a need for education.  I still believe very strongly in a statement that I've used for decades.  That education is the key to freedom.  I believe that, and I still think that that's the case.  So, education, justice and we still have a lot of racism in the country and what we have to try to do is to fight it.  One of the things that I say to the seniors in my charge to them is that, "Fight with racism every time it raises its ugly head."  Fight racism every time it raises its ugly head.  I also think that there are some things that we've got to do better in the black community.  There're too many drugs in the black community.  I tell the graduates in my charge, stay away from drugs and drug dealers because if you don't, at some point in your life, it's gonna cause you some, some, some harm.  May not for life but at some point in your life it's gonna cause you some disarray.  One of the things that we're doing here at Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] is we're starting an African American marriage center.  Unfortunately, 70 percent of all the babies that are born today in the Africa American community are born to those single mothers.  And we think that those, that's problematic, it's problematic from an educational point of view, from an economic point of view from a crime point of view, from a health point of view.  Because if, if, if, if young African American girls are having babies and then in the (unclear) letting their mamas take care of them it's problematic.  Their men are needed in the household for the young men and the young women.  But, particularly for the boys and young men that are growing up.  So, that is something that we need to try to reverse that trend, because, it's important for that young boy to see his father in the house and not see a succession of eight out of ten men coming in during his time he's born and until he, he either goes to the [U.S] Army or goes to school, or what have you.  So, that's something that we continue to look at here at Hampton.  And as I said I'm not even talking about the moral point of view. I'm just talking about the problems that are created as I said educationally, financially, crime wise, health wise and otherwise.  So, that's a problem in our community.  So, our work is not done and all of us have a part to play in that.  Not just those of us, who are, who are teachers and administrators in colleges and university.  All of us have to play a part in trying to get a strong family unit, and trying to get folk to stay away from drugs.  And trying to understand that education is still the key.  You know, it is the arc of freedom in my judgment.  So, yeah, there are things that we need to do.  Yet, there are people that are doing it, and for that I am pleased.  I'm just say this, I think that President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] is a terrific role model, as a father, as a husband and as president.  And I would hope that the other young black men, can see that.  That's important. Good role models are, are important.  I've used them all of my life in every place I have been.  I would not be sitting here talking to you now, if I had not had role models.  Starting with my mother [Claudis Parker Harvey] and father [W.D.C. Harvey], but every place I have gone, every place I have gone.  I mention the Youngs [Mai Young and Kenneth B. Young] at Southern Normal [Southern Normal School, Brewton, Alabama].I mention at Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama] people that I had.  I mentioned at, at Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].  I mentioned at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I mentioned in the Army.  These roles are very important.  So, that's why it's so important for all of us no matter what our chosen field, whether are not we are journalist, or doctors, or teachers, or scientist, or college presidents, we need to try be good role models and I just think that President Obama is an outstanding role model as a father, as a husband and as president.
Story_ID: 613600
Speaker 1: And I'd be remiss if I did not ask you about President Obama's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] recent visit.  How were your able to do it?  When he came into Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], it was all over the news as we came into this area.  On last Sunday, Mother's Day, President Obama spoke at the commencement exercises here on the campus, right?  So, tell us a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Well, as you can see I'm an unabashed fan of President Obama's and I have been for a long time.  When he announced on February the 10th, 2007, I had seen him at the Democratic National Convention [2004 Democratic National Convention, Boston, Massachusetts].  And I, I liked him.  I happened to be one that I'm a political independent. My father [W.D.C. Harvey] in Brewton, Alabama, taught me to be that way.  He said then that there are good people and that there are scoundrels in both parties.  So, support the person rather than the party.  I remember he said that to me, black folk were overwhelmingly voting Republican.  Just like we are overwhelmingly voting Democratic now, Democrat now.  But, my father said that to me I have followed that.  My father, I don't know where he got it from, said, "No permanent friends, no permanent enemies and only permanent interests."  And I've done that all my life.  I have supported Republicans I have supported Democrats, because I support the person rather than the party.  So, when I saw President Obama, then Senator Obama give the address at the Democratic National Convention, I said, "Boy he's got a lot of fire."  And I started taking notice of him and then when he announced on February 10, 2007, I started reading everything I could find on him, including his book, and including some of his speeches and other things about him.  So, then I contacted his office and said that my wife [Norma Baker Harvey] and I wanted to have a fundraiser for him.  Now, I want you to mark this, and he eventually said yes.  When my wife had a fundraiser for him in the spring of 2007, he was thirty points behind Senator Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton].  And 80 percent of the African Americans were going with Senator Clinton. Well, we have a fundraiser for him, and we were able to raise some money and when I had a chance to meet with him and talk with him face to face and have him in my home for about two hours, I said that this is the man that, that I'm going for.  And he asked me to serve on his finance committee and I did.  And then after he was elected I was as elated as everybody else.  He has asked me to serve as chairman of his, the president's advisory board on historically black colleges and universities [President's Board of Advisors on HBCUs].  And I invited him to come. I cannot say why he chose Hampton except that there're a lot of parallels.  What I just told you, there is a bond developing.  There are many parallels.  He was born in Hawaii, so was Hampton's founder [Samuel Chapman Armstrong].  He graduated from a, a, a-- the high school in Hawaii, so did Hampton's founder.  He graduated from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], so did Harvey [HistoryMaker William Harvey], I graduated from Harvard.  We believe very strongly in service and uplifting our community and having our students go out into the community to be of service to others.  He believes that.  So, I think there are a lot of parallels, I cannot get in his brain and say why he chose Hampton.  But, I think that all of the things that I just said may have had something to do with it.  Whatever the reason, I can tell you I am as pleased as I can be to have had President Barack Obama here and give our 140th commencement address.  And he was magnificent.  Everything was about as near perfect as it could be.  First the all the weather, it was sunny, not a cloud in the sky, yet it was a high of sixty-three degrees, it wasn't hot.  He came in, he gave a magnificent speech; he got a great reception from us.  He was inspirational.  So, it was about as near perfect as it could be, and I'm very pleased that he came.  I will say this in conclusion he is the tenth president to have come to Hampton.  So, Hampton has only had the movers and shakers in the country, not just people like the president of the United States, but, but corporate CEOs, John Rockefeller [John D. Rockefeller], George Eastman of Eastman Kodak [Eastman Kodak Company], Coleman du Pont [Thomas Coleman du Pont], the patriarch of the Du Pont fortunes. Bill Ellinghaus [William M. Ellinghaus] when he was president of AT&T [AT&T Inc.].  Roger Enrico, when he was chairman of Pepsi-Cola [PepsiCo], all of those people were on our board.  And to be able to have President Obama come as the tenth president to have come here, it's, it really remarkable. When William Howard Taft [President William Howard Taft] of Ohio was the president of the United States and the chief exec- chief justice of the United States Supreme Court, he was chairman of Hampton's board.  So, we've always had that because Hampton is always had those standards.  We've always been leaders.  I told you Armstrong pioneered Indian education in this country, Native American. He pioneered the whole concept of the head, the heart and the hand.  Hampton has always been on the cutting edge and we've always had the movers and shakers in this country associated with us.  And so, when President Obama came, he gave a magnificent address. It was so well received and we were obviously very, very pleased.
Story_ID: 613601
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question too.  We, we only have three more questions.  The first one is when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know. I'm sure that I have not done everything right. We've done a lot of things, you know.  One of the things that I said when I came here was that I wanted to change the paradigm, I wanted a new paradigm to keep Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] as an outstanding undergraduate institution.  But, that I wanted to be, to for us to do world class research.  At the look at the fact that right now, right now, we're world class research, cancer research, I've got a group that has twelve patents on a breast cancer and prostate cancer detection device.  I got another group that has fourteen patents on prosthesis for artificial limbs.  Two springs ago we launched $140 million weather satellite in Vandenberg Air Force Base [California] so that we could study not to loosen clouds and the ionosphere.  In the School of Pharmacy we're trying to identify the gene that causes Alzheimer's and if we can than physicians can treat that disease in ones twenties and thirties.  As opposed to when it manifests itself in one's sixties, seventies and eighties.  We have initiated a skin of color institute [Hampton University Skin of Color Research Institute] and we just had a major conference last weekend, the weekend before Mother's Day.  L'Oreal [L'Oreal S.A.] sponsored it for us, because what, what, what I found out that I did not know that there is a difference between black and white and red and yellow and brown and tan skin other than pigmentation.  There are issues and challenges and diseases of each.  Well, Hampton is going to be the forerunner in looking at those issues and diseases and challenges in people of skin of color.  L'Oreal, which is the largest cosmetic company in the world partnered with us and gave us the money for that conference.  Now, did they do that out of the goodness of their heart? I don't think so.  They're looking for their own return and I'm happy about that, because that's where you get the quid pro quo. Sales in this country and in Europe are flat.  Sales in Africa and Asia, South America are go- going up.  So, they want to look at that as well.  So, we're doing some outstanding research in some outstanding areas.  And what I try to do is to look at the, the good things, the successes I don't spend too much time on any of the others.  But, I can say to you I'm sure that I've, I've had some failures.
Story_ID: 613602
Speaker 1: Okay, but I think you've already, I'm a ask, ask this question anyway, but, I think you've kind of already answered it already but.  What, what would you consider to be your legacy at this point?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know I will probably leave my legacy to others to write but as I said we have changed the paradigm.  We have gotten Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] on strong financial basis.  When I became president we had 29 million in endowment we got over 250, now.  We had an entire decade of this '70s [1970s] we were in red ink.  We've had thirty-two straight years of black ink.  So, we've gotten Hampton financially stable.  We've built some twenty new buildings.  We've initiated some seventy-six new degree granting programs, including six Ph.D.'s: atmosphere science, nursing, business, education, physics, pharmacy, physical therapy is seven.  So, we've done a lot and we've a lot because we've had a lot of good people.  I've had fourteen of my people to go on and become presidents of other colleges and universities.  So, that fact is that I believe very strongly in the team concept.  I tell people that there is no I in team.  I am the team leader, I am the team leader and make no mistake about that.  But, that fact is that it's the team, it's the collective judgments and wisdom and talents of those fourteen as well as others that are here, that, that have made Hampton where we are.  Including our students and faculty, our alumni, they support us in a big fashion.  So, we got a really good thing here and we've had some major, major successes.  And, and, and by any objective analysis Hampton University would be considered one of the best modest size universities in the country.  Any objective analysis and I'm very pleased about that.
Story_ID: 613603
Speaker 1: Just a few words about your family. Did-- have your parents had a, did they have a chance to see you be- be- become the president of Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: My mother [Claudis Parker Harvey] did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother did, my father [W.D.C. Harvey] did not, but my mother did.
Speaker 1: And, and talk a bit, a little bit about your family (cough) today before I last question?
Speaker 2: Say that again, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Can, can you just give us some information about your family today, before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Well, I've got wife [Norma Baker Harvey] of forty-four years, we've got three kids.  My son [W. Christopher Harvey] has three and his wife have three kids, so I have three grandkids [Taylor Harvey, Gabrielle Harvey, and Lauren Harvey].  My, my two girls are not married right now.  Hopefully they'll find a fine man that they can fi- form a fine union with.  My kids are doing extraordinarily well.  My son is a, is a businessman.  He's a vice president and partner of a very large construction and development company [Armada Hoffler Construction Company; Armada Hoffler Properties, Virginia Beach, Virginia].  My oldest child, who is a daughter [Kelly Harvey], just finished University of Pittsburgh law school [University of Pittsburgh School of Law, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  My young child [Leslie Harvey] is a counselor in the D.C. school system [District of Columbia Public Schools].  She has a bachelor's [degree] from Hampton, and a master's [degree] from Hampton, and a master's from George Washington [George Washington University, Washington, D.C.].  And they're doing, they're doing well.  We are very blessed to be able to have them doing the kinds of things that they are doing and the fact is that they are terrific kids.  They don't try to live on their mother and father's name.  They're out making a name for themselves.  And we taught them that way and we've proud of them for doing it.
Story_ID: 613604
Speaker 1: The last question is like legacy but a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, that we came to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and we found a very wonderful institution and we made it better.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right well thank you very much for sharing.
Speaker 2: You're very welcome, my pleasure, my pleasure, my pleasure.  All righty.
Speaker 1: Okay, we, we got through.
