Story_ID: 45570
Speaker 1: Today's date and, you know, your occupation.
Speaker 2: My name is Carl Wendell Hines, Jr.  Carl with a C, C-A-R-L, Wendell, W-E-N-D-E-L-L, Hines, H-I-N-E-S, Jr.  Today's date is, I think it's, July 11th, the year 2000.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I've been a math teacher here in Indianapolis [Indiana] in the high schools for 35 years.
Speaker 1: And you're also a musician.
Speaker 2: I'm also a part time musician.
Speaker 1: And poet.
Speaker 2: Yes, and poet.
Story_ID: 45571
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I have five questions I ask everyone, they have no relevance and I just want short answers. One, I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is collard greens.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I like to go home, to my hometown, Wilson, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring is my favorite time of year.
Speaker 1: And a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying, to each his own.
Story_ID: 45572
Speaker 1: Now, what I typically do, I ask--I start with people asking about their childhood, and I really would like you to tell us about your mother and father and anything that you might know about your grandparents, but, I really would like to know what your mother's name was and-
Speaker 2: Okay, I grew up in a small town, Wilson, North Carolina, which is located about 45 miles east of the capital city Raleigh [North Carolina]. My parents were both school teachers, my father, Carl Hines, Senior, was--he taught math in the schools, and he was also a self-taught musician. He started the band, the only band the high school ever had, he thought that there should be a band at the school, so, he started it, he was self-taught himself. He learned to play the instruments, and did a very good job of teaching the instruments to the other kids, and that was a very good band. My mother was an elementary school teacher, and she prided herself in her ability to teach kids to read. My grandfather was a descedant of a slave mother.  He was not very educated, but, he insisted that all his kids go to college, which they did. My grandmother was a housewife, this is on my father's side and--let's see what else can I say. My mother and father, of course, insisted that my sister, Brenda, and my brother, Harold, also become educated. My sister is now a school teacher in Washington D.C.-in Silver Springs, Maryland, she recently won the presidential award for teacher of the year. My brother teaches dentistry at Harry Medical College in Nashville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Now tell me what--did your parents share with you any stories about them growing up?  You know, even one, or--
Speaker 2: They were not the talkative type about that kind of stuff, so, we had the pry stories out of them, but, before my father passed, my sister sat my father down, and just, similar to what we're doing now, just asked him a lot of questions about his childhood, which it never surfaced that he told, I never, ever heard before, and we have those on tape, and I'm very proud to have that tape. So, they were not the story telling type, they were just the kind of silent type. Both my mother and my father.
Story_ID: 45573
Speaker 1: Can you--did they grow up, in you said, Wilson, North Carolina?
Speaker 2: My father grew up in Wilson [North Carolina] and my mother grew up in Greensboro, North Carolina.  My father went to A & T College [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State College, Greensboro, North Carolina], and my mother went to Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina], both in Greensboro, and I think that's where they met.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, let's talk about--so you said they just weren't the talkative type, where there any stories that you father told when, you know, your sister got him to talk that you'd like to share?
Speaker 2: Really, nothing in particular stands out, I hate to say, it was just, a couple of hours of reminiscing about old days.
Speaker 1: Are you--where do you fit in the family tree?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: You're the oldest, okay and then is it Harold next or Brenda next?
Speaker 2: Brenda is next and my baby brother Harold.
Story_ID: 45574
Speaker 1: Okay, so, let's talk about you growing up.  What was life like in Wilson, North--I mean, where is Wilson [North Carolina] located?
Speaker 2: Wilson is about 45 miles east of Raleigh [North Carolina].  Not to far from the coast, maybe about an hour's drive. These were the days of segregation, of course, back in the 40s' and 50s', but, life in a small town was kind of relaxed, I mean, you know, we were kids, we were happy, we were running around just being kids and, of course, we had to sit upstairs in the movie theater and there were places that we couldn't go, and things like that, kind of restrictive, in a way, but we didn't care, we were just kids, we were happy to go to the places that we could go. There were, if a movie was heavily advertised, it might be playing, you know nationally, it might be playing in the home town in the theater that we were not permitted to go to, so, my father would pack us in the car and we would go to Raleigh, or to Rocky Mountain [North Carolina], which is a close by town and there might be a theater there that would have that movie playing, so, we could see the movie and those were happy days for us.  Not unhappy at all.
Story_ID: 45575
Speaker 1: So, describe some of your favorite childhood memories.
Speaker 2: Let see, favorite childhood memories.  I started in the German Bugle core when I about, maybe, fourth or fifth grade, or something like that.  I went to a Catholic school for the first five grades, they had a rhythm band which I enjoyed a lot.  I played the sticks, later the cymbals, sticks are just little sticks you hit and they play different rhythms and later graduated to cymbals and later they developed a German Bugle core, and I played the bugle, so, I was real happy about that, so, and the family used to go down to the beach, which is not too far from my hometown and there were beaches that allowed us to go to, one in particular, Hammock's Beach, about an hour and a half from Wilson [North Carolina] and we'd go to the beach and spend all day at the beach, a couple of years we went to Merrill Beach in South Carolina and just had a good time.  Swimming in the ocean, picking up shells and that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 45576
Speaker 1: Well, I'm kind of curious, you went to a Catholic school, I mean, it's the south and it's Catholic, and its mainly, you know, the south both Black and White, I think it was Baptist, you know, Catholics more existing in the north, so, I'm just curious about that.
Speaker 2: I think I went to a Catholic school so I can go early, I think I went to the school at age five, and I think I skipped a couple of grades, because I graduated from high school at age 16 and that may have had something to do with why I went to the Catholic school, I never really knew exactly why.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any discussion about your parents not wanting you to under--you know, were you Catholic?
Speaker 2: No, we were Presbyterian--
Speaker 1: --oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --and so I was going to the Presbyterian church every Sunday and going to the Catholic school during the week, there was a time that I wanted to become Catholic, but I had serious conversations with my Presbyterian minister, and also with the priests and with my parents, and decided to stay Presbyterian and I think that helped me decide that, basically all religions are the same, it doesn't really matter, so, I still have respect for all religions today, I wouldn't say I lean towards Presbyterianism, or anything like that, it's just that I just continued to go on to the Presbyterian church until I graduated from high school.
Story_ID: 45577
Speaker 1: Now, you were the oldest, so, did you feel--were there expectations in your family because you were the oldest, or were there certain things, you know, your parents said you had to do because you were the oldest.
Speaker 2: Well it was understood that I was going to go to college, there was never a question, it was programed into us from birth almost, when you get to college, such and such, you know, so it was programed into us that we were going to go to college. I made pretty good grades throughout school and did okay, I wasn't valedictorian or anything like that, but, I made A's and B's and that kind of thing and you know other than normal chores you do around the house, I wouldn't say there was anything extra expectations that were placed on me.  That was just all of us three and we were loved equally, and I kind of feel that sometimes I had to make all the mistakes, so that my brother and sister [Harold and Brenda Hines] wouldn't have to make them, but, and I did make quite a few, you know, nothing major, just the minor things.
Story_ID: 45578
Speaker 1: Let's talk about music, because I know education was very, you know, predominant, were your parents--your father [Carl Hines, Sr.] taught at the local (inaudible).
Speaker 2: My father was a math teacher for many years, then he became principal of an elementary school in our home town [Wilson, North Carolina], he was a self-taught musician, although I don't ever recall, I don't ever recall hearing him play, I mean, in the band he would teach the kids how to play, he would say, well, you hold the horn here and you do this. I never heard him play an entire song, or anything like that.  Around the house we listened to the classical music, mostly, Nat King Cole.  In those days I listened to rhythm and blues was the thing, there wasn't--we would listen to Nashville, Tennessee late at night, this is before the era of rock and roll, of course, we would listen to people like, I would, although my parents would like, my father liked classical music, and march music and that kind of stuff. My mother liked Nat King Cole and the popular singers, Billy Eckstine and people like that, and I discovered rhythm and blues early in my youth and in my hometown, there was one station that played Black music for an hour or two during the day. CPS Serenade was the name of the program, and us teenagers would listen to CPS Serenade during that time, and then we would listen to Nashville, Tennessee, Randy's Record Mart, I don't know if you know about that, but, this was the days before rock and roll, so, we would listen to Randy's Record Mart late at night, and we would hear rhythm and blues, the Black music of the day.
Speaker 1: (Inaudible). Okay.
Speaker 2: And I played a little bit of trumpet, after I played the bugle, in the German Bugle core in the Catholic school, when I got to high school, actually sixth grade through 12th, was considered the high school, I mean, the classes were all in the same building, Darden High School [Wilson, North Carolina] and I played the trumpet, I never really got to be very good on the trumpet, I enjoyed being in the band, although it was a little bit embarrassing, my father was the band director, but, we did have a very good band and I enjoyed playing in the band, and we would do marches, and play at the football games and that kind of stuff.
Story_ID: 45579
Speaker 1: This is a question--how large was your town?
Speaker 2: At that time the population was about 28,000 maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was your mother teacher also?
Speaker 2: She was a teacher also, she was an elementary school teacher.
Speaker 1: Did they teach at the school you attended?
Speaker 2: My father [Carl Hines, Sr.] did.  But, my mother was an elementary school teacher.
Speaker 1: So, but when you were--oh, you went to (inaudible).
Speaker 2: I went to the Catholic school.
Speaker 1: So, she did not teach at that school?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Do you think there was any decision about them not teach--you know, you going to the school that they didn't teach at, or--
Speaker 2: No, there was only one school that was not an elementary school and that was Darden [Darden High School, Wilson, North Carolina].  So, Darden was sixth grade on.
Speaker 1: Does that school, was the school, the Catholic school, was it all Black Catholic school?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Everything was all Black in those days, it was either all Black or all White, there was nothing in between.
Speaker 1: Okay, was the town that you were in was it all Black or was it
Speaker 2: No, it was about 50/50, actually, there was some railroad tracks, Amtrak, right down the middle, we lived on side, the other folks lived on the other side.
Speaker 1: At that point and time, did you have much exposure to White society, or do you think that it was--
Speaker 2: I would say zero.  Only contact was, when you go shopping or something like that.  Now my grandfather had owned a barber shop, that catered exclusively to White clients, people like the mayor, you know, the top people of the town, had their hair cut at my grandfather's barber shop, he passed on, that was about, I really don't remember him, I was about one years old when he passed on. But, my father [Carl Hines, Sr.] ran the barber shop, all the barbers were Black, but, the clients were exclusively white.  My grandfather had invested in real estate, so, he did quite well in real estate, he ran the barber shop, and built houses for people on my side of the tracks. Most of these houses are still lived in today, most of them.
Story_ID: 45580
Speaker 1: And you say you still enjoy going back, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I go back every chance I get.  I was there last week.
Speaker 1: Has the town changed much?
Speaker 2: Well, it's changed, the population has gone up to maybe 33 or 34,000.  It's completely changed from the days that I grew up. There are things that remind me of the old days, but, basically there's a K-Mart there, there's a Wal-Mart there, and the downtown that we used to dress up to go downtown shopping. I think the Wal-Mart and the K-Mart has brought about the battle of the K in the downtown area. The whole of last week, I was taking pictures of the downtown just to remind myself of how it was.
Speaker 1: Now what--you know, a lot of times, you know, people who grew up in small towns, it's a different life, what do you think--how do you think you're different today because you grew up in an environment like that?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't have exposure to a lot of drugs, the bad things in life.  I think, I didn't have serious exposure to that kind of stuff, when I did become exposed to it, I had no curiosity about it or a need for it, and so I count that as a blessing. So, I never developed a taste for some of the evils of society, because the small town kind of protected us from that kind of stuff, especially with my parents being who they were, if I had gotten into just a little bit of trouble, my parents would hear about it before I got home, and then I would, of course, catch it, you know, you didn't want to do that, so I was, you know, kind of good--kind of a good kid.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had the foot washing Baptist, you know, all of them, Methodist, Catholic, Presbyterian, Episcopalian and all of them.
Speaker 1: Okay. In that little tiny town?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  A large number of churches.
Story_ID: 45581
Speaker 1: Are there any other childhood--so you said you never saw your father [Carl Hines, Sr. really play?
Speaker 2: Not really, no.  He played the saxophone, that was his primary instrument, he had played it some in college, but, I don't recall him ever playing a tune, or anything like that, he definitely didn't play around the house.
Speaker 1: And who do you think you're most like, your mother or your father.
Speaker 2: Definitely like my father.  He was like a hero to me and I patterned myself after him in many ways. I became a math teacher because he was a math teacher, not because that I was that outstanding in math, I just, it didn't hurt him--then I learned to play, because he was a musician, so I tried to emulate him in every way that I could.
Speaker 1: Now, why--
Speaker 2: He was a fine and decent person, he really, really a nice person.  Low key.  Very noble, upstanding, a member of all the civic clubs and all that kind of thing, but, a really down-to-earth person at the same time.
Speaker 1: So, you really loved your father.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Mother too!
Story_ID: 45582
Speaker 1: Now, you, you know, the other thing that sort of surprised me, you said you really like sort of R&B, at that time--
Speaker 2: At that time.
Speaker 1: Wasn't R&B at that time a little on the--wasn't it not accepted by certain Black society.
Speaker 2: Of course.  But, most people listened to it, now we're talking about the days before rock and roll, before Elvis, I'm talking about, Clyde McPhatter, Louis Jordan, see in those days, I said there was a radio program that played Black music called CPS Serenade, we didn't have our own stations in those days, or at least not in my home town, and they played a variety of Black music, which is unlike today. One tune might be by Clara Ward, singing gospel, the very next record may be Count Basie, the very next record might be Louis Jordan, so there was a wide variety and it was listened to one of those, listen to that station one day, I heard the music of Clifford Brown, trumpet player, I didn't know anything about jazz music at the time, but, one day they played this record that just absolutely, absolutely just floored me, I had no preparation for it, I had no knowledge of what Jazz music was all about and it was just--the effect that it had on me, because he was an extremely fluid, creative trumpet player, and I was mediocre trumpet player at best, but, I could immediately hear the genius in the--there was something good about this, I didn't know what it was--I associated with the word Jazz, but, I didn't know anything about jazz at the time, I had heard of Louis Armstrong, and I had heard of Duke Ellington, and Count Basie and a few others, but, I didn't know anything about the music. So, I resolved at that instant to learn all I could about this music called, which I thought was Jazz, so, went to the library. In my home town the library and the teenage hang out were right adjacent to one another all in one building, the library about--a little bit larger than this room right here. But, I read everything I could about Jazz.  Every book, every magazine that had the word jazz in it, I read it, and so I knew, I didn't have much access to records, so, I knew, all the names of all the great players, and where they were born, details about their life, but, I didn't know what they sounded like, so, that would come later. So, this happened in--I was born in 1940, by the way, so this happened in the mid 50s [1950s], so I would have been about--
Story_ID: 45583
Speaker 1: You were just saying you were born in 1940.
Speaker 2: I was born in 1940, and this would have been mid 50s [1950s], maybe even 55 [1955], 56 [1956]-55 [1955] probably, and hearing the music of Clifford Brown, which I learned later, this is who it was who was playing, playing a tune called Cherokee, now those musicians would know, you can probably imagine the impact that, that would have on a person who had never heard anything like it before, and had no preparation for it. So, it just floored me, it just had a tremendous impact on me.  So, I was determined to learn all I could about this music. So--
Story_ID: 45584
Speaker 1: When you say the music floored you--
Speaker 2: In mean, it was one of those instances which--transforms your life.  So, I wanted to learn all--I mean that became my highest priority, learning all about this music.
Speaker 1: Now how old were you?
Speaker 2: 15 or so.
Story_ID: 45585
Speaker 1: Did you try to discuss it with your father [Carl Hines, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  His era of interest of Jazz music was the 30s [1930s], of course, the big band era, you know, Duke Ellington, Count Basie, Jimmy Lunceford, the big bands, the Swing era, which I had no knowledge of it at the time, but, he would talk about these bands and how much he enjoyed them and that kind of stuff. And we had a few records around the house.  That I began to listen to differently after that.  Before that it was just some old music, you know, but then I began to listen to all the records differently. It was later that I would learn that this was Clifford Brown and the name of the tune was Cherokee. So, as I said, by the time I graduated from high school [Darden High School, Wilson, North Carolina], I knew the names of most of the players, and I could put the history of Jazz into a kind of perspective, but, there was very little access to records, I just couldn't go downtown and buy Jazz records, so, whenever someone in my family would go to Raleigh [North Carolina], or Greensboro [North Carolina], they would go to record shops and maybe buy Jazz records, so, the earliest records I had were by Charlie Parker, Dizzy Gillespie and soaked up every note, I still know every note of those records.
Story_ID: 45586
Speaker 1: So, I never did become a very good trumpet player, by the time I got to college I abandoned the trumpet all together. Took up piano.  My sister [Brenda Hines] got a piano, she asked for a piano, at my house Christmas in my senior year in high school, but, I don't think she ever got to play it, until I went away to college. I would get home from school and just sit down and just pick out notes until it was time to go to bed. So, I did that from Christmas until September of that year, I would just try to pick out, I would play these Charlie Parker, Dizzy Gillespie records, try to find those notes on the piano, kind of a tedious process. So, my mother asked me if I wanted to take piano lessons, and I went to the guy and asked him if he knew anything about Jazz, he said no, so I lost interest in having lessons, now I wish I had taken the lessons, it would have speeded up the process of learning how to play an instrument more quickly, but, in the process, I think, I learned how to listen, I learned how to hear notes, I learned how to--at first play the record, find the note, play the record find the next note, find the next note on the piano, kind of a tedious, but, eventually you get to a point where you can hear entire passages, and you know exactly where they are on the piano. I never got to be very good while I was still at home, but, when I got to college at Tennessee State University in Nashville, Tennessee--
Story_ID: 45587
Speaker 1: I mean, you were talking about Nashville, Tennessee being a very musical city, you know, and you sort of found yourself there. I'd like to understand how you got to Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee], that was neither place that your parents had gone.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: [TAPE INTERRUPTED]
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay, how did I get to Tennessee State? I was saying that I graduated from high school at age 16, was programed to go to college and I just couldn't wait to get away, matter of fact, I don't know if I mentioned this or not, but, sometimes during the summers we would go to New York City [New York], just to find a job, just to get out of the south, so, some of my happiest experiences were when I was in high school, just going to New York during the summer, I think I did that between my junior year, which I must have been very young, and I don't know how my mother allowed me to do this, but, I went to New York, not knowing anything about it, just, several of us went together, and we just found jobs, washing dishes and that kind of stuff, just to be in New York City, just to be out of the south, so, those are very happy memories for me.
Speaker 1: So, when you did things like this, did you mother make arrangements for a rooming house?
Speaker 2: Nope!  We had to do it all on our own.  So, there were no McDonald's or places like that to work in, in my home town [Wilson, North Carolina], so, you could either pick cotton, or pick tobacco, we would have jobs like cleaning up department stores after they closed for the night, we used to do that, we used to wash dishes in restaurants in my home town, but, when summer would come, I just couldn't wait to get away and so about four or five of us kids would just go--get on a bus, and just go to New York City, find a place to stay, and just find a job washing dishes, or doing anything like that. So, I would spend most of the days washing dishes, or busing tables, or something like that, and I would try to find a restaurant job where I could eat, but, then at night I would go to Berriland, Smalls Paradise, the Apollo Theater, so, I got to hear some of the great musicians, got to hear Miles Davis, John Coltrane, Bud Powell, some of the great players of the day, so, at places like Berriland, being under age was not a problem because they had a railing, and if you sat behind the railing, you didn't have to worry about drinking, or anything like that, you just paid your admission fee and you could sit there all night, and you wouldn't have to--there was no two drink minimum, or anything like that. So, I would sit there every night, from about nine to about three, ride the subway back to where I was staying and then just get up the next day and wash dishes, so, I would do that, soak up all this great music, I mean, those are great times for me.
Speaker 1: And you were 15 at the time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This almost seems unbelievable.
Speaker 2: Uh huh, now that I think about it, how did my mother allow me to do something like that, but, I guess she had faith in me.
Story_ID: 45588
Speaker 1: Now did the money you earned, did you keep, or was it going to the family, or--
Speaker 2: No.  You know, my parents being school teachers they didn't have, you know, it wasn't like we were poor and I had to send money back home, or anything like that, I would save a little bit for college, but, most of it went to being in New York, I would try to catch all the Jazz musician I had read and heard about and I would go somewhere different every night. I would go to the art museums, Broadway plays, I would hang around in case somebody, you know, maybe their girlfriend didn't show up and they had a spare ticket or something like that, so, I got to see a lot of Broadway plays, and things like that, we would do stuff like that every single night and this was a very happy time for me. Being out of the south, for one, feeling free, that was completely different experience and I think my parents understood I needed to have this experience and they just gave me their blessings, and I went.
Speaker 1: That's amazing!  And I mean, when you first arrived, cause you had been in such a teeny little environment.
Speaker 2: Sleep on the subway until you find a place.  The subway in those days cost 20 cents, you ride it back and forth all night, just sleep on the subway, if they made you get off, just get on the next one, until you find a place.
Speaker 1: And how many kids were you with?
Speaker 2: There were about three or four of us.
Speaker 1: That's amazing.  All boys?
Speaker 2: Uh huh, so that was a great experience for me.
Story_ID: 45589
Speaker 1: Okay, so now let's talk about Tennessee State University [Nashville, Tennessee] (inaudible).
Speaker 2: In my home town [Wilson, North Carolina], most of the kids who graduated, everybody--practically everyone graduated from high school in those days. Those who didn't, went to the Army or something like that, there were no factories or anything like that to speak of, so, you went away, so, most of the kids went to A&T College [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State College], which is in Greensboro [North Carolina], or Charlotte University [sic], or St.  Augustine [St. Augustine's University, Charlotte, North Carolina], or Johnson C. Smith [University, Charlotte, North Carolina], or some of the local colleges, and I wanted to go away, I don't know, I was adventurous, I wanted to go, I wanted to be away, and there was a guy in a class ahead of me, named Carlton Petway, who for some reason had gone to Tennessee State, and when he came home at Christmas, he was ranting and raving about, you know, about Tennessee State, Tennessee State, and he showed me his yearbook with all these beautiful girls, and I just got excited, that was where I wanted to go, made up my mind, I was going to Tennessee State, even though I had never heard of it before, Carlton Petway was talking about it, he eventually became a lawyer, and became something like attorney general of the State of Tennessee, and he passed away at an early age unfortunately, but, he had a lot to do with my decision to go Tennessee State. So, the day I arrived there was my 17th birthday, so, I was walking around the campus wondering if I had made the right decision, and I heard some sounds coming from a building over there, and I just followed these sounds, and there was some guys my age who were jamming, they had a piano in this room and they were playing Jazz, I couldn't believe it, they were my age and they were playing Jazz, so, at that instant I knew that I had made the right choice, there were people my age who knew about Jazz and so the rest of my days there were very happy.
Story_ID: 45590
Speaker 1: Now, what was you major.
Speaker 2: My major was, my initial major was electrical engineering, I chose that major not because I knew what engineers did or do, which I had no idea, but, one day we had these speakers at the school, they would talk about all these opportunities, and science and engineering, so, I said okay, an engineer, that's what I'll be, although I had no clue what engineers do, so, I struggled with that for a few years and eventually I went to see my adviser one day, and he said, well, if you continue to do well you'll be out of here in two more years, and I was already there--I had been there three years, I said, I want to get out, so, I just chose a major that would allow me to graduate as soon as possible, so, I had already taken all these science and math courses, so, I just found out if I just took some education courses, I can graduate, so, that's what I did. I wind up being a school teacher, and my parents had always said, take some education courses, you'll always have something to fall back on, and so I've fallen back on it for 35 years, I guess.
Speaker 1: So, at that point, was there anything else memorable about, you know, Nashville or Tennessee State or did you join--were you part of a fraternity?
Speaker 2: I was in Omega Psi Phi, and the important part in Nashville to me was, in addition to graduating from Tennessee State and being a part of the fraternity and all that stuff, was, the musical life.
Story_ID: 45591
Speaker 1: They [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] had a music building that stayed open 24 hours, and here were these really mature Jazz musicians, they were located on campus, matter of fact, one year Ray Charles came to town, and just took a whole bunch of them out on the road with him, and many of them are still in the band with him now. Hank Crawford was one of them, he was at Tennessee State [University], he was an Alto player, he joined the Ray Charles' band. Ray took about five of these guys on the road with him and many of them became famous, names in their own right. But, so I just hung out with the Jazz musicians, there's a music building that stayed open 24 hours a day and they would have jam sessions after the rec hall closed, they would go there every night and have a jam session, and I would be right there soaking it all up.
Speaker 2: In a university, that they permit it--cause 24 hours, you never even think of that.
Speaker 1: Then it was, the music building stayed open 24 hours, but, what is most unusual, the department head, the head of the music department frowned on the Jazz at the time, he didn't like Jazz men playing in his music building, so, whenever he came back, the Jazz guys would have to suddenly get serious and pretend they were playing classical music, or other kinds of music, as soon as he would leave, they would go right back into the jam sessions, and I would be there, I was not a player at the time, I mean, I had tried to learn to play on my own, more or less when I was still in high school, but, I was there soaking it up, and whenever the piano player wouldn't show up, they would say, oh, let him sit in, you know, they had to have somebody play piano, so, I would sit there and just struggle through it, but, it was a great learning experience for me.
Story_ID: 45592
Speaker 1: So, I went to Nashville [Tennessee] primarily as a non-musician, and emerged as a fair musician, pretty good musician, not really good, but, pretty fair.  So, I would go out on the weekends and play gigs, blues--rhythm and blues, and have a good time, that was an important part of Nashville for me, going out playing these jobs, all sorts, we would travel around Tennessee, play small towns, play barns, play in clubs that had strippers and comedians, chorus lines, and you know, just can't believe some of the stuff. Some of the dances we played, there would be a line down the middle of the floor, Black people on one side, and White people on the other side, and we'd play the dance, get paid and go home. We played a lot of dances, we had a group called the Bonnevilles, in which we would come into town with two brand new Bonnevilles, Pontiac Bonnevilles, we'd play the dance and I'd make about six dollars, sometimes ten and then we'd go back to the campus, and I was (inaudible) I enjoyed that tremendously. And lots of experiences, sometimes we'd show up, played the dance and have to shoot our way out of town, ha, ha, so, a lot of times I'd play places, and there would be shootings and stabbings and that kind of stuff, nothing ever happened to us, I mean, many times we were shot at, but, the leader of the band would shoot back and we'd high tail it out of town in our brand new Bonnevilles [laughter].
Story_ID: 45593
Speaker 1: Now, you were shot at, now wait, was the leader of the band--see what I'm trying--I know that Ray Charles and them came into town, and you had this building, but, the lead--I know you were performing around the--the leader of the band was that another student or was that--
Speaker 2: Another student, uh huh.
Speaker 1: It was another student? Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah so he lived in the city.  He was from Nashville [Tennessee], who was taking some classes on campus. But, I would go out with anybody who called, so, we had a certain band, but, if anybody needed me, my talents were kind of mediocre at the time, but, I would jump at the chance to go out and play, so, I gained lots of experience in Nashville.
Speaker 1: (Inaudible).
Speaker 2: Blues, I played with a guy named Earl Gaines, who was recording at the time, another guy named Larry Birdsong, who was recording time, got to play with Carla Thomas, who was a student at Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee] at the time, and she was making records, she made a big record called Gee Whiz that became real big back in the 60s [1960s], played with her father Rufus Thomas, and just a wide variety of blues, rhythm and blues, some Jazz, I would play Jazz whenever I could, but, it was still a learning process for me, I was one of the worst, I would be--I would get to play if there was no one else available, I would go and I would try learn, I had a positive attitude, so playing tunes and different keys, and learning all the tunes that the musicians were likely to play, and being able to play them in different keys and being able to improvise, and take a fair solo, when my turn came, this is what you had to learn, so, this is what I did.
Story_ID: 45594
Speaker 1: Now, what did you learn at this point and time about being a musician, versus the--you know, there's the art form, and there is the life of a musician?
Speaker 2: What I learned is to please the audience, so, my heart was in Jazz, but, if I was on a blues job, I would do my best to play blues that would make people smile or want to dance, and do whatever and then try to go in with the attitude, that I'm going to play Jazz on this blues job, I tried play the best blues that I could, and I played many, many, many blues jobs, we would just go play blues. We'd go into small towns in Tennessee and different places around Nashville, and to just try to please the audience that's in front of you and I still have that attitude today.
Speaker 1: When you guys were traveling around like this, where were you sleeping?
Speaker 2: We would drive back to the campus most of the time, it might be four or five in the morning when we got back, I enjoyed that tremendously, then I would try to hit the books and learn about calculus, trigonometry and that kind of stuff when I got back, try to squeeze that in there in some kind of way, it was fun, a great deal of fun.
Speaker 1: So, that was the time in your life (inaudible) you matured as an artist?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I still--
Speaker 1: --(inaudible). You were grounding.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's more like it, I wouldn't say I matured, but, I grew.
Story_ID: 45595
Speaker 1: Who was your favorite artist back then?
Speaker 2: Okay, I was heavily into Jazz at the time, I would listen to every note of people like Miles Davis, Charlie Parker, Dizzy Gillespie, Charlie Mingus, Thelonius Monk [HistoryMaker], Art Blakeky people like that. So, I missed a lot of what was happening in popular music at the time, so, by the time of the Motown era, I was just not in it, it's taken me now to go back and learn who the Four Tops were. I just missed that period because I was heavily into Monk and people like that, so, I would listen to Monk for hours, and hours, and hours and I would--they would play Supremes on the radio, you know, and I would hear it, but, I would not really focus my attention on that, and the Beatles and that kind of stuff, I would say--it just had no interest to me at the time, so, it took me years to learn that this was something important, and say, I better go back and check it out. So, now I know who the Temptations are and the Four Tops, but, at the time I didn't know one from another, I just didn't pay any attention to it.
Speaker 1: Very interesting, you didn't even think about that, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would sit and listen to Coltrane for hours and hours and hours, and digest every note, you try to learn how to improvise. People think that improvisation is something that comes naturally, but, it's a skill, highly developed skill, you have to invent a new melody around the predetermined set of cords. You have to make it interesting every time, it has to be different every time and that's not easy.
Story_ID: 45596
Speaker 1: And so what do you consider Coltrane's genius?
Speaker 2: Coltrane? He took the instrument further than Charlie Parker had, Charlie Parker revolutionized Jazz and the way he improvised, rhythmically, harmonically, melodically, he took everything--he assembled everything, or assembled--he took everything that happened in Jazz before him and came up with a brand new package, a new ideas, new revolutionary techniques. And then after Charlie Parker, there were a bunch of Charlie Parker imitators, everybody wanted to sound like Charlie Parker. Coltrane was the first to emerge with a completely different--this is my opinion, now, you can get into some pretty serious debates on this, but, Coltrane was the first who come up with a different sound, and a different technique, he took Charlie Parker's ideas and Monk's and everybody before him, and assimilated a brand new style, a brand new way of playing, new energy to music, technique, you know, no one could play with the technique that Coltrane had at the time, and he became the model that everybody wanted to emulate after him.
Speaker 1: And what about [Charles] Mingus?
Speaker 2: Mingus was a very passionate, he was--played the bass, and was also a composer, so, his music was very passionate, it came straight from the heart, and he had a fantastic technique, but, the technique, the display of the technique was not the major element of his music, it was--to him the music expressed his deep felt passions, and he had a lot of them and that's what I got from Mingus' music. How deep, or how music can be used to express passions, and that's what I got from Mingus' music, and I would listen to Mingus for hours, and hours, and hours, and hours.  So, he was one of my all-time favorites.
Story_ID: 45597
Speaker 1: In the meantime, some, I'm soaking up music, I'm trying to learn engineering, which I never did know what engineers do, you know, you just go to class and you take physics and you take calculus and this, and I was making okay grades, except in math, now you may find this ironic or interesting: in high school [Darden High School, Wilson, North Carolina] I took a year of algebra and a year geometry, so, there was two years without math. So, when I got to college [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], there was college level math, so, I was, there was a big gap there, so, I had forgotten most of my algebra and most of my geometry and I'm struggling with math, and I was doing okay with everything else, except was giving me a fit, calculus, so one year, one summer, I set aside everything, and said I'm going to concentrate on math, so, just on my own, I just read math books too, read books on the history of math, on my own, just went to the library checked out books, went to the bookstore purchased books. History of math, the lives of the famous mathematicians, what is mathematics, you know, just general, what is this stuff called, mathematics, what is it, why is it giving me the fits? And I developed such a appreciation for math, that, I decided to pursue a master's degree in it, it was giving me a fit up to that point, but, once I got a grasp of the fact that there's a logic to math, if you can tie into the logic, then what is happening in math is not as hard as it may seem, there is a logic, a reason to have everything that goes on in mathematics and if you could tie into that reasoning process, then you could--it helps in understanding what math is all about, so, I read every popular account of mathematics that I could get my hands on. Read and re-read the lives of people like Galileo and Sir Isaac Newton and all the great mathematicians.  So--one time I considered getting a masters in the history of math, cause I was really fascinated by this, I developed the same kind of fascination about mathematics as I had about Jazz years ago. So, then I took a lot of elective classes just to see if I could, just to see how well I could handle this stuff, did okay.
Speaker 2: So, at this point and time, how old are you at this point, cause you developed--you developing--
Speaker 1: Right around 18, probably between my sophomore and junior years or something like that.
Speaker 2: --(Unclear) (Simultaneous)--but, you start out as an electrical engineer, that's why I'm saying--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was taking classes, not really no, I mean--
Speaker 2: So, was math part of that curriculum or you just--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, when you're an engineer, you take a lot of math and chemistry, and all the sciences, physics.  All the sciences.
Speaker 2: So, your degree was in--
Speaker 1: Eventually, as I said, I switched to education, so my major, my degree is in science and math education, so, I was able to go and get out of there, graduate, that became my primary goal at that time, graduate. So, which I did, and I eventually--later I went to the University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee] to get my masters degree, and I was one of the first few Black people to attend the university of Tennessee.
Story_ID: 45598
Speaker 1: I want to ask one question before we get to the University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee]. When you were becoming, you know, this very passionate person about math, were you having discussions with your father around this opening--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) no, it just, that's interesting. You know, now, I have another question, so, I don't forget--do you see that there is an intersection between music and piano in any way?
Speaker 2: Most definitely.  I think they come from the same part of the brain, I believe, so, what it takes to--what approaches your brain to music, you bring those same approaches to mathematics, especially Jazz music, because it's creative. In other words, when you improvise, you're not just playing random notes, you have to--what you improvise has to fit within the structure of the song.  Every song has a structure, let's say it was a 12 bar blues, or 32 bar standard song, like Misty, or Take the A Train, or something like that, so, when you're improvising, it's still Misty, it's just that the cords stay the same, the rhythm stays the same, but, you have to re-invent a new melody, within the structure of that same song. You know mathematics has definite structures to it, so, you're working within the restrictions of a certain structure, and you have theorems, you have postulates, and all the ideas come within the context of the use of theorems and postulates.  Theorems may change, the postulates may change, so you have to come up with ideas within the context of these new postulates and theorems, so, there's a definite correlation, definite, in  how you learn it, and how you create within the context of the structure of music and math. Also, there are other things like--matter of fact, the way I learned cords, initially, somebody just explained to me, when I was--
Story_ID: 45599
Speaker 1: So, somebody explained to me verbally one day, said the scale has eight notes in it, you know, do, rey, me, fa, so, la, ti, do and if you play the first, the third and the fifth, you can get a chord, huh?  If you take the third note down a half a step, you've got a minor chord, huh?  If you take the seventh note and take it down a half a step, you get what we call a dominant seventh chord, huh?  And I went to the piano, you know, tried it, here's the scale, do, rey, me, fa, so, la, template, one, three and five, got a cord there. If you take the first note from here and put it there, you get a different version of the same chord, huh?  So, based on this verbal explanation of the numerical value of the notes, I was able to learn all about chords, so, I hate, this rendition of a very brief, maybe a one minute explanation of how the system works was enough to send me to the piano with a renewed understanding of how it all works, and you can start anywhere, but, you still have an eight note scale, if you play one, three, five, you've got your major chord.  Take the third note down a step, you have a minor chord, huh?  So, by the time I got to college, I had worked all that out, so, I knew, all the major and minor chords, and dominant seventh chords in all keys. So, that was the slight advantage I had, very slight.  I still didn't know how to improvise, but it was somebody who put the chords in front of me, like C minor seven, F seven, that kind of stuff, then I could read it. So--and then my experience with the trumpet had shown me the value of notes, like--I still couldn't read sheet music, part of that was treble clef and bass clef, that kind of stuff. But if you had a melody line and chords, I could play it. The very mediocre way, you know. You try to enrich the chords. That's what jazz is all about, you take your basic chords and find notes to enrich the chords make it--make the harmonies a little bit richer than just the basics. But knowing the basics, which I got from this verbal--
Story_ID: 45600
Speaker 1: --And there is a theory?
Speaker 2: Yeah. And if you tie into the theory, then the rest of it's kind of simple and easy, cause you understand the logic behind it. But, if you miss a little bit of that theory--
Speaker 1: Or if you miss both--
Speaker 2: Yeah, if they give you some examples, you can follow those examples and sometimes get the problems worked out--
Speaker 1: Right, maybe that's what I was (unclear)--
Speaker 2: And pass the test, and that's fine.
Speaker 1: But, I really didn't understand it, it was they were talking gobbly gook, that's what--is there a similarity between math theory and music theory, or are they--?
Speaker 2: Most definitely.  I mean, there is a pattern to it, that's the key thing. Math is the discovery of patterns.  People think of math as counting, and counting your change and that kind of stuff. But, there is a creative and artistic side to mathematics.
Story_ID: 45601
Speaker 1: Mathematics is an open ended era--area, it's not fixed, it's like science in a way, there's always new discoveries and new ideas and it's always advancing and there's a creative side to it, there's a part of math that exists only for its own sake, no practical applications whatsoever, it's just that human beings decide they'll define a problem for themselves, and spend years and years and years trying to find a solution to this problem, and for no particular reason other than--it's the same people climb mountains, it's there. So, there's a creative side to mathematics also, and I kind of, once I understood that, I started tying in to the creative side of mathematics, I had a completely different appreciation for mathematics. But, no matter what math you're in, they always define the terms for us, here are the terms I want to use, and here are the conjectures that we have about these words, or these connections between these terms, and we set about to prove whether these conjectures are true of false and then it becomes a whole era of human endeavor, trying to find connections between this and that, are there any patterns, to discover, and the same thing in music. You know, music is not, there's no end to it.  Music is open ended.  Every time I play, I try to come up with something different, and so all the thousands of musicians, all in the world, who are trying to come up with something different, music is always open ended, now, they've become trends, something will catch on and everybody will kind of lean towards that way of expression, same thing in math, they become new problems, or new areas of discovery and mathematicians will move in that direction. But, it's open ended, and always expanding outward, both mathematics and music.
Speaker 2: Yeah, one is viewed as creative and the other, you know, so it's like--do you think, I mean, would you consider yourself both a right and left brain person?
Speaker 1: Yes.  At different times, at different times, never at the same time, I wish I could combine the two at the same time, boy.
Story_ID: 45602
Speaker 1: You got our of school, you said--
Speaker 2: Right, University of Tennessee [Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Right, but, what did you do in between?
Speaker 2: Okay, I graduated from college and I went to New York [New York City, New York].  I said that when I was living out there, I finally got that paper and I wind up washing dishes, as I had every time I had gone, so, I said, I'm going to go to NYU [New York University], get a masters degree in math or science education, and wash dishes, and the School Placement Bureau, sent me a job, it was freezing, it was winter time, I'm in New York City, staying in a one room, still going down to Berriland checking out all the music and that kind of stuff. But, they sent me a job in a small town called Alcoa, Tennessee; took it. My salary was $3,9000 per year, and I was very happy, I mean, I was scared cause it was kind of in the eastern Tennessee, it's up in the mountains, right outside of Knoxville, Tennessee, but, I took it, I was going to teach school, it was my first teaching experience and I enjoyed it. That summer, let's see, I taught there a half a year, and that summer I wanted to get my masters, so, I went to apply to the University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee], this is a time where this would have been 63 [1963]  maybe, 62 [1962], 63 [1963], no, yeah, 63 [1963]. The integration was just coming in, I mean, I applied and I had to sign certain forms that I was going to stay and teach in the State of Tennessee and certain things before they let me in, but, I went, and by the time I was already married, I was married. Can't remember much about the University of Tennessee, except I did play gigs in and around Knoxville, and I was married with a child, and taking classes over at UT [University of Tennessee], had some very positive experiences, and some very negative experiences, but, the positives outweighed the negatives.
Story_ID: 45603
Speaker 1: What were some of the negatives?
Speaker 2: Let's see, when you walk into a class and you know just from the fact that you walk in, the teacher doesn't like you, for no other--you just walked in, you can tell from the teacher's expression, this person does not like me, so, I mean, I did what I had to do to graduate, and I made it, that was a serious struggle, but, there were people who were open, and encouraging and that was a big help to me, and so--and as I said, I was playing gigs in and around Knoxville [Tennessee].  Being married.
Speaker 1: What was it like in Knoxville?
Speaker 2: Knoxville in those days?  It was a very segregated town, I didn't go to movies much, but, I remember there was this movie that was very controversial, James Joyce's 'Ulysses', they made a movie of it, and there was all this controversy, so I said, I want to see what that's about, so, I went to the movie, and of course, you had to go around behind the theater, climb up a flight of stairs, and sit in a balcony and watch the movie and stuff like that.  It was kind of typical. So, by that time, when you're in your home town, you just assume that there are certain places that you can go and certain places you cannot go, and it's--you don't even think about it, you know, I can't go there, so, I'll just go on to the next place and go wherever, do what you've got to do.
Story_ID: 45604
Speaker 1: But, when you move to a different place, you can see how ridiculous some of this stuff is, by the way, the Civil Rights Movement took place while I was in Nashville [Tennessee], so, while I was in Nashville, I distinctly remember folks coming into town and saying, hey, what we're going to do is we're going to go and sit at this lunch counter, and if they burn cigarettes on your forehead, or if they spit on you, we're just going to sit there. So, I said, I'll watch.  I participated in all the marches, every time they had a march, I was there!  But, sit ins, I never quite mustered the strength to--or the courage to do that. But, Nashville was one of the important battles of the Civil Rights period, there were church bombings and the whole bit. So, it was a very interesting time to be in Nashville.  So, I remember being interviewed by one of the networks, what do you think about all this sit in stuff?  And I don't' remember the question, but, it was something like that, so, it was scary.  There was a revolution taking place, it was things that were happening that had never happened before in the history of the country and the kids, there were some brave kids, one of the leaders, one of the important people of this movement, was the guy who was the leader of the Bonnevilles, LeRoy Fisher [ph.], so, he became real big in the Civil Rights movement around Nashville.  Diane Nash, from Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], James Bevel [HistoryMaker], so, that was an important part of the time I was in Nashville also.
Story_ID: 45605
Speaker 1: By the time I got to Knoxville [Tennessee], it would have been, let me see, I graduated--during the time I was in Knoxville, let see, I went there during the summers, and then I took a year off, to just go concentrate on the masters degree and while I was in Knoxville, there was the era of the Harlem [New York City, New York] riots, things like that, very important Civil Rights, but, nothing really overt ever happened to me, I mean, I was never really--I developed a set of good friends, musicians primarily, and some poets too, by the way, and so, all in all the Knoxville experience was a good one.
Speaker 2: Was your wife musically inclined?
Speaker 1: No.  Although I met her in a bar when I was playing in a club in Knoxville, I met her there. She sang a little bit, she would come up and request a song or two, and somehow wound up married, our marriage had lasted three years.
Speaker 2: Where there any children with that marriage?
Speaker 1: Uh, huh (yes).
Speaker 2: Oh, that's right, you said that
Speaker 1: One son, David and now I have four beautiful grandsons.
Speaker 2: Okay. Is he a musician also?
Speaker 1: He plays a little bit.
Story_ID: 45606
Speaker 1: So, now did you stay in Knoxville [Tennessee] past that point?
Speaker 2: Okay. I taught in Alcoa [Tennessee] for half a year and I went back the following year, taught a year in Alcoa. My college roommate who was from Indianapolis, Indiana said why don't you come up here and fill out an application. Which I did, came and filled out an application, and down there I was making $3,900 a year and here they offered me $5,400 a year, I said, yes, so immediately moved to, that following September came up to Indianapolis and that would have been 1964.
Speaker 1: And you've been here ever since?
Speaker 2: Been here ever since.
Speaker 1: So, now, you and that's--have you been teaching at the same school--(unclear)
Speaker 2: No, when I first came here, I filled out an application and I said, okay, we're going to send you to Crispus Attucks High School, I said, oh, oh, what am I getting myself into?  But, Crispus Attucks was primarily Black, I mean, there were a few White teachers, maybe two, maybe one while student, but, really enjoyed my Crispus Attucks experience, so, I taught here a year, and then that was the year, after I had been here a year, that was when I went back to take the full year at the University of Tennessee Knoxville, Tennessee], then I came back here and taught for many years, for about 10 years, and I was in the initial group of teachers to be bused to previously all White high school, I taught there eight years, enjoyed it. Sat behind a desk at the downtown school office for about two years and didn't enjoy that to much. Went back to the classroom which I enjoyed much better and went back to Attucks for a while, and they made it into a middle school, so, then after that, I went to Arsenal Tech High School, where I'm still teaching now, so, it's been 35 years.
Story_ID: 45607
Speaker 1: And do you have any--I'm surprised that--I didn't know they bussed teachers into places, I thought that was (inaudible).
Speaker 2: That was just a figure of speech.  But, at the time I went to Marshall High School, there were five Black teachers and four Black students, so, they had just gone through and said, you're going to go, and you're going to go, and you're going to go. So, we went to Marshall, not knowing what to expect and at that time it was very conservative, Barry Goldwater, was the hero for a lot of people, so, we felt a little out of place, one teacher quit and became a lawyer. But, I stuck it out, and I enjoyed it, overall, it was a learning experience for me, it was my first time, actually, although I had gone to the University of Tennessee I would go to class and then go back home, and I developed a few friendships that were primarily musicians, but, this was my first experience being around members of the other group, so, I would just, at the cafeteria, I would just sit at a different table each day, and talk to kids at the table, trying to learn, you know, what they were about, cause I didn't really know, I didn't have a clue, so, I would just talk to the kids, and the kids remember that, and they I see them on the streets today, and they talk to me about how we did that, but, that was not liked, by the administration, they frowned on that. Everyday, I took my tray, sit in the cafeteria at a different table full of kids and just talked to the kids about the music they liked. This was the era of psychedelic, you know, psychedelic era, so, I would just talk to the kids, you know, that's how I learned and I enjoyed it, I learned a lot and it benefitted me in a lot of ways.
Speaker 1: In what ways?
Speaker 2: Well, I learned about the dominant culture in the ways that I had not--whereas before I had the theory, here I was actually meeting people, talking to people, learning about attitudes, learning about the things we had in common and some of the differences that we had about things.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about some of the similarities and some of the differences?
Speaker 2: There were, I mean, the type of music listened to was all together different, it was different from this was the era in which the kids were saying, hey, don't trust anybody over 30, remember that?  So, there was a lot of things going on in society at the time, so, I don't know if they were just racial, or mere cultural differences, but, there were also differences between these kids and their parents, so. The similarities were that we were all basically human, and they're teenagers and I went through my teenage period, and you know, a lot of things you worry about, like acne, and you know, just, you worry about these things. So, it was a learning experience for me in many, many ways.
Story_ID: 45608
Speaker 1: Now, did you--what about Indianapolis, did you--have you found--you obviously stayed here, you know, and you arrived in 19--
Speaker 2: '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: '64 [1964], so, you've been here--
Speaker 2: 35 years.  Yeah, 36 years, it will be 36 this September.
Speaker 1: Right, and what have you found, I mean, at this point and time, beside your time at work, you spent most of your time, you know, in the south, so, what have you found that has attracted you about this city, except (inaudible).
Speaker 2: Okay, that's kind of an easy question to answer. Indianapolis is fairly large city, a lot of the cultural advantages of large cities, like museums and sports teams, and all that kind of stuff, but, it has a small town feel to it. It's not like there are huge slums, and stuff like that, where there are neighborhoods you're afraid to go into. Indianapolis, simply doesn't have that.  There are little pockets, you know, of poverty and that kind of stuff, but, they're spread out throughout the community, so, it has a small town feel to it, the things that go on here, you feel like you belong, like it's a part of you, it's a part of your town, and I tried to take advantage of all the cultural activities, all the museums and that kind of stuff, sports teams, and things that big cities have, that small towns don't and but, at the same time, maintain that small town flavor, you know people.  People are friendly towards you, you're not afraid to go in certain places. I found I was able to fit in musically and I found musicians that were willing to hire me and I would go on the jobs and develop more as a musician, and just get better, and better, and better.
Story_ID: 45609
Speaker 1: Now what stage of musician were you when you arrived and how do you think Indianapolis has helped, you know, the music environment has helped you.
Speaker 2: I would say I was a mediocre musician when I came, maybe just a little bit above in a sense that I new how to improvise, and I knew the cords to lots of tunes. So, whenever there was a jam session, I could hold my own, although, I wouldn't raise any eyebrows, I didn't get anything thrown at me, and I didn't get cussed out, and say we're never going to hire you again, or hear that kind of stuff, but, I would be like third or fourth call, you know, if they would call the good guys, and if they were busy, eventually they'd get down to me and just the experience of playing with these guys who were great musicians in this town, has benefitted me greatly, just the experience. So, there are quite a few really good musicians in the town, and they would hire on occasion, so I would, if I knew this guy had a certain repertoire of songs that he would play, I would make sure I knew them all, so, when he would hire me, there would be no, well I don't know that one, you know, that kind of stuff, so, I would make sure I knew all of his songs, and then when this guy would hire me, I'd make sure I'd would know all of his songs. So, I played for many years with a guy named Larry Liggett, who had a band that consisted of four horns and four rhythm and we played hotels, and things like that, society type dances and that kind of stuff, so, I made sure I learned all those songs.
Story_ID: 45610
Speaker 1: And so over the years I developed a repertoire of being able to play just about any kind of job, so, I still play blues, I still play R&B, and I still play Jazz, I play in a lot of the hotels, solo piano bars and that kind of thing, so, and it's keeping me pretty busy, so, I do it about three nights a week every week. Different places, not one steady place, I play dances, receptions, parties, weddings, what have you.
Speaker 2: Now, what were some of the--was Liggett one of the (inaudible) who were some of the other names?
Speaker 1: Jimmy Cole, he was a very good saxophonist, he has a big band around town, and also plays--he played--he took Charlie Parker's place in the band of Kansas City musician named Jay McShann, so, he's an outstanding musician around Indianapolis, very well known, he just traveled all over, played the (inaudible) all that kind of stuff, so, it's really a pleasure for me to play with him. Larry Liggett, was more of a society type of band, and we played a lot of debutante balls, and this, you know, wedding receptions, at the major hotels and that kind of thing. I played for him for about 15 years and there was a guy named Billy Wooten, who that's a very good musician around town. See, I'd play with whoever would call, I made sure everybody had my number, and whoever called, I'd go out and play with them and in each time I played, I would have something to learn, so, over the years, it has kind of built up, so, I've gotten to be pretty good.
Story_ID: 45611
Speaker 1: Now, I was told that there was an area in Indiana Avenue used to be a big place for music and I wanted to ask you about that and it's importance here.
Speaker 2: Back in the 40s [19540s] and 50s [1950s], Indianapolis [Indiana] was still a very segregated town, the Ku Klux Clan was founded here in Indiana, at Crispus Attucks High School, where I taught for many years was built by the Klan. The governor and most of the important people in the state government, were Klan members back in the 1920s, so, in 1927, before '27 [1927], you could go to whatever school you happen to live close to, but in--during the rise of the Klan, they built Crispus Attucks High School, they made all the Black kids go there, no matter where you went to school, so, Indianapolis was fairly well segregated town during the 40s [1940s] and 50s [1950s]. Indiana Avenue was like 125th Street and Harlem [New York City, New York].  It was exactly the same, it was the mecca, it was the place where everybody met, there were clubs all along there, Jazz clubs, where people like Count Bassi, Duke Ellington, Charlie Parker, Miles Davis, Jimmy (inaudible) all the great bands would appear on Indiana Avenue, and it was a thriving community. Part of the, there's the Madame Walker Building, Madame Walker [Madame C.J. Walker] had her offices here, and factories here.  For many years there was this big building right on the corner of Indiana Avenue and West Street, where there was a theater, a bar room, lots of offices for doctors and barbers and all kinds of restaurants and it was a really thriving community back in the 40s [1940s] and 50s [1950s]. This is before I came to town, by the time I came to town, the heyday of the avenue had passed, there were still lots of clubs where they were not all located on the avenue, they were scattered throughout the town.
Story_ID: 45612
Speaker 1: Was there any particular sound or anything that came out of that, you know, or anything moving?
Speaker 2: Some of the greatest musician of all came out of Indianapolis [Indiana]. J.  J.  Johnson, the number one Jazz trombonist of all time, came out of Indianapolis, he graduated from Crispus Attucks High School in 1939 and went to New York, made some of the classic recordings with Charlie Parker and Miles Davis, and Dizzy Gillespie and all those, he was the premiere Bee-bop trombonist, and still remains the number one trombonist in the world.  He wins all the poles. And other musicians who came out of here are Wes Montgomery, the guitarist, the famous guitarist.  Who was afraid to fly, so, he didn't achieve fame until later in life, simply because he didn't want to travel, he just stayed here and played around here. All the musicians who came here from all over the world, were ranting and raving about Wes Montgomery, eventually he went on to New York to make some of the classic guitar recordings of all time, and he passed away here in Indianapolis, I think it was in 1967, right at the height of his fame. Freddie Hubbard, one of the premier Jazz trumpet players, he was initially from here, grew up playing on the avenue [Indiana Avenue], honed his chops and developed his skills and then went on to become the premier trumpet player of his time. And there are quite a few, I mean, of the top name Jazz musicians who came out of here, although, I would not say there is an Indianapolis sound the same way there was a Chicago [Illinois] sound, or a New York [New York City, New York] sound, or a Kansas City [Kansas] sound, or New Orleans [Louisiana] sound, it's just that the musicians became the number one musicians in the world on their instrument, but, they went to New York or other places to achieve their fame.
Story_ID: 45613
Speaker 1: And let me ask you about, just a question about Jazz and it's importance to the, you know, to the world, or even to American society.
Speaker 2: America has a dual feeling about Jazz, during the 1920s it was the thing to do, the 1920s are still referred to as the Jazz age, that was when America made the transition from whatever they were listening to before, to this brand new form of music, called Jazz, it was exciting, it was new, it was radical, it was, it defied the era in the same way that rock defied the later era, but, even at that, Jazz was so new and so different from what had come before, that it just captured the imagination of not only America, but, the world. People like Louis Armstrong and people like that, revolutionized the popular music, so, it was the premier form of pop music that people listened to for years, but, the music evolved and then with the advent of Charlie Parker and Dizzy Gillespie in the 1940s, it became a more intellectual kind of thing, as opposed to a dance form or something you could party to. It's--it was something you could listen to in the same way you might listen to a string quartet or--it was serious music. It was still hot, and it was still, had rhythm and fire and energy. But it's primary function was as a listening (unclear). And people kind of drifted away from it at that time. They were used to the word jazz meaning something you could dance to or something you could party to. And then it became intellectual. And Europe has always had an intellectual tradition. So jazz became much more popular in Europe and places like Japan.
Story_ID: 45614
Speaker 1: Okay, you were talking about Europe, and you were comparing, you were going through that chronology, you were saying that Jazz, you know, it was identified with dance, and then it became more intellectual and then in Europe, it sort of--and Japan, it took--
Speaker 2: They have intellectual traditions.  They're attuned to the arts more than most of many Americans. The word Jazz still means to many Americans, party music and when they go and they hear [John] Coltrane or [Chalres] Mingus or someone like that, they are bewildered, in many cases, if they stick with it, give it a chance, many times they're sucked into the music or join into it, and become spellbound by it the same way I was when I was a kid, and I heard Clifford Brown. But, many people just can't, they just can't relate to Jazz as something intellectual, so, they have turned to other forms.  Which is okay too, music is a part of every culture. I've never heard of any culture that didn't have some form of music, but, I think jazz has become--jazz is always pushing the boundaries. They take the instruments and play them the way that they have never been played before, and so they have affected classical music, pop music, movie making music, all forms of music have been influenced by this music, simply because of some guy trying to find a different way to play, has come up with some new concepts, and eventually worked their way into all forms of music, from classical on, and it's interesting to watch it.
Story_ID: 45615
Speaker 1: Now, I have one more question just about music and that is, well, I have two questions. One was, what do you think it's importance to society? I mean, there are people that view music, you know, and the arts as sort of extraneous.
Speaker 2: Okay, I disagree totally!  You're going to have music no matter what. Now in the schools, there has been a de-emphasis in the arts. I think, conversely, an emphasis in sports, the emphasis on sports is never before, but, to contrast music and sports, which is an argument I'm always making. In music you don't have to be a certain height, certain weight, you could be male or female, you can be physically handicapped in some way, and still make music.  Not true in sports.  Anybody can be in the band if they are just willing to dedicate themselves to being as good as they can be on this instrument and there are no physical limitations, it's just individual effort on the part of the individual. In sports, they talk about the kids getting to go to college because they excelled in sports, but, you can play trombone in the college band, you can get a scholarship just as easily and then if you're an athlete, your chances or making it into the pros are very slim anyway, and then even if you do, by the time you hit mid 30s, you're considered old, but, if you learn to play an instrument, you can play this instrument your whole life, Eubie Blake was over 100 years old and still playing the piano, now, how many athletes were still playing ball in their 100s? So, I would put more emphasis on the arts.  Arts make you a better person. Sports teach you to beat the other person.  Kill the other team. Whereas music is in all the arts.  Emphasize get along with one another, understand what the other person is trying to say to us, cooperate to make something beautiful out of this group of individuals. So, we need more emphasis on the arts, I think in America, the arts are taken for granted. This is something that somebody wants to paint, and it's going to be a painting no matter what, we don't really need to teach them the skills, or to tell a good painting from a not so good painting, we don't-when we need to just do the reverse, emphasize those, they make us better human beings.
Story_ID: 45616
Speaker 1: Now I want to talk a little bit about this poetry.  I know that you first mentioned that you were writing poetry, that I remember, you know, during the course of this interview, at Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee], but, did you start earlier?
Speaker 2: Okay, here's how I got interested in poetry, you know when you're in high school you take English classes, you have to memorize some poems or one of the ones I had to memorize was Mother to Son, you may be familiar with that, by Langston Hughes Invictus, stuff like that. But, poetry was just--and I would write some, many of the love letters and that kind of stuff, but, I never really took it seriously. But, now, here I am a freshman or a sophomore at Tennessee State and I heard that there was going to be--that Langston Hughes was going to be on campus at Fisk University [Nashville, University], reading poems, backed up by some Jazz musicians, that I knew and respected and admired greatly, so, I went down there just primarily to hear the Jazz guys play, and Langston [Hughes] read, it was a book entitled 12 Moods for Jazz, in which he--here's the poem, and over to the side of this page, is a verbal description of the kind of Jazz that he wants to play to accompany this poem, or this page of the poem, and I was so spellbound by it, it was like hearing Clifford Brown all over again, it was one of those pivotal events, hearing Langston Hughes in person, being supported by some of the local Jazz musician, that was great to me, I mean, it was just outstanding, that was just outstanding.  Earthshaking. So, I became a poet that evening, I mean, I just went home and I just wrote poems and I took it all very seriously at that time, so, I began to spend hours trying to decide if this word should go on this line or that line, things like that, you know, I just took it more seriously at that point. So, I just started writing and writing, just, writing became a secondary outlet, music was still first, but, writing was still important.
Story_ID: 45617
Speaker 1: At Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], there were two famous Black poets in residence, one was Arna Bontemps and the other was Robert Hayden, so, they were both on campus. Hayden was a (inaudible) and he had a lot of fireside chats at his place, and I was trying to remember if I had the (inaudible) to going to any of those fireside chats, I can't remember. I did meet Arna Bontemps, on several occasions and I can't remember how some of my poems got into his hands, but, in the very next anthology that he published, American Negro Poetry, he was asking permission to include one of my poems, which was Two Jazz Poems, and of course, I would write about Jazz and that was an honor at the time, beyond my wildest dreams, I just never thought I would be publishing in any way, much less in such an important publication. Since then Two Jazz Poems has been published all around the world.  Many, many anthologies of American literature, Black literature, just poetry, and I still continue to write today.
Story_ID: 45618
Speaker 1: This is my first serious publication.  It's in American Negro Poetry, edited by Arna Bontemps, and it was published in the early 60s [1960s], probably '63 [1963], 1963.  It's called Two Jazz Poems. Yeah, here am I, I'm standing at the crest of a tallest hill, with a trumpet in my hand, and dark glasses on, bearded and beret I proudly stand, but there are no audience to see me. I send out a cool sounds, but, there are no ears to hear me.  My lips they quiver, and they eat their emptiness.  There are no hearts to love me. Surely though, through night's gray fog missed of delusion and dreams, in the rivers of tears that flow, like gelatin soldiers, some empathetic bearer of paranoid Payotie(ph) visions or some other source of inspiration. Shall hear the song I play, shall see the beard and beret, shall become inflamed beyond all hope with emotion's everlasting fire, and join me in an eternal peace and but yet well, who knows. There he stands see, like a Black ancient mariner, his wrinkled old face, so full of the worries of living, it's turned downward with closed eyes, his frayed collar, faded blue old shirt, turns dark with sweat, and the old necktie undone, drops loosely about the worn old jacket, see, just barely holding his sagging stomach in, yeah. His rundown shoes have paper in them and his rough unshaven face shows pain in each wrinkle, but, there he stands, in self-brought solitude, head still down, eyes still closed, perked and trained upon the baseline for across his chest lies an old alto saxophone, supported by from his neck by a wire coat hanger, gently he lifts now to parted lips, see, to tell all the world that he is a Black man, that he was sent here to preach the Black gospel of Jazz, now preaching it with words of screaming notes and cords, he is no longer a man, no, not even a Black man, but, a bird, one that gathers his wings, and flies, high, high, higher, until he flies away or comes back to find himself a Black man again..
Story_ID: 45619
Speaker 1: So, that was the kind of stuff I was writing in 1963.
Speaker 2: So, how long did it take you to write that poem.
Speaker 1: 15 minutes.  But, then you'd spend a lot of time revising, it, and editing, do I need this line, can I take that one out, do I need any more words, in poetry the idea is to, there's a connection between mathematics and poetry, might not know that, or might not have thought about it. In mathematics the idea is to experience lots of stuff in a very elegant simple formula or phrase, or a description of a theorem, or something like that, we make elegance out of, we take a ton of information, and just reduce it down to one formula and poetry is the same kind of stuff. We try to say so many things in just one word or one line, that idea is to reduce it to the smallest number of lines and words possible for a maximum impact of expression. So, that's one connection between those two.  If I can say, if I can express an idea with five words that's better than ten words.
Story_ID: 45620
Speaker 1: That's good.  Has your poetry--do you still write--
Speaker 2: Still write.
Speaker 1: Has it changed over the years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's--I use even less words.  Fewer words and music is still the primary area of expression, but, every now and then a poem just embeds itself in my brain, and I have to sit down and get it out, so, once it's out, I just spend a lot of time refining--refining takes more time and more effort and more sweat, than the initial inspiration or impulse that gave birth to the poem. So, you just spend a lot of time worrying about and you don't know if it makes a difference to anyone else or not, but, to you it has to be, that word has to be on the right line, or else the poem doesn't work.
Speaker 1: Now, you know what's very popular these days, are poetry slams, where there things like that?
Speaker 2: We don't have slams, but, we do have readings, their not competitive, but, around town, there are different places where people do readings, and they're fun, and they're interesting and there's a great variety in the quality of the work. By the way there are two outstanding poets from Indianapolis, of many, but, two that I'm very familiar with, and I want to mention their names, one is Mari Evans, she's written many, many, many poems that have been widely published, she has several books of her own out, including, I Am A Black Woman, and she has anthologies, and she has a collection of Afro American writing, Black writers, Black poets, and she's still around town, and she writes, and still very well. And I want to mention the name of Etheridge Knight, who discovered poetry while he was in prison, and became a truly outstanding poet, the Chicago [Illinois] poet, Gwendolyn Brooks, was a great influence on him and the corresponded while he was in prison and his first book was entitled Poems From Prison and it was truly outstanding quality work, so, he became one of the best known, and best loved poets around when he was released, he passed away about a year or two ago.  But, the quality of his work is superb and people who haven't heard of him, need to know about Etheridge Knight.
Story_ID: 45621
Speaker 1: Now, you're still relatively young, and I'd like to, and you've had a career that has been probably evenly divided between educating and very immersed in music and poetry and so my question, in a town that you consider sort of solidly sort of Midwest, but, my question for you  is what will we be hearing in the future?  What hasn't Carl Hines done that he wants to do--(unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, okay, what I'm working on now is, I've written all these poems and I've never really published the book about them, for me the writing is the end all, once the poem is finished and the way I want it to be, there it sits, I'm satisfied with it, I move on. So, people keep saying when are you going to do a book of your own?  I have poems and many, many, many anthologies. Another one of my poems has been, people have written classical music, string quartets around it, it's being performed by the Fisk Jubilee Singers, and it's been almost as widely accepted as the two Jazz poems, and the name of it is Now That He is Safely Dead. So, I hope--I have a copy of that I think.
Story_ID: 45622
Speaker 1: Now that he is safely dead let us praise him.  Build monuments to his glory, singing hosanna's to his name. Dead men make such convenient heroes, they cannot rise to challenge the images that we would fashion from their lives and besides, it is easier to build monuments than to make a better world. So, now that he is safely dead, we with eased conscientious will teach our children that he was a great man, knowing that the cause of which he lived is still a cause, and the dream for which he died is still a dream. So, that poem was written within hours of my hearing that Martin Luther King [Jr.] had been assassinated, but, I deliberately didn't mention his name, I left it open, because it applies to all martyrs, people who have for a cause and it's been accepted in many different circles and many different circumstances, widely published.
Speaker 2: (Inaudible) Ossie Davis [HistoryMakers] and Ruby Dee [HistoryMaker], (inaudible).
Speaker 1: Yeah, they do it when they go around touring.
Speaker 2: What strikes me is that you are so modest about your talent, all the time through, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, I never felt that I was one of the greats, you know what I mean, so, no matter how good you think you are, there's always somebody a whole lot better than you, so, especially in the field of Jazz, you can't go around feeling to good about yourself, because there's some kid whose coming along who will just wipe you out, you know what I mean, that could happen at any instant, and then they have the truly greats, you know, people who are just great, so, I never put myself among those, so, I just happy to be playing, so, I never go out and play for the (inaudible), play in a hotel lobby or something like that, and the people seem to like it, that pleases me greatly, but, not enough to develop any kind of ego, or to be boastful about.
Story_ID: 45623
Speaker 1: Now, your mother and father [Carl Hines, Sr.], are they alive?
Speaker 2: My father passed about five years ago and my mother who is 87, moved from Wilson [North Carolina] to live with me here in Indianapolis [Indiana] and she's been here about a year and it's been a really pleasurable for me to have here.
Speaker 1: So, what do they think of their son?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know.  I think they were kind of proud of me, you know, I graduated from college [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] as they had planned, turned out to be a fairly decent human being, and that was it. I'm sure they had hoped I'd become a doctor or something like that, but, I became a school teacher as they had been, so, I think they were pleased with me.
Speaker 1: And then you say it's been a pleasurable experience having your mother around, what do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: Well you see, I graduated from high school [Darden High School, Wilson, North Carolina] at age 16 and then I would go back home, you know, Christmas and maybe during the summers for a little while before heading out to New York or somewhere else, but, I would go home every chance I would get, and so, getting reacquainted with your mom, you know, living with her, so, it's new.  It's, you know, you do get to hear stories, and get to see her in a different light and still a lot of warmth, she's still my mom and I was still her little baby.  So, she tells me to brush my teeth, don't forget to do this, or that, you know, so, that's been very pleasurable for me.
Story_ID: 45624
Speaker 1: I have one last question and that is, what do you want your life (inaudible).
Speaker 2: Well, as far as a legacy, being a teacher is very important, so, if some of the kids learn something they can use in their lives, especially math, which has the applications in a lot of areas, if some kid learn something from me, then that's good enough, so, I ran across--and it happens every now and then, and this is bound to happen in any teachers life, when some kids comes up to him and says I learned a lot in your class, so, that means more than anything. I would like to get a book of poems of mine, actually out there, which I have been planning on for years, but, I'm actually working on this summer, and do some recording with the music, maybe that will happen one of these days, I've done some, but nothing out on my own name. Maybe one day I'll feel that I'm good enough that, you know it will be accepted, I don't know.
Story_ID: 671665
Speaker 1: Hm?
Speaker 2: So this is a publicity photograph (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah, it's a photo I had taken, just in case somebody asked for a photo or something.  So I used it for publicity.
Speaker 2: How long ago was this?
Speaker 1: I would say it's about early '90s [1990s] or maybe late '80s [1980s].  (Pause) I didn't have a beard then.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No goatee.
Speaker 1: No goatee.  (Pause) So I don't remember anything special about the picture at all.
Speaker 2: That's another publicity type photo, had taken on the same day as the previous one, this one geared towards music.  I notice the bowtie, and I notice the keyboard.  I also notice my hair is starting to turn gray, and--so just your typical publicity photo, I guess.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This looks like another--
Speaker 1: Yeah, just another standard publicity type photo.
Speaker 2: This is probably earlier in the '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 1: It's probably earlier in the '80s [1980s].  I don't remember any--I don't remember who took the picture or where.  But I did send the picture out a lot.  So, if I was requesting--if someone was asking that I play somewhere and requested a picture, I'd just send it to 'em.
Speaker 2: Looks like- yearbook--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I was gonna say.  That's probably your typical yearbook type picture, have no idea what year it was or where I was teaching at the time, probably sometime during the '80s [1980s], maybe while I was at John Marshall High School [John Marshall Community High School, Indianapolis, Indiana].
Speaker 2: There's your math teacher, Mr. Hines [HistoryMaker Carl Hines].
Speaker 1: (Laughter) This looks like a picture out of the '60s [1960s] or if not early '70s [1970s].  So horn rimmed glass, the beginning of the Afro period.  So--
Speaker 2: Where do you think was used--where is this at?
Speaker 1: It was probably while I was teaching at Attucks High School [Crispus Attucks High School, Indianapolis, Indiana], probably another yearbook photo.  (Pause) Yeah, I was probably teaching at Attucks High School--probably, probably the late '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: And this is probably another high school--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --yearbook photo?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 671666
Speaker 1: That looks like late '60s [1960s], maybe early '70s [1970s], judging by the Afro and the shirt collar.  I'm pretty sure that was taken at Mari Evans' house (unclear).
Speaker 2: Probably the same situation here?
Speaker 1: Same situation here, different shirt, so it's probably a different time, but probably the same year.  This might have been taken by my friend, Derrick Femster [ph.], a photographer, or it might have been taken by Mari herself, probably early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Pretty sure that would have been taken during the '60s [1960s], probably also by my friend, Derrick Femster (pause).  Pretty sure that was '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And who are the band members (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Okay, this was a very (unclear) band to play with.  The saxophonist is Buddy Parker, self taught saxophonist, very good.  He didn't know much--he didn't know F from G on the saxophone, but he can play any song in any key.  I can't recall any tune that he didn't know.
Speaker 2: Just had an ear for it.
Speaker 1: He had an ear for it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: What's his name again, Buddy Parker.
Speaker 2: Buddy Parker is the saxophonist, very good saxophonist.  He had played with people like Wes Montgomery and pretty much self taught, and didn't know much about the formalities of music, but he could play any tune in any key; very good improviser.  He has since passed away.  He had risen up from poverty to become a, a very important person in city government, but he developed, I believe it was diabetes, and he passed away a few years ago.  The drummer--the bass player is Al Fennell [ph.] who is principal of one of the Indianapolis Public Schools, a very good bass player.  I notice I'm playing a Fender Rhodes piano so that probably puts this in the '70s [1970s].  And the drummer is "Killer" Ray Appleton, a gentleman who is now living in New York.  He's played with John Coltrane and many--and Pharoah Sanders and very--and many important people in New York.  He has since developed diabetes and lost a leg, but he has had a prosthesis that allows him to continue playing the drums and very outstanding.  He comes back here for the Jazz Fest [Indy Jazz Fest] every year.
Speaker 1: His name is Killer Ray?
Speaker 2: Killer Ray Appleton.
Speaker 1: Do you know how he got that nickname?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  He's just an outstanding drummer, temperamental, no nonsense, and a very energetic, aggressive player on the drums, but very, very good, keeps perfect time.
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna say that may even go back to the time I was in college [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], this photograph here, very studious looking, goatee.  So I'm sure that was early '60s [1960s] if not even late '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: So you've pretty much had a beard, a mustache or a goatee?
Speaker 1: For a long time I didn't.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Yeah, throughout college, I think I did.  But after college, I didn't until the '70s [1970s], when the Afros and all that stuff came in.  Then after that went out, I probably shaved it until about maybe a year ago, maybe six months ago, started wearing it again.
