Story_ID: 647109
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Leon Alexander Huff [HistoryMaker Leon Huff], L-E-O-N, A-L-E-X-A-N-Z-D-E-R [sic.], H-U-F-F.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April 8, 1942, Camden, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And is there a story behind your name?
Speaker 2: I was named after my grand- great-grandfather--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in my family, you know.  That's about it.
Speaker 1: Is this your, on your mother's [Beatrice Alberta Huff] side or your father's [Eugene Huff] side?
Speaker 2: My mother's.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, so what is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had a hard, I had a hard time learning how to spell that name when I was little, growing up 'cause--
Speaker 1: Oh, Alexander?
Speaker 2: 'Cause Leon is nice, four letters--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --four letters.  But that Alexander, it took me a minute (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I'm a musician, songwriter, record producer, record company owner, publisher, humanitarian.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date, what is it?  March 26, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  And you don't have to give your address.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Moorestown, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In your home, right?
Speaker 2: Pardon me?
Speaker 1: In your home, right?
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, okay, all right.  Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we kind of ask just as a warm up.  So--
Speaker 2: You say was it my home?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, me and my wife, Regina [Regina Bryant Huff].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I was just establishing that we're in your home, but I didn't want to give the address.
Speaker 2: Oh, no (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So just didn't want to do that.
Story_ID: 647110
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as a warm up sort of, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: A favorite food?  Yes, fish.  Are we filming now?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).  My favorite food is fish, rice and broccoli.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Color?  Brown.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like all four seasons, but summer is my favorite.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Me and my wife [Regina Bryant Huff] just, we just decided to spend some time in Miami [Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last question is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: The beat goes on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That makes sense.
Story_ID: 647111
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, separately; and then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: What do you mean, individual people?
Speaker 1: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or just--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  First I ask about your mother's side of the family, and then your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Beatrice, B-E-A-T-R-I-C-E, Huff [Beatrice Alberta Huff].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Father is Eugene [Eugene Huff].
Speaker 1: Oh, well, we're going to ask about them separately.
Speaker 2: Oh, my mother's first (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) First your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Beatrice, yes.
Speaker 1: So what was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Alberta, A-L-B-E-R-T-A.
Speaker 1: Now that's her middle name, right?
Speaker 2: That's her maiden name.
Speaker 1: That's her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Beatrice Alberta.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right.  Okay, all right.  Beatrice Alberta.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I got to get that to you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not good on dates.
Speaker 1: So can you approximate maybe?  So you were born in '42 [1942].  So--
Speaker 2: Could I get you the correct date?
Speaker 1: Yeah, sure.  You (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I said I'm going to send it to you, send it to you.
Speaker 1: I just wanted to try to get it in the ballpark.  Was she, was she a young woman when she had you?  Or--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, young and pretty.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So was she in her twenties?  Or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would say so.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So--
Speaker 2: I'm just assuming, because I don't know for sure.
Speaker 1: So say about 1920 or so?
Speaker 2: I guess, yeah [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Just--okay, you can get, give us the exact date later.  All right.
Speaker 2: I know song titles, but dates, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: Florida, St. Petersburg.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?  And are there any stories about what they were doing?
Speaker 2: To my grandfather, her father.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was his name?
Speaker 2: Herbert, H-E-R-B-E-R-T, Alberta [Herbert Alberta].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And are there any stories about him or what he did for a living?
Speaker 2: I called him Poppy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Poppy was a great grandfather.  I watched Poppy love his wife, my grandmother, took care of his family, worked hard every day, a dedicated family man.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: God fearing type of man.  I used to admire him.
Speaker 1: Now did--and what about your grandmother?
Speaker 2: I called her Mama.  Oh god, I'm at a stage now.  I can't remember names.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  But you called her--the family called her Mama (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We called her Mama, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Anna.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: (Makes sound).
Speaker 1: So that's Anna Alberta.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, now what did your grandparents do for a living?
Speaker 2: My grandfather, I think he worked in a factory.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my mother was, my grandmother was a housekeeper.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And did they move to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I mean, at some point?  Or did they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They lived in Camden [New Jersey], too.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  I mean Camden--
Speaker 2: They lived in Camden.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did they--so they moved when your mother was a child, to Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: To Camden.
Speaker 1: I mean to Camden.  I'm sorry, I keep saying, I don't know why I--
Speaker 2: You're thinking about Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So they moved to Camden I guess when your mother was a little girl and--all right.  So is there a story about why they moved?
Speaker 2: None that I've heard.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they have relatives here already?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now are there any stories in--on that side of the family about growing up in Florida or--
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) what it was like there?
Speaker 2: None that I could tell you.
Story_ID: 647112
Speaker 1: Were your, either your, of your grandparents [Anna Alberta and Herbert Alberta] musicians?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother [Beatrice Alberta Huff]--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --she played piano for the--like, for the church.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Now do you--did your mother talk about how she got started as a piano player?
Speaker 2: Not really, she just loved to play.  She just took lessons when she was a little girl.  I loved to hear her play.
Speaker 1: Now did she have like formal training, or did she kind of pick it up by ear, you know?
Speaker 2: Both, you know, the neighborhood music teacher, the basics.  But she knew how to play those old gospel hymns.  That's what she liked to play.  That's about it.
Speaker 1: Did she have a favorite?  Or do you, do you have a favorite, you know, of your mother's?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother--'His Eyes Is on the Sparrow' ['His Eye Is on the Sparrow'] songs like that, 'What a Friend We Have in Jesus,' you know, the basic black, you know, gospel hymns she knew.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's what I was listening to as a kid growing up, on Sun- especially on Sundays.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nothing else was played in the house but gospel music on Sundays.  I wasn't even allowed to rock on the piano.  I had to play, you know, Sunday was the day.  And I heard all them great gospel quartets on Sundays, you know, the Mighty Clouds [Mighty Clouds of Joy] and The Harmonizing Four, The Dixie Hummingbirds.  That's what I was listening to growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now did you have a favorite of those groups?
Speaker 2: Dixie Hummingbirds.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And what's their--?
Speaker 2: Well, you know what?  It's between The Dixie Hummingbirds and The Soul Stirrers because I loved Sam Cooke.
Speaker 1: Okay, right, right, that's right.  That's when Sam Cooke got started, with The Soul Stirrers, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So did you have, did you have a favorite song of those groups?
Speaker 2: Not really, because I liked mostly everything they sang, basically.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Dixie Hummingbirds was really great, though.  They had a song that was real popular called 'Going Out to the Show' [sic. 'Let's Go out to the Programs'] or something, where they was doing a lot of imitations of other gospel groups, like the Mighty Clouds.  And Ira Tucker could just do it.  And I used to hear that a lot too, that was a popular one.
Story_ID: 647113
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Beatrice Alberta Huff] have to work growing up?  Or was she a housewife, or what?
Speaker 2: Well, she was a housewife during the time me and my sister [Jean Huff] went through school, after she gradu- after me and my sister graduated [from Camden High School, Camden, New Jersey], she went to nursing school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Became a nurse.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now did your mother, did she have, did she have any desire to become a professional musician in terms of, you know, making money in her craft (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, not really.  Just what, you know, between the family.  That's how the piano got into, into the house that I was born in.  See, I wasn't born in a hospital.  I was born in the house where I grew up at.  So I always said, you know, I had Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] laughing on this one.  It was like, when my mother conceived me in the house, that piano was sitting there waiting for me, because that's what I took to as a kid growing up.  I could play really good like about ten years old.  So I think that piano was an old upright in the living room.
Speaker 1: The kind you see in schools and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: An upright piano?
Speaker 2: Yeah, an old upright.  In fact, we--me and Gamble wrote a lot of songs on that upright.  Loved that up- upright, especially if you get a good one, a good used one like our first one was.
Story_ID: 647114
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side (background noise), and then we'll put them together.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Eugene, E-U-G-E-N-E, Huff [Eugene Huff].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Eugene--the regular way you spell it, E-U-G-E-N-E?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and--
Speaker 2: I got to get that, too.  Sonny was born, I mean he was in August, but I got to get you the dates.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was he older than your mother [Beatrice Alberta Huff]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: About the same age?  He was older?
Speaker 2: Older (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How much, do you think?
Speaker 2: About five years [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So he would have been born maybe about 1915, 1918, something like that?  Okay.  And, well, what can you tell--and where was your father born?
Speaker 2: In Hull, H-U-L-L, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So was he raised in Hull?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Migrated to Camden [New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what can you tell us about your father's side of the family?  What, you know, are there stories from Hull, Georgia?  And how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: To grandfather, my father's father.  We called him Pop [George Huff, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I call my father Sonny.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now why did you call your fa- your father Sonny?  Was that his family name?
Speaker 2: No.  I guess me and my sister [Jean Huff] saw it, I mean my mother called him Sonny, you know, so I guess--we didn't call him Dad or Daddy, we called him Sonny.  And that's the way it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, okay.  So your grandfather--now what was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: Herbert, H-E-R-B-E-R-T [Herbert Alberta].
Speaker 1: Now, and your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Anna [Anna Alberta].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she had the same name as your--
Speaker 2: Alberta.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  I mean, your grandmother on your father's side has the same name as your--I mean the same first name as your grandmother on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: The grandmother on my mother's side?
Speaker 1: Yeah, you said her name was Anna.
Speaker 2: And on my father's side [Sallie Seals Huff]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry, I misunderstood you.  Okay, but I never knew her name, never, never met her.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So was she still living in Georgia when you were coming up or--
Speaker 2: I think so, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm very vague on that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Are there any stories about your father's side of the story about--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember all those great family reunions that me and my sister used to go to.  That's how me and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] wrote that song called 'Family Reunion' by The O'Jays.  And those experiences, I'll never forget.  It was great.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father had about five sisters, four brothers.  He had a big family, and they were all great people.
Speaker 1: Were these reunions always down South, or were they in Camden?
Speaker 2: Some were in the South, down south, and some was in Camden.  They would drive up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was wonderful.
Speaker 1: Now what kind of stories did they tell?  I mean what was, what was Hull, Georgia like?
Speaker 2: I went there once.  Me and my sister had a chance to see where my father was born, was born and raised at.  And they had this--they lived on this huge plot of land that my aunt had, my father's sister, and all the kids had houses on this.  It was like a compound.  I mean, it was huge.  And they had this big, big barbeque pit.  And they just had all this food and music.  And it was something I looked forward to: the gathering of my uncles and my aunts and cousins.  It was a great time.
Story_ID: 647115
Speaker 1: So is there a story about how your father [Eugene Huff], you know, moved to Camden [New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Him and his sisters, my Aunt Nessie [Nessie Huff] and my Aunt Bertha [Bertha Huff] and my Aunt Kate [ph.], they all left their home in Hull, Georgia, and I guess they wanted to move.  Some stopped, lived in Newark [New Jersey], and some came to Camden.  So my Aunt Nessie, my father's sister, lived right around the corner from us.  So it was my father and his sister, they moved to Camden.  But the rest of his sisters and brothers stayed in Newark--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Now where did your father fall in the, in the lineup in the family?  Was he the oldest or the youngest or in the middle or what?
Speaker 2: My father was the youngest.  No, next to the youngest.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My Uncle Wade [Wade Huff] was the youngest [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did your father serve in World War II [WWII]?  Was he a veteran?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So about how old was he do you think when he came to Camden?  Was he a teenager or grown?  Or--?
Speaker 2: I guess he was a young, young man.  I guess he was in his twenties, I guess.
Story_ID: 647116
Speaker 1: Did your parents get a chance to finish high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, my mother [Beatrice Alberta Huff] did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She graduated from Camden High [Camden High School, Camden, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your, and your dad [Eugene Huff], he didn't get a chance to finish?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father just had that good old fashioned mother wit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what did your dad do for a living?
Speaker 2: Was a barber.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did he have his own shop in Camden [New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had a, he turned the, he turned basement into the, the house that we lived in into a barbershop.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he have a name for it?
Speaker 2: A name?
Speaker 1: Yeah, for the shop?
Speaker 2: Mr. Sonny's [ph.]. That's what everybody used to call him.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There's so many songs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know they met, they met in Camden, (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know there're so many songs about how peo- people meet and fall in love and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But there's no story about how they met, that you know of?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Nothing I can remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But here in Camden is where they got together?
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, so, I mean not here, but in Camden.
Story_ID: 647117
Speaker 1: Are you the first child, or you, are you like--
Speaker 2: My sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You got a sister.
Speaker 2: My sister Jean, J-E-A-N [Jean Huff].
Speaker 1: And, so you were born in '42 [1942], so Jean was born when--
Speaker 2: She's three years older than me.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1940.  Then comes you, all right.  Now then are there any other siblings?
Speaker 2: No, just me and my sister.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.  Now when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their habits, their hobbies, how they walk, talk, look, act, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Both.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father [Eugene Huff] was quiet, hard worker, responsible to his family.  He had a loving family.  My fam- my parents got along real good.
Speaker 1: And of course you take some musical talent after your mother [Beatrice Alberta Huff], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) After my mother.
Story_ID: 647118
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: An earliest?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, being curious about that piano that was sitting in my living room.  I sort of, like--because I was, I was, I started being curious about that piano.  And my mother [Beatrice Alberta Huff] used to tell me, she used to pick me up--because the piano stool was so high, she used to pick me up and put me on the piano stool.  And she used to tell me I used to like bang on it.  You know, I was a kid, just banging on it.  But, so the way I look at it, I must have got curious with the sounds that was coming from out of those white and black things I was beating on as a child.  And I figured the more I did that, the more I developed that gift of wanting to play it.  I started playing by ear.  And five years old, six years old, I was playing the boogie woogie.  I was playing, I was playing, I was playing stuff that I was just making up.  And then my mother took me to the Apollo in New York [New York], and she, and she took me to see a young guy named Sugar Chile Robinson who played piano.  And he just tore the house up, Apollo Theater.  And that was an experience I never forgot.  And I was learning (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sugar, Sugar Chile Robinson?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how old were you then?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was like a preteen.  I must have been like seven or eight years because my grandfather [Herbert Alberta] had a sister that lived in Harlem [New York, New York], and my mother used to visit my aunt [sic. great-aunt].  And she would take me and my sister [Jean Huff] to the Apollo when we would go there and visit, and that was wonderful.  I got a chance to experience that Ha- Harlem, Apollo vibe early; and it was fantastic, those shows.
Story_ID: 647119
Speaker 1: Were there venues in Camden [New Jersey] where you could hear like live music (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Music?  Oh, it was great when I was growing up.  Well, I was like, you know, when I started going to school, elementary school, my mother [Beatrice Alberta Huff], she wanted me to join the band, which I wanted to join too.  I wanted music, because music was starting to enter me then.  So I joined the band, and when I joined the band playing drums.
Speaker 1: Now why the drums?
Speaker 2: I love drums.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: That's my second best instrument.  And I played drums elementary school and junior high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And then--
Speaker 2: I played the drums with the dance--see, my junior high school had a dance band, and then they had the marching band, you know, that played at the football games and everything.  So, I played the drums in the dance band and in the marching band.  From elementary school all through junior high school, I played drums.  And I took drum lessons on Saturdays.
Speaker 1: So that was all in Camden?
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  What was the name of your first school in Camden, your elementary school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Sum- Sumner [Charles Sumner Elementary School, Camden, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, three names, Charles Sumner.
Speaker 1: Sumner, okay.
Speaker 2: S-U-M-N-E-R, School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Named after the abolitionist, Charles Sumner, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: That was elementary.  And my junior high was Hatch Junior High, H-A-T-C-H [Cooper B. Hatch Junior High School; Cooper B. Hatch Middle School, Camden, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then Camden High [Camden High School, Camden, New Jersey].
Story_ID: 647120
Speaker 1: Now I read that the 19th Street Baptist Church--is that the?
Speaker 2: 10th Street.
Speaker 1: 10th Street, okay, 10th Street Baptist [10th Street Baptist Church, Camden, New Jersey].  And that was, that was the church your mother [Beatrice Alberta Huff] played the piano (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, on certain occasions, you know.  And that was like mandatory every Sunday.  That was what me and my sister [Jean Huff] had to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you ever play in church yourself?
Speaker 2: Yeah, for the junior choir.  I played, I played, I guess about a year and then I started getting a little too funky for the choir, you know.  It was real (laughter)--
Speaker 1: I know, I remember in the information about Ray Charles, they say that Ray Charles took gospel and--well, first they say that Thomas Dorsey [Thomas A. Dorsey] took--he was a jazz musician who started--he just changed the words around from baby to Jesus.  And then Ray Charles changed them back to, from Jesus to baby.  And, you know, but there's a relationship between the music.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a feeling.  It was, you know, they couldn't understand why I was playing 'What a Friend We Have in Jesus' the way I was playing it.  I was playing it a little different than the basic traditional way.
Speaker 1: Can you hum how it goes?
Speaker 2: (Singing), "What a friend we have in Jesus."  So I was playing it a little, little, little funkier.
Speaker 1: How?
Speaker 2: They couldn't understand it then.
Speaker 1: Well, what would it sound like?
Speaker 2: Which is what they do now.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What would it sound like when you played it?
Speaker 2: What would it sound like?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, it was a little too hip, you know, because I'd be adding a little stuff to it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the director couldn't understand that.  I always like being creative, you know.  So--
Speaker 1: Can you hum a little bit of how you would play it?  I mean, funky?
Speaker 2: I mean I would raise the tempo.  The tempo would be (hums), you know, it would be faster than--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the slower way, the way Kirk Franklin would do it a little different.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the choir director didn't like it?
Speaker 2: A little more livelier.  But it's an old traditional, slow, you know, like ballad type.  So I'd come in and put a little spice in it.  They just wasn't ready for that yet.
Story_ID: 647121
Speaker 1: Now when you were in grade school [Charles Sumner Elementary School, Camden, New Jersey], did you have a favorite subject in grade school?
Speaker 2: English.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I loved English.  And it took a little harder studying in math, but basically my mother [Beatrice Alberta Huff] was, she was really disciplined when it came to education for me and my sister [Jean Huff].  It was like mandatory that you take, you take your education seriously.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it wasn't--
Speaker 2: You know, my mother, she was a member of the PTA [Parent Teacher Association].  So she was involved with the school system in Camden [New Jersey], and she was real disciplined about, about the education.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she sounded--well, you know--so she made sure that--and you were discussing how you got in the band.  You know, she made sure you got in the band and all that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that's a program that, sometimes it goes by people.  They--it's available, but they don't take advantage of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know.  But I guess my mother must have seen the talent developing, and she nurtured it big time.  I was taking drum lessons--and neighborhood piano teachers, nothing really beyond that.  But me and my sister was singing in the choirs and in the glee club.  So my mother had me and my sister very active as, you know, activity is concerned, and mine was basically music.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you liked English.  Did you read a lot when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I still do.  That's my favorite pastime.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have any favorite books growing up?
Speaker 2: I loved biographies.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm reading Clive Davis' ['The Soundtrack of My Life'] right now.  But I love biographies and history and, you know, I try to read a lot.  Different--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So how were your grades in school?  Were you a good student?
Speaker 2: Average.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: C average.  I wasn't, you know, I'd bring home a few A's a few times, you know.  But I couldn't bring home no Ds and Fs.  That was like, no.  My mother was like, unh-uh.  She wasn't having that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your mother basically took charge of that part of the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My father [Eugene Huff] was like, a hard worker, you know.  And I had a great relationship with my father, but my mother was the disciplinarian.  My father was like the serious one.  But I knew, I knew when to play with my father and I knew when he wasn't tolerating no nonsense.  But my mother was the disciplinarian.  My mother was no nonsense, but loving.
Story_ID: 647122
Speaker 1: One aspect, now having been raised by a barber myself, if the barbershop's in the home, did you spend time in the--I know you, I know you probably spent some time in the barbershop [Mr. Sonny's (ph.)].  Did you sweep up the hair and do that kind of thing for your father [Eugene Huff]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I helped my father a lot.  In fact, I used to go down there and play.  That was my play area, down in that barbershop, swinging around in that barber chair (laughter).  It was, it was--oh, yeah, I used to do all of that, you know.  And that was part of my, you know, our chores when I was growing up.  That was part of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you--I mean, the barbershop is a place where you can learn a lot of things.  And usually in those days, men would quiet down some of the talk, you know, if kids were around, you know.  Did you learn a lot from the guys that came down there?
Speaker 2: My father had a lot of--
Speaker 1: Any discussions?
Speaker 2: --a lot of friends, and I used to sit around and listen to them, you know.  They used to play checkers, and I mean I used to love to watch them play.  And my father played good, you know.  And they used to have those checker games.  And my father played a little guitar.  But he loved the blues and he had a guitar down in that, in that, in the barbershop, and I used to hear him down there playing.  You know, so he grew up in like the blues era.  So, you know, that's what he played.  But, so the barbershop was like--the people that were down there in the barbershop could hear me upstairs in the living room playing.  And they used to, in fact they tell me now, the guys that I bump into, they say, "Man, I used to hear you upstairs playing, upstairs."  Because you know, the houses--you know, the row houses--you could hear.  I'd be upstairs jamming, and the guys downstairs in the, in the barbershop would be listening.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's both on the drums and on the piano, right?
Speaker 2: No, just the piano (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just the--okay.  Did you play drums at home?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I played the drums, not the drum set.  I had a drum set when I was like a preteen.  But I started playing the marching band drums, you know, like that, like that--what's that movie? 'Drill Team' [sic. 'Drumline'].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So you were playing the snare or the, or the tom tom?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, the snare.
Speaker 1: Snare, okay.
Story_ID: 647123
Speaker 1: So were you involved in--was the, was the style of your band like the drill teams in that, in the movie--
Speaker 2: Oh, I used to that love that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) 'Drumline'?
Speaker 2: That's one of my favorite movies.  I loved that.  And that's what basically I was gravitating towards, marching bands, you know, drums.  And they used to have a program in the spring in Camden [New Jersey].  It was great, called Spring Festival, where all the, all the schools competed against each other to have the best bands.  And at the end of that competition the director would pick a student or two or three students from each school to form this all-star band.  And I used to make that every year, because I played drums, I played drums good, natural rhythm, timing.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So this is--okay.  So this is--from what you described you started off playing the piano like a drum.  I mean, the piano (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Rhythm.
Speaker 1: --is a percussion instrument.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the rhythm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a percussion instrument.
Speaker 2: That was basically my style of playing--the rhythms, especially with left hand.  And that's where all that rhythm comes from.  And I was able to inject that into them records.  That's where the foundation started for me as a musician, in elementary school [Charles Sumner Elementary School, Camden, New Jersey].  That's when I first started playing for them bands.  And that just grew on me, because by the time me and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] started producing records--and Gamble's experience was with or- with orchestras.  And we was listening to clarinets, trombones, trumpets, xylophones.  We was listening, we was listening to the whole spectrum of an orchestra.  And I was playing, I was hearing all that, you know.  And tubas, baritones, saxes [saxophone]--all those things we incorporated in our productions.
Story_ID: 647124
Speaker 1: Now were you exposed to--I know you say you played drum in a dance band--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in junior high school [Cooper B. Hatch Junior High School; Cooper B. Hatch Middle School, Camden, New Jersey].
Speaker 2: I played for the prom, yes.
Speaker 1: What kind of music were you listening to?  Were you listening to more of the big band music?  Or was it--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, 'Moonlight Serenade,' that type, you know.  What other ones did we used to play?  We played a lot of Philip Sousa [John Philip Sousa], the marching band music.  And modern--during those days playing in that dance band--I forget the--I know 'Moonlight Serenade' was one of them.  I don't forget that one.  And there were some other ones, you know, band stuff, big band stuff.
Speaker 1: And did you--were you--did you take any classical training when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: No, I love classical music though, but I never took training for classical.
Speaker 1: I mean in terms of school, did they talk about the composers and have you listen to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, Mozart [Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, and different things, Beethoven [Ludwig van Beethoven] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had those types of classes.
Speaker 1: And there was--I know Camden [New Jersey], you know, being in close proximity to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], there was so much, so many musicians in this area.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were there, were there jazz musicians in Camden?
Speaker 2: Yeah, one of my favorite organ players, Richard "Groove" Holmes [Richard Holmes].
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, that's right, Richard "Groove" Holmes.
Speaker 2: Richard "Groove" Holmes lived around the corner from me.  And he was, boy, what can you say about Richard "Groove" Holmes?  And I think there--Buster Williams, a great bass player.  And there was another drummer from Camden that used to play with Ray Charles.  I got to get his name.  Then there was another gentleman from Camden that played in the Duke Ellington Orchestra, where I went to school with--uncle.  I got--I'll get his name.  He was from Camden.  Camden had a lot of mu- musicians, like you were saying.
Story_ID: 647125
Speaker 1: I didn't ask you about the demographics of Camden [New Jersey], you know.  What--how was it deployed in terms of the racial separation in the neighborhoods, and that sort of thing?  I mean, you know, how, what was the percentage of black people in Camden, would you guess?  I know you don't know, but what would you think, when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: When I was growing up?  It was sections.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was sect- I grew up in a section called Centerville [Camden, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which was, it was maybe 75, 75 percent black where I, where I grew up at.  And then you had Parkside [Camden, New Jersey], which was mostly white, Caucasian.  Fairview [Camden, New Jersey], Caucasian.  The area where blacks grew up was like Centerville.  Then you had a section called Crosstown [ph.].  Then they had downtown Camden.  They had North Camden [Camden, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: These are black neighborhoods, kind of just little po- pockets--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --all over the city?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: East Camden [Camden, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Okay.  But everybody went to Camden High School [Camden, New Jersey]?  Or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had Camden High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then if you lived in another certain part of the town, you went to Woodrow Wilson High School [Camden, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was Camden High School mostly black, or was it integrated (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I was going?  No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there wasn't a predominantly black high school in the city?
Speaker 2: Not when I was going to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there now?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Hispanic, I guess.
Story_ID: 647126
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: When I was growing up?  The sights, my [maternal] grandfather [Herbert Alberta] had a big, a huge garden right on the side of his house.  In fact, my grandmother [Anna Alberta] and my grandfather lived like about a half a block away from us.  So me and my sister [Jean Huff] used to spend a lot of time at my grandfather and my grandmother's house.   And my grandfather had this huge garden on the side.  And I used to, one of my chores was I had to help my grandfather pick.  You know, he had everything, you know, corn, tomatoes, okra, I mean he had everything in there.  And I used to have to go in there and help him, you know, do that.  And that's when I first saw, I saw my first garden snake.  It scared me to death.  They shooting up there.  So you got to pick tomato.  You got to pick tomatoes and you got to go down up underneath there, and I saw that thing.  I mean, you know, it's harmless, but I thought, oh, it was--I'll never forget that.  Well, anyway, that's one of the sights, you know.  And Centerville [Camden, New Jersey] was an area where they had a lot of sports.  I loved basketball.  We played it all.  Football, we had basketball courts, sandlot baseball, football, you know, and power boxing.  We had a nice swimming pool.  It was so different when I was growing up in Camden [New Jersey], because we had so much activity.  Swimming pools, I mean YMCAs [Young Men's Christian Association], all the sports, but mainly basketball, because Camden High [Camden High School, Camden, New Jersey] had a great basketball team.
Speaker 1: Now did you play a lot of basketball?
Speaker 2: I played junior varsity.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Because, I mean a boy growing up in Centerville that couldn't play sports missed it.  Because they had it all, baseball diamonds.  We had semi-pro ba- baseball leagues, you know.  The church had, the churches had, even had a softball league, you know, and they all competed against each other.  So I participated--my mother [Beatrice Alberta Huff] had me participating in basically everything--baseball, all the sports.  And the Camden High, Camden had a great library on Broadway that I'll never forget, that my mother used to take me and my sister to.  And I remember me and my sister getting our first library cards, and that was like a great experience because I always used to like to go the libraries.  Never had a problem with that.  It was on Broadway in Camden, really, really nice.  And Camden had everything.  I mean you didn't have to go Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] for anything during the time I was growing up, unless you just wanted to go there.  Because it was like a flourishing little town, Camden was.  Broadway, you know, nice men's clothing stores.  I mean, I mean banks.  It was an event for my mother to take me and my sister up on Broadway in Camden because it was, it had everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was different.
Speaker 1: Is that the main drag through--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, the shopping area.  They even had all the stores, you know, Penney's [JCPenney], Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.], the Lit Brothers.  I mean, Camden was really a bustling little place when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It sounds like you--now compared to other places now, when you look back at growing up here, do you think that Camden was maybe a better place to grow up than a lot of other places were?  I mean, because you described so many opportunities (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  I never wished I was nowhere else when I was growing up in Camden.  I, I thought I was like in a little paradise in Camden.  I had a ball growing up in Camden.
Story_ID: 647127
Speaker 1: Were there special teachers and mentors along the way for you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, who were some of these?
Speaker 2: Mrs. Hazel Nimmo, H-I-M-M-O [sic.].  She was the wife of the pastor of our church [10th Street Baptist Church, Camden, New Jersey], the Reverend J. Allen Nimmo.  And she was also the librarian at the, at the school [Camden High School, Camden, New Jersey].  So she was like really friendly with my mother [Beatrice Alberta Huff].  And she was very inspiring.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So that's interesting.  So you could see the librarian at church, you know, and vice versa.  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and Miss Nimmo used to, sometimes she used to be a substitute teacher, you know, in junior high school [Cooper B. Hatch Junior High School; Cooper B. Hatch Middle School, Camden, New Jersey].  So it was a nice connection there.
Speaker 1: So she used to kind of look out for you--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in the--okay.
Speaker 2: Still do (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now who else?
Speaker 2: Well, mainly I looked to my father [Eugene Huff] and my uncles.  I mean, they set a nice presence.  They were, like, really reserved men, you know.  I remember them being quiet like.  And they got along really good.  I used to love to watch them sit around and laugh--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and talk.  And I used to play the piano, and they wanted me to play.  "Let me hear you play a song."  You know, there was no escape with that.  Every time they came to my house, and I had to do it.  So that was part of, you know, the family reunion thing.  Because they used to visit my family, my father and mother a lot.  And I had my Uncle Fess [ph.], my Aunt Nessie [Nessie Huff].  They had, they had the family visit them a lot, especially the ones that came down from Newark [New Jersey].  So I was, I was around my family a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were there any other teachers or coaches or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mr. Bowman [ph.].  Mr. Bowman was, Mr. Bowman, he was very inspiring, too.  I used to like the way he dressed.  You know, they was dressing during those days, you know, I was going to school.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about--
Speaker 2: He was more like--
Speaker 1: --what clothes he wore.
Speaker 2: He was more like--see, he was the first one I'd ever seen with one of those Foreign Intrigue raincoats.  Mr. Bowman was really stylish man, looked good.  And my father was, too.  Oh, my father and uncles was wearing three piece suits, wingtip shoes.  I mean those guys was like, I was watching them.  There wasn't too many people outside my family circle that I was really--
Speaker 1: Okay.  How many uncles did you have in Camden [New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: My Uncle Brother, my mother's brother.  My Uncle Brother, he lived in Camden.  And mostly my father's brothers lived in Newark.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: That's the only one, my Uncle Brother.  And he was great, my mother's brother.  I got along with them all good.  I had a lot of uncles, so I had a lot of protection.
Story_ID: 647128
Speaker 1: What was your first--I know you played in church [10th Street Baptist Church, Camden, New Jersey].  And you, and you were in the dance band in junior high school [Cooper B. Hatch Junior High School; Cooper B. Hatch Middle School, Camden, New Jersey].  What was your first group that you played in that tried to get gigs someplace, that you--
Speaker 2: I was in a neighborhood group.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We was good.  I played piano (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the name of the group?
Speaker 2: We called ourselves--during those days the groups was, the doo wop groups was naming, naming their groups after cars, you know, The Cadillacs, and the El Dorados.  So we were The Dynaflows.
Speaker 1: The Dynaflows (laughter).  Okay.
Speaker 2: Remember that Buick [Buick Dynaflow]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: And Buster Williams was in that group, too.  In fact, I got a picture I'm going to show you.  And we were, we were really good.  I mean, we were winning talent shows in Camden [New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Now did you have a full, like, band (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, it was just the piano.  Just the piano and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just the piano. Okay.
Speaker 2: --five singers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you play the piano for the group?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we rocked.  Normally, a group would have a guitar player, you know.  But I was the keyboard player, and we was really good.  We had a guy, name's Floyd Henley, who could sing like Sam Cooke.  And we had--I can name the members.  The members were Floyd Henley, lead singer.  And then we had Honey Cooper [Everett Cooper], second tenor.  Then we had Buster Williams, baritone.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Harrison Artis, Harrison, H-A-R-R-I-S-O-N, Artis, A-R- yeah.  And it was, oh, that was so much fun.  Because we were good, we could sing.  We sang all the, you know, them doo wop songs, you know, and plus some of the stuff that I used to make up.  Very creative.  And we was winning talent shows.  And we won a talent show at a school, and the first prize was being on this rock and roll show up at the Camden Convention Hall [Camden, New Jersey].  And it had a lot of stars on that show, and I remember The Moonglows, and Frankie Lymon and The Teenagers.  Then you had a guy called Screamin' Jay Hawkins.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: And these guys was on that show.  And we were like local, local kids.  And we were good enough to win that talent show and be, and be on that show.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, those are really--Frankie Lymon and The Moonglows--
Speaker 2: Faye Adams.  That's when I first seen Screamin' Jay Hawkins come out there (laughter), come out that coffin (laughter).
Speaker 1: He came out of a coffin, did he?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: What is his--I know Screamin' Jay Hawkins, he's famous for--
Speaker 2: (Singing), "You put a spell on me" ['I Put a Spell on You']. That song.
Speaker 1: Oh, right, right, that's right.  "You put a spell," right, right, right.
Speaker 2: Oh, that was something.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So he came out of a coffin onstage?
Speaker 2: It was something, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Screamin' Jay Hawkins, all right.   Yeah, so--
Speaker 2: It was, it was a big list.  But I remember The Moonglows, because they were my, one of my favorites.  And that Screamin' Jay, I remember him.  So we had a, had a spot on the show, and we did really good.
Speaker 1: So did you get any offers or anything from the producers?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we went to, we went to a few record companies in New York [New York], you know.  But we just wasn't ready for that level.  We even auditioned for the Ted Mack, Original Amateur, Amateur Hour ['The Original Amateur Hour'].
Speaker 1: Yeah, now Ted Mack.  He was--is this the radio show or TV show?
Speaker 2: It was the TV show.
Speaker 1: TV--okay.
Speaker 2: We went to New York and auditioned.  And we never got called, but I know we rocked in there because we really rehearsed the night before we went up there.  We really were sounding good, but they never called us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think it was during the time that Gladys Knight was doing, was on the show.  And she won, remember?  It was during that time.
Speaker 1: Now this is like--how old are you now when you went to--
Speaker 2: I'll be seventy-one in April.
Speaker 1: I mean, no, during this period of time (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, I--
Speaker 1: During the period of time when you were going on Ted Mack?
Speaker 2: Age ain't nothing but a number.  But--oh, well--
Speaker 1: You're in high school, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, like sixteen or seventeen.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So this is like '58 [1958], '59 [1959]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because I graduated school, Camden High [Camden High School, Camden, New Jersey], 1960.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And, yeah, that's around about that time.
Story_ID: 647129
Speaker 1: So in high school [Camden High School, Camden, New Jersey], you're playing in your group [The Dynaflows].  You've got like--you're playing in the school band--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --too, right?  And you're playing at--were you, were you still playing in church [10th Street Baptist Church, Camden, New Jersey] at that point?
Speaker 2: No, they--
Speaker 1: They (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had been gone from there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was, I was really into rock and roll.  That's what I really wanted to do.  Because I was, I was looking at people like Little Richard and Fats Domino, you know.  They had a show called the Dick Clark--bandstand used to come on every day.  And I used to, I had to see that show.  Because they had all those famous black artists who used to come on there.  And the first time I seen Little Richard like, I was like blowed away.  Because he had a band called The Upsetters.  (Makes sound) Boy, I was like dazzled with that.
Speaker 1: And that was just, that was shot live, right over in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: What's that?
Speaker 1: The 'American Bandstand.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, right in Philly.
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 2: And I used to rush home from school to see that show.  It was very popular during that time.
Speaker 1: Now did you know anybody that got a chance to actually go to the show or be on the show?  I mean, part of the crowd?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I know stories about Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] used to try to get in there when he was growing up.  But I never--
Speaker 1: I remember it was a very white show, I mean in terms of the teenagers that were there, hardly any black teenagers--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --on the show dancing.  In fact, that set the stage for 'Soul Train' to be po- popular.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Because you couldn't get on 'American Bandstand.'
Speaker 2: No, not to dance.  But Don Cornelius came along and changed all of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But when you were in high school, 'American Bandstand' was on and, but the black performers would be on 'American Bandstand.'
Speaker 2: The only ones probably would be like Chubby Checker or Hank Ballard and The Midnighters or Frankie Lymon and The Teenagers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I--
Speaker 2: Dee Dee Sharp.
Speaker 1: Right, she was on.  I know I remember seeing her (unclear) (simultandoeu).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's about the level of entertainment, you know.  But Chubby Checker used to be on there all the time.  But that's, you know, James Brown, my man.  So it's like, got a, I got a chance to see those artists, you know.
Story_ID: 647130
Speaker 1: Now was there a venue in Camden [New Jersey], a black music venue, like a--I mean, like an auditorium or something that everybody (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, when I was growing up?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: They had live--mostly all of the bars and the clubs had live entertainment during those days, I used to hang out.  On the weekends it was so many places to go to see live entertainment in Camden.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But it was in clubs, mai- mainly?
Speaker 2: Club, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You know, some cities have, even small cities, had a theater or something, you know.  Like, they would show movies maybe during the week, and then they would have, on the weekend they'd have like--
Speaker 2: Like movies?  Camden had a lot of movies.  Like movie thea- like to go see movies?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm just saying in those days some of the theaters, you know, were dual, had a dual purpose.  They would show a movie during the day, but they'd have a live show--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the evening.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: But I don't know--did you have that kind of--?
Speaker 2: Stanley movies [Stanley Theatre, Camden, New Jersey] did that.
Speaker 1: What's it called?
Speaker 2: The Stanley, S-T-A-N-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And the Savar [Savar Theatre, Camden, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was like uptown in Camden.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's when I first seen (pause) Little Richard.
Speaker 1: Okay.  At the Sa- Savoy [sic. Savar Theatre] or the?
Speaker 2: Stanley.
Speaker 1: At Stanley, okay.
Story_ID: 647131
Speaker 1: So your, your strip in Camden [New Jersey].  You had a strip where you had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the strip was like very active.  And even a lot of people from different, or surrounding areas used to hang out in Camden.  Like the Phillies come to Camden, you know, and vice versa, you know.  But they had a lot of club, popular clubs, on Kaighn Avenue.  That was the strip and Broadway.
Speaker 1: Is that C- C-A-N-E?
Speaker 2: What's that, Kaighn?  That's like K-A-I-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: -G-H-N, Kaighns Avenue [sic.].  Let's see if I can spell that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: K-A-I-G-H-N-S, I think, Kaighns Avenue (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.  Kaighns Avenue and Broadway?
Speaker 2: Broa- Broadway.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you were saying that Lola Falana was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --from Camden (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Lola Fa- Lola lived right around the corner from me in the projects, called Branch Village [Camden, New Jersey].  And I went to school with Lola in--let's see--
Speaker 1: Now you called her Fat Lola [sic.].  Was she, was she fat then?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Where are you getting that from (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Oh, you were talking (laughter)--
Speaker 2: No!
Speaker 1: --in a different sense.
Speaker 2: She was far from that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Lola, Lola, I remember Lola when she first started dancing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Elementary school [Charles Sumner Elementary School, Camden, New Jersey].  And then I think Lola moved, her family moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Now did they have like formal dance instruction for kids?
Speaker 2: I know over it's, over in the section called Chelton Terrace [Camden, New Jersey] they used to have a program for girls who wanted to do the interpretative dancing.  And Lola used to attend those classes.  You know, they danced to the bongo rhythms, you know, they had the bon- bongo rhythms.  And I used to go over there sometimes and peep through the window.  And that's when she started.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was she--did people recognize her as a, as a real big talent (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was talent.  She was talented then, you know, stage presence.
Speaker 1: Right.  She could do everything, sing, act, dance.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that's what attracted Sammy Davis, Jr.
Speaker 1: That's a good guess (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, because she--
Speaker 1: Yeah 'cause she's very, very pretty (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She met him during that time.
Speaker 1: She could do everything.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: She could do almost everything.  And he's a multi talent too.
Speaker 2: Who, Sammy was?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Story_ID: 647132
Speaker 1: Now when you were in high school [Camden High School, Camden, New Jersey], were you, did you have time for--so you played junior varsity basketball?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And were you involved in any other clubs or activities in high school?
Speaker 2: No, just the music program and the sports.  I just played baseball, I mean basketball.  You know, that's about it.  I was too little for football.  You know, I played football like in, you know, street ball, you know, like in the area and neighborhood where I was growing up at [Centerville, Camden, New Jersey].  You know, we had a big field that we'll turn into a football field.  You know, I used to look forward to those games.  We made our own baseball diamond, you know.  We'd find a big lot and we'd just make a diamond out of it.  And we used to play every day, I mean every day, especially in the summer.  Very active in sports when I was growing up--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --too, besides music.
Story_ID: 647133
Speaker 1: Now I know when I mentioned the theaters, and I mentioned movies, you get, you kind of lit up there.  Did you have favorite movies when you were growing up or that you remember?
Speaker 2: I remember my mom [Beatrice Alberta Huff], I remember like okay.  I remember my mother took me and my sister [Jean Huff] to see 'Samson and Delilah.'  Those kind of movies that my mother was--took me and I'd see.  And I remember the first time I went to the movies to see Frankenstein, Dracula.  I had all, you know, Camden [New Jersey] had all those types of movies coming there.  I remember my first time going to the movies.  And in fact my mother, you know, my mother took me and my sister to the movies too when we were kids.  But my first time going with my boys, we went to see Frankenstein, the first time I seen Frankenstein.  I remember that good.  So I like movies.  I like them now.  I mean, you know, I look at all kinds of movies.
Speaker 1: Did you pay spe- special attention to the scores in the movies when you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the music.  You know, I'm like, I'm from the Humphrey Bogart era, you know, George Raft.  Those were my boys, you know.  What's my man?  Edward G. Robinson, those kind of guys, you know.  I love them all, you know.  I like all, I liked all the movies.  Musicals, gangsters (laughter), monsters, I, you know, I liked it all.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I went to movies all the time when I was growing up.  Cowboys.  When I was a young boy growing up, I was into them Westerns, cowboys, you know.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: When I was a kid, my mother bought me a pair of guns, you know.  My mother bought me a--I remember my mother bought me a whole Hopalong Cassidy outfit for Christmas, the guns, the boots, everything, the hat, everything, I had it.  So when I was a little boy I was like into, into, I was into, you know, the Westerns, cowboys, you know.
Speaker 1: I know one of the earlier hits that you and [HistoryMaker] Kenny Gamble wrote was 'Cowboys to Girls.'
Speaker 2: 'To Girls,' growing up.  That's the way we were, you know.  Growing up--that's how you write a song like that.  You had to experience that, you know, to write something like that, and it was a big hit.  And I used to watch Gillette worldwide of sports ['The Gillette Cavalcade of Sports'], boxing.  Me and my father [Eugene Huff] liked to look at boxing.  We watched that every Friday.  So I had a--growing up, I used to see like Joe Louis and Sugar Ray Robinson, you know.  I was looking at, I was watching the sports with my father, you know.  On Sundays we watched baseball games when the Philadelphia Phillies would play the Brooklyn Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers].  That was like an event.  You know, when Jackie Robinson came, you know, it was like I was seeing all that when I was--and my mother--you had to see Ed Sullivan ['The Ed Sullivan Show'] on Sundays.  My mother--that's my mother.  My mother, she loved Ed Sullivan, Lawrence Welk.  She loved all of that.  Liberace.  So she was looking at all those things, so I was exposed to all of that, you know.  My mother was buying records during the time I was a preteen.  So I was listening to Nat King Cole, you know, and Billy Eckstine.  My mother had all of that, you know, Mahalia Jackson.  My mother would expose me to all of that great music.  Because she had a Victrola in the house that she'd wind up.  That's when we was playing those big 78 records [78 rpm record], that you dropped, they'd crash.  She was buying records.  She would take me to the record store.  She was buying all that, my mother--had all that music in the house.  Ethel Waters and all the great singers.
Story_ID: 647134
Speaker 1: You mentioned that with The Dynaflows--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you wrote a couple of the songs--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that you performed.  Can you remember those songs and how they went?  And did any of them go anywhere?
Speaker 2: Most of the group, when we was meet- well, we all participated, but I would come up with, you know, the melodies and the way the song was structured.  Like, we had a song called 'I Cried' [ph.], which Buster [Buster Williams] sang.  It was a ballad.  And we used to--oh, that sounded so good.  And we had an up tempo song called 'Five Reasons Why' [ph.], that Floyd Henley sang lead on.  And we used to bring the house down on that one.  It was like up tempo.
Speaker 1: Well, what was this?  What--now what was this one called?
Speaker 2: 'Five Reasons Why.'  That was the up tempo one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Five Reasons Why.'
Speaker 2: And the ballad was called 'I Cried.'
Speaker 1: Can you hum them now?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You can't do it?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Now I wondered if any of those songs are songs that had a life afterwards, when you got with--
Speaker 2: I got a copy of--do I have a copy of--?  Aft- after, after The Dynaflows, after Floyd Henley left, the group changed.  A couple of the members stayed on and became The Lavenders.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's when we made our first recording.  That's when we first signed our first recording contract.
Speaker 1: As The Lavenders?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we recorded a record called 'The Slide,' it was a dance.  And it was like, you know, a local hit, nothing really--but that was the first time I heard a song that I played on on the radio.
Story_ID: 647135
Speaker 1: So what kind of a radio outlet did you have in Camden [New Jersey] then (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, we listened to WDAS [WDAS Radio], Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  We was beamed into Philadelphia, WDAS, Georgie Woods and WHAT [WHAT Radio].  And then we listened to WFIL [WFIL Radio, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. That was the pop station.
Speaker 1: I didn't know you had a WHAT here too.  Because I know there's a WHYY [WHYY Radio] for--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --public radio.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: A WHAT and a WHYY in Philadelphia.
Speaker 2: Yeah, WHAT.
Speaker 1: WHAT, okay.  So, now what was the format of--did either station have a black format?
Speaker 2: Yeah, WDAS and WHAT.
Speaker 1: They both did?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I know in some cities, prior to 1964 or '65 [1965], you didn't have a black station.  But you had, you had this in Philly before--
Speaker 2: As far as I can remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: It was always on in my house.  WDAS. That was the station.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And who was the disc jockey (unclear)?
Speaker 2: It was like WVON [WVON Radio]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --in Chicago [Illinois], that--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that station.
Speaker 1: Yeah, WVON really didn't start up until about '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963], '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so that's why I was asking (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was the main station that was beamed into the black neighborhood?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was the first one.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And it was, it didn't really start up until '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: Rodney Jones [E. Rodney Jones]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and, you know--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Lucky Cordell?
Speaker 1: Right, yes, sir.  Right, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That was a great station, wasn't it?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, right.  So WDAS.  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --was in--so as long as--when you were a kid, this was on the air?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It had a black format, basically?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Played black music?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you mentioned a disc jockey or two.  Who were they?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Geo- it was Georgie Woods, Jimmy Bishop.  They had Louise Williams [Louise Williams Bishop] who played gospel on Sundays and John Bandy [John "Lord Fauntleroy" Bandy].  These were like the popular disc jockeys.  Then we had [HistoryMaker] Dyana Williams, who had a blues show and played nothing but the blues.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, so, you know, personality radio--that was those days where, you know, the disc jockey basically controlled how many times they could play a record, you know, all of that.  That was different.
Speaker 1: It's really--
Speaker 2: Sometimes--
Speaker 1: It's really changed now.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I can remember them playing.  Me and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] would put out a record, I mean, and disc jockeys would play it like three or four times in a row.  They can't do that now.  They don't do that anymore.
Speaker 1: It's all prerecorded now, pretty much or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or maybe one guy is broadcasting for all the, all the stations.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: But then it was all local, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All local, pre- pretty much.
Story_ID: 647136
Speaker 1: So The Lavenders--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, well, were you--let me go back to high school graduation [from Camden High School, Camden, New Jersey].  Now you graduated in 1960, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what were your prospects after high school?  Did you consider going to college?  Or you were, were you going to work?  Or what were you going to do?  Were you, were you determined to get into the music business then as a professional?
Speaker 2: Well, after high school, after the, after that era was over, I was sort of like--when I graduated from high school I didn't, I didn't go to college.  Those were--I got a job.  I had to go to work.  So I got a job at Cooper Hospital [Cooper University Hospital, Camden, New Jersey].  That was my first job.
Speaker 1: Now, okay.  So you--
Speaker 2: So I didn't really have any plans or any--I just wanted to hope one day that I would be a studio musician.  That's what I wanted to be.  Because, you know, when my mother [Beatrice Alberta Huff] brought those albums home, they used to have pictures in the back of the albums that I used to love to look at.  And they used to have pictures sometimes of inside the studio with all the musicians.  And I used to dream about being in that studio playing on the ar- artists' records, you know.  I had to have that much confidence in my talent that I could do that, that I could play.  That's what I wanted to be.  I wanted to be a studio musician first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I didn't have no idea when that was going to come after I graduated from high school.
Speaker 1: So you--
Speaker 2: I had to get a job.
Speaker 1: So you were--continued playing with The Lavenders, you know, when you could, you know, dur- when you didn't have to work?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then--
Speaker 2: And we did pretty good.  We did pretty well in the clubs singing around Delaware Valley.  But no- nothing like a huge success, none of that.  But I always worked on the weekends in clubs as a piano player.  But I had a day job.
Story_ID: 647137
Speaker 1: So how long did you, did you have to wait before you got a chance to play in the studio?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was, that was long, that was, that was years.  Well, things started to happen.  I got an opportunity to join a band called Kenny Gamble and The Romeos.  I wonder if Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] talked about that when you talked to him.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now that--yeah, I'm sure he talked about it.  But I'm thinking--I've got a note here that says that you started working as a session pianist in 1960.  Is that true?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, it's not true.  Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'd just got out of school [Camden High School, Camden, New Jersey] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right, okay, right, right.  Because what you're saying doesn't jibe with this.  So--
Speaker 2: No, that didn't happen until like '65 [1965] or '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's when you were working with Phil Spec- in Phil Spector's studio?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I think--is that--that's prior to leaving Kenny Gamble or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So in '65 [1965], what happened?  How did you get a chance to work with--in Phil Spector's--?
Speaker 2: Well, I got, I got--after Kenny Gamble and The Romeos area, era, I had a great time with that era with Gamble's band.  Because that's when I met Tommie Bell [Thom Bell].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is prior to Phil Spector?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: This is leading in (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  We're getting mixed up.  So before, so maybe it was--was it '62 [1962], '63 [1963]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you're with Kenny Gamble--
Speaker 2: I was working at Cooper's [Cooper University Hospital, Camden, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I kept hearing about this band down at this club that I used to hang out at called Loretta's Hi-Hat in Lawnside, New Jersey.  And they said here's this--everybody talking about this band, this singer that was--had lines around the corner.  So I wan- I wanted to go down there and see.  The hospitals, you work Sundays, you know.  So I had to wait until I got a weekend, a day off.  And I went down there to see Gamble and his band.  And Gamble had lines around the corner, and he was tearing it up in there.  The band was great.  Tommie was the keyboard player then.  And I played in that--oh, I guess the band stayed together for about five or six years.  And then that's when me and Gamble started to write together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, let me--okay.  After, after The Romeos--
Speaker 1: Now, well, let me go back to The Romeos for a minute--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --before we leave it.  Did you play drums in The Romeos?
Speaker 2: Piano.
Speaker 1: Pi- piano, okay.  So they had two piano players?
Speaker 2: Now Tommie, Tommie left.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right, all right.
Speaker 2: Tommie left the band and became an arranger at Cameo-Parkway [Cameo-Parkway Records, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And he went to work for Chubby Checker, and I took his place.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Cameo, so he left for Cameo Records and--
Speaker 2: He went to work for Cameo-Parkway Records.
Speaker 1: --with Chubby Checker, who is--he was still riding off of 'The Twist,' right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, because that was about the time 'The Twist' came out?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, Chubby Checker, okay.  Is Chubby Checker from the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So Thom Bell left.  And then you're, so you become the keyboard person for--
Speaker 2: Yeah, after Gamble (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Kenny Gamble and The Romeos?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did Kenny, Kenny Gamble sing the lead?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we had a great band.  And Gamble was good, was good.  I mean, Gamble was like--I mean, we had the girls.  So I mean we was like, I mean we would pack a club.  I remember going on a tour with Kenny Gamble and The Romeos, and Little Anthony and the Imperials.  And we was the backup band, and we played the whole college circuit.  And we had a ball playing for all those frat parties.  And we just had a good band, we played all the popular music, and those students just danced the night away.
Speaker 1: Now is Little Anthony [HistoryMaker Jerome "Little Anthony" Gourdine] from around here too?
Speaker 2: Little Anthony and the Imperials?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: No, Little Anthony is from Brooklyn, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We just happened to be signed with the same booking agent and--Larry Magid.
Story_ID: 647138
Speaker 1: Now what's hard for me to believe is just, as somebody that listens to music--and I interviewed [HistoryMaker] Kenny Gamble--not too many people have, I don't think.  But his voice is so soft now--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it was--
Speaker 1: --I can't imagine him as a lead singer.
Speaker 2: Oh, he could sing.
Speaker 1: But he was, he was really--
Speaker 2: He had a recording contract with Columbia Records as an artist during those days, I think in the late '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Is there, is there a reason why he didn't--
Speaker 2: He didn't like entertaining.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I didn't like the road.  As a musician, I didn't like the, I didn't like the road at all.  You know, I experienced traveling with that band for about maybe five years.  But I didn't like the road.  That's why, that's why I decided to work in the studio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't want to be an entertainer.
Speaker 1: So the way you two met was by joining his band?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And this is in 1962, you think?  Or '62 [1962], '63 [1963]?  It's got to be in there somewhere.
Speaker 2: Yeah, around '60 [1960].  Because I was playing, I was going to New York [New York] playing on those Spector and Leiber [Jerry Leiber] and Stoller [Mike Stoller] sessions, like a couple, a few years after high school [Camden High School, Camden, New Jersey], like '63 [1963], '64 [1964].  Because I met Gamble around about '65 [1965], '66 [1966], you know, '66 [1966], during that era.  It was during the '60s [1960s] era.  I graduated from high school, kicked around for a few years until I got that opportunity through--I got a job as a songwriter with this production company, like in '65 [1965], '66 [1966].  I quit those jobs, okay.  I got the job at Cooper Hospital [Cooper University Hospital, Camden, New Jersey], okay.  Then I didn't--that wasn't for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm confused now.  You have to--wait a minute.  Let's try to put this in order.  Now--
Speaker 2: Yeah, let's go back.
Speaker 1: So you graduated from high school.  You're playing in clubs and you're working at Coo- Cooper Hospital?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did you meet Kenny Gamble first or go to Phil Spector first?  I mean--
Speaker 2: No, I went, I was doing, I was doing, it was during the same time.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was during the same time, you know.  I was in the Romeo band [Kenny Gamble and The Romeos].  And then after the Romeo band split up--okay, I was in the band for a few years, and then the band decided to change careers.  I think the drummer [Karl Chambers] went on the road with Gladys Knight and the Pips.  The guitar player became Marvin Gaye's road band leader.  And me and Gamble decided to write music.  The bass player, Willie [Win Wilford], became an Ebony fashion model, which was Debbie Allen's first husband.  So they all went their separate ways.  But me and Gamble decided to write.
Speaker 1: Well, this was a great band.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which is to say this is really a talented group.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Roland Chambers was one of my favorite guitar players.  He's passed now.  But he was good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Really.
Story_ID: 647139
Speaker 1: Did you and [HistoryMakers] Kenny Gamble discuss, you know--I guess you had discussions about what you wanted to do in the music business at that point?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Because you said you didn't like the road?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: He said he didn't like being out in front as the lead.  And--
Speaker 2: But he could sing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  Well, did he talk about what he didn't like about it?
Speaker 2: Oh, I guess--
Speaker 1: A lot of people want to be the star, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, Gamble always had aspirations of being a songwriter and a producer.  I think Gamble wanted to be in that studio just as well as I did.  Because he didn't have no problem--when the band decided to disperse, then we di- didn't have no problem--us--Gamble--okay.  This--okay, after the Romeos [Kenny Gamble and The Romeos]--during the time me and Gamble decided to--before that, after the band I got a job as a songwriter with this production company.  That's how I knew, that's when I seen Gamble come into that elevator.  That's when I started--
Speaker 1: Now that's--I was going to ask you about the elevator story because that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, see--
Speaker 1: That's reported in a lot of stories about, that you all met in the elevator.  But you'd already worked together before (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  See--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but that's where it's conflicting.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or either I'm wrong.  I got to get, I got to get the sequences together.
Speaker 1: Well, we, well, we have to believe you (laughter) in this interview so--
Speaker 2: Well, it was during the same--it was so close to the time.  I mean--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were working--
Speaker 2: I met Gamble, I met Gamble on the elevator first.  I met--that's where I first--then that's when The Romeos--after that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I met Gamble, when I first seen Gamble on that elevator, he had a guitar in his hand.  And we were the only two blacks coming in that building anyway.  So, and that building was sort of like the Brill Building in New York [New York].  It had, it had--you could take voice lessons.  It had music teachers, publishers.  The building had--it was a music place.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Which is now the Merriam Theater [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] now.  It was the Shubert Theatre [Sam S. Shubert Theatre] then.
Speaker 1: This is in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I first got that job in Philly, I was making fifty dollars a week as a songwriter for Madara-White Productions.  It was housed in that building where I met Gamble on the elevator.  I was already on the elevator, and Gamble came on.  I'd never seen him before.  That's the sequence.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then I found out that Gamble had a band, during that time.  And that's, and the first time I seen him perform is when I went to the club.  That's when the relationship started.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then after the band dispersed, after the elevator--Gamble came over to my house.  Oh, this was all the time that The Romeos--I told you I had a--when Gamble asked me what did I do, on the elevator, I said, "I write songs."  I sort of like knew what he was--I didn't know, but he had a guitar in his hand, so I figure he was connected to music, you know, the first time I seen him.  So we talked and then that's when Gamble--I invited Gamble over to my house, then The Romeos after that.  Then I found out Gamble had a band.  This was all during the same time.  Then after the band dispersed, that's when Gamble and Huff Productions [Gamble Huff Productions, Inc.] was born.
Story_ID: 647140
Speaker 1: Prior to that even, I guess may, or maybe during the same time--you have access to Phil Spector's--?
Speaker 2: I was going to New York [New York]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --during the time I was working (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you--
Speaker 2: --with Madara-White Productions.
Speaker 1: And you played on some of the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as a studio, as a studio musician for Phil Spector, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was exciting.  I mean--
Speaker 1: For The Ronettes?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they were making big--their records were all over the country, The Ronettes.
Speaker 2: I was amazed.  When I was hired to come up to New York I met a, I met a gentleman named Jeff Barry and Ellie Greenwich.  And they were great.  I mean they just, I mean they just loved the way I played.  And my opportunities came through them, you know.  Jeff evidently must have talked about me playing, and so I was hired to come to New--to New York to the Brill Building to meet Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller.  And they're two of my favorite songwriters.  And I got a chance to play on a coup- couple of their sessions.  And I was hired to come to New York to play on The Ronettes' Christmas album ['A Christmas Gift for You from Phil Spector'], and that's when I first met Phil Spector.  And--
Speaker 1: So this is prior to meeting Ke- [HistoryMaker] Kenny Gamble, right?  This is before you met Kenny Gamble?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You met Phil Spector.  What did you think of Phil Spector?
Speaker 2: A genius in every sense of the word.  This guy knew exactly what he was doing in that studio.
Speaker 1: And also--
Speaker 2: And, well, go ahead.
Speaker 1: I used to watch him.  When I was going to New York playing on those sessions, I was only really the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] piano player that was going to New York playing on those sessions.  And I got a chance to play with some great musicians.
Speaker 2: Who else was there?
Speaker 1: Because most of the guys who played on those record dates in New York on their off season, I mean they played with those big bands like Count Basie and all those.  Duke Ellington, they played record dates.  And I got--had the chance to play with some great guys, you know.  And I used to be so nervous (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who were some of the guys that you played with?
Speaker 1: Oh, man, Artie Butler.  He was like an arranger, piano player.  He did a lot of work with Leiber and Stoller.  And he had Pretty Purdie [Bernard Purdie] on drums, and Harold Blaine [Hal Blaine] and Gary Chester.  Al Gorgoni on guitar.  I mean, I forget some of them.  I forget a lot of them, but I can get them, I can get them for you.
Speaker 2: These are, these are great musicians.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, and Jack Nitzsche, the late Jack Nitzsche, who used to do the arrangements for Phil Spector.  And just watching them people, just watching them at work was mind boggling.
Speaker 2: And what I read also is that you became friends with one of the producers, I guess or part of the crew, and they let you come and watch other recording sessions.
Speaker 1: Jeff Barry.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Even to this day, Jeff Barry, I thank Jeff Barry for even introducing me to that world was--and I had to, I had to, I had to play.  I mean I just couldn't go up there and just, you know.  That was the time to shine.  You know, you get an opportunity.  But I was nervous, you had to be, my first time in New York sitting amongst all those guys.  But once I got to grooving, then it was over.  I think the record I played on was produced and written by Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller called "The Boy from New York City," you know (singing), "Ooh wa, ooh wa, come on get it."  That was great, a great session.  And--
Speaker 2: That's 1967 or so?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And I played on The Ronettes' second record, "Baby, I Love You," that was the second release after "Be My Baby."  Phil Spector's sessions was scary and fantastic at the same time.  Because after you heard the playback (makes sound).
Speaker 2: You're saying it was scary, I mean how?  What's his, what's his--
Speaker 1: I mean, I mean, you know, my first time in New York, you know.  You know, I'm from Camden [New Jersey], you know, playing, you know.  I got confidence in my piano skills, but you don't want to make no mistakes.  You want to perform.  This is my first time.  Because if you play well, your name will get around.
Story_ID: 647141
Speaker 1: A question was raised during the break that I was thinking about before.  And that's like, what did you--going to New York [New York] from Camden [New Jersey], I mean where did you stay?  How did you, how did you--?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't--I couldn't afford--all I had enough money to get there.  I used to take the Trailway [Trailways National Bus System; Trailways Transportation System, Inc.], turnpike [New Jersey Turnpike], and I had just enough money.  I couldn't afford a cab so I'd catch the Trailways to 42nd Street in New York and I'd walk to the, to the studio, which was like on, I think on 53rd [Street], 52nd [Street].  It would be cold, but it didn't matter.  I had to get to where I had to go.  All I had was an address, and the name of the studio, and what time to be there.  But I wanted to stay over, I joined the, I joined the musicians' union in New York, Local 802 [American Federation of Musicians Local 802].  And--
Speaker 1: How much did that cost?
Speaker 2: Oh, I can't remember.
Speaker 1: But it was something, though.  It was something to pay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: For a working person to--
Speaker 2: Oh, definitely.  So I--in order for me to continue to play music dates and record recordings, I had to join the union, musicians' union, which I did.  And if I had to have a session that day and I had a chance to cash a check, the next day I'd stay over and I'd sleep in the train station.  During those days I found me a bench over in the corner, and I'd sleep there all night.  And nobody never bothered me, thank God for that.  And if I didn't have enough money, I'd go to the pawn shop.  I'd have a watch and get me fifteen or twenty dollars for it.  I'd pawn it and I'd get my money and come home.  I was like, I wanted to do what I wanted to do.  And the only way I wanted to, I had to do that--was I had to be around New York.  You know, that--I used to go to the local unions when I didn't have no sessions, just to be up there.  And the local union would have, sometimes they would have Latin day.  And the, and the local union, they had this club.  Like, and the union, it was a big, big, big, building.  And I'd sit in there and listen to them play, and I'd sit there all day.  Or I'd go to the movie, sit in the movies all day until the session--if I had an evening session.  Because I couldn't afford no hotel or nothing, so I'd go to, I'd go to, I went to so many movies on 42nd Street.  (Laughter) Every time I go up there now, I see the movie I used to sit in.  You know, I'd just have enough money to get a hot dog and a Coke [Coca-Cola], and that was it.  Everything was just pure desire just to do what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, it takes that.  Yeah, so you--this is a sacrifice, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, that's the only way I could see doing it.  First I got, when I got the opportunity to play on my first record date in New York, I did very well.  They kept calling me.  And the, and the company that I worked for in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], they recorded in New York.  Johnny [John Madara] and Dave [David White] used to take me to New York all the time with them, and I got a chance to meet the engineers.
Story_ID: 647142
Speaker 1: But in these early days did you--was there ever a time when, you know, you attempted to stop and say, "Well, I'll just, I'll just work in the hospital [Cooper University Hospital, Camden, New Jersey] the rest of my life" or--
Speaker 2: That's--
Speaker 1: Or, "I don't want to do this.  This is like too much to do"?  Or--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --felt discouraged (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I was doing day jobs, that's the way I felt.  Because all I did, you know, all I did was work in the kitchen in the hospitals, in the hospitals.  It got to a point where I said, "This is, this is not what I want to do."  And so I quit.  And some people didn't like it, but I had to dive in.  I had to, I had to do it.  But I kept jobs anyway.  But it was hard for me to keep jobs, because once--if New York [New York] called me, I'd go to New York.  I wouldn't go to work.  So I'd get fired because I didn't, you know, the guy, my boss would be wondering why I stayed out on Friday, was payday.  I had a session in New York.  I wasn't thinking about nothing else.  I'll hustle me up money to get to New York.  I wasn't thinking about washing no dishes in no kitchen.  I wasn't thinking about that, but that's what I had to do.  But I come back, you know, I'm fired.  So I get another job, you know.  It was like jobs, jobs, here and there.  Because if New York called me, that's where I'd be, on the turnpike [New Jersey Turnpike].  So eventually it got to a point after I got that job working for Johnny [John Madara] for fifty dollars a week, then I had a chance, you know, to concentrate on my writing and producing skills, you know.  I worked at fifty dollars a week, then I worked weekends.  The weekend gigs as a musician always helped me.  It was like a supplement.
Speaker 1: What could you make on the weekends in those days?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Twenty-five dollars in the club working on the weekends.  I can't sit still and talk.  It's--but it was money for me then.  It didn't matter.
Speaker 1: In perspective I guess, in those days a guy working at General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] or something would make maybe a hundred and, a hundred dollars a week, a hundred and twenty dollars a week in a factory--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in an auto plant.  That's what my dad made in the auto plant.  But, so seventy-five dollars a week is less, but it's still enough for one person to get along on in those days.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: I just wanted to put it in perspective for anybody watching--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --whenever they watch it.  They may be watching this three hundred years from now and not understand what that means.  But it was enough for you to--but it wasn't by no means any big money, but it was like enough to get by.
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, I had a little car then.  So, you know, I was doing sessions.  I got me a little car, you know, a little Ford.  So I had to have a job, you know, to keep, to get around, you know.  I didn't have no problem with working, per se.  But you know I had to make a living, you know.  But I wanted a career in music--that's what my main desire was.
Story_ID: 647143
Speaker 1: So let's, let's like move to when the band [Kenny Gamble and The Romeos] broke up and you and--
Speaker 2: Gamble.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Kenny Gamble, yeah, decided to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --partner up on these songs.  Had you--what songs had you written prior to getting together with Gamble?
Speaker 2: Well, I was, I got married young, in my early twenties, and I lived with my mother-in-law.  And I had a piano in there, and that's where I wrote my first Top 20 [sic. Top 40] record called 'Mixed Up, Shook Up Girl.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was, that was--oh, what year was that, '63 [1963], '64 [1964]?  I got to get you the date on that.  The group was from Camden [New Jersey], called Patty and The Emblems.  And that was my first as a, as a writer by myself.
Speaker 1: I think I remember that, I, you know.  I think I actually remember that.
Speaker 2: (Singing), "She's a mixed up, shook up girl."  That was like a Top 20 record.  That's when I first wrote my first hit.  So I said, "If I can write a song that went Top 20, I can write a number one."  Those words were like in my, in my mind.  I was like, that's the first song I ever heard on the, that I wrote that really did anything, was 'Mixed Up, Shook Up Girl.'
Story_ID: 647144
Speaker 1: Now what was the process like when you, when you and [HistoryMaker] Kenny Gamble got together to write songs?  What was your process?  I know one thing I've read about it is that you had an upright piano, and generally had the tape recorder on top of the piano.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And let it run the whole time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, so would you come up with a melody first?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or would you come up with a poem, a poem first, or what?
Speaker 2: Either way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Either way.  But basically what I did was--when we got that piano--and I think that Gamble said it made a difference.  When we got the piano it was in Gamble's office, the action wasn't really fast enough for me.  So what I did was, I went to the drugstore and I got about three boxes of thumb tacks, and I took the top off the piano and I put the thumbtacks behind every hammer on the keyboard.  When it hit that string it would bounce off, and that made the action fast.  And I loved it.  And it created a whole different sound.  And I used that pedal on the piano as a backbeat, to keep the time down.  And that's the way I rocked on that piano.  And those thumbtacks made a whole different sound to that piano.
Speaker 1: Now is this something that you thought of by yourself, or did you know somebody else who had done that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was something that I just--Gamble, he didn't know what I was doing when he walked in to the piano and saw the whole thing taken apart (laughter).  I took the top off and the front.  And I took, I had patience enough to do that.
Speaker 1: Did you tune the piano yourself?
Speaker 2: No, we had a piano tuner.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I put those thumbtacks behind the hammer of every--all those eighty eight keys.
Speaker 1: So when the hammer would strike the--
Speaker 2: It had a different sound to it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the wire the tack was striking first.
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Like a tap on a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --shoe.
Speaker 2: And that would bounce off real fast.  So that left hand action was really fast.  And it was just the way, it was just right.  You know, all those up tempo songs that me and Gamble wrote was, come from that piano, like 'Love Train,' you know, and all of them up tempo songs.
Story_ID: 647145
Speaker 1: I read the first big hit that you and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] had was the one by the Soul Searchers [sic.], 'Expressway'--
Speaker 2: Soul Survivors, 'Expressway to Your Heart' (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Soul Survivors, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Expressway to Your Heart'?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That was 1967.  Now, how long did you write before you got a number one hit?  I mean, a big hit?
Speaker 2: It didn't take me and Gamble long.  I remember the first time me and Gamble was, Gamble came over to my house in Camden [New Jersey], and we must have wrote about six or seven songs the first time we really sat down, just off the top of our head, just improvising I guess.  And it wasn't too long after that that I met a group called The Intruders.  This was like right after 'Expressway to Your Heart.'
Speaker 1: Now where were they from?
Speaker 2: 'Expressway,' we met through--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --through Jerry Blavat.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A disc jockey.  He introduced us to the Soul Survivors.
Speaker 1: The Soul Survivors were unique in those days because they were an integrated soul group.
Speaker 2: Yeah, two Italian guys, Charlie [Charlie Ingui] and Richie [Richie Ingui].  They're my boys.  And they were great.  And me and Gamble went to see them at a club in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] where Jerry Blavat told us they were performing, and they were like tearing the house up.  It was sort of like, it was during the time when Phil Spector was doing like The Righteous Brothers, during that era.  And the Soul Survivors were like two male singers, and they could--real rich voices.  And we wrote that song for them, and it was a big hit.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they had a lot of play on the Top 40 stations all over the country.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: 'American Bandstand.'
Speaker 2: I think it was the first time two black producers produced a white act.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, okay.  So they're--the Soul Survivors were Philadelphia guys?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And The Intruders, now were they from Philadelphia (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were great.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And I told, when I first met them I called Gamble and I said, "Man, I just met a great group. And I think their contract, I think they're out of their contract.  I think maybe we might want to get those guys."  And we got The Intruders and we started writing some great music for them.  And our first big hit was like, big national hit was 'Cowboys to Girls.'
Speaker 1: Right.  So you had local hits with them first?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We had a song called 'I'm Going to Be Strong' [sic. 'Gonna Be Strong'], which got good play locally, and 'Together,' a song called 'Together,' 'United' ['(We'll Be) United'].
Speaker 1: I--
Speaker 2: We got about maybe four or five regional, you know, spotty hits with them before we got that big national one.
Speaker 1: I remember 'United' from--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because Chicago [Illinois] used to play a lot of our old records (unclear) truth.
Speaker 1: I was living in Dayton [Ohio].  Now Dayton (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dayton, even in that area.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Dayton had a soul station, WDAO [WDAO Radio].
Speaker 2: You had to hear The Intruders, yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: A lot of music that--
Speaker 2: It got lot of R and B play.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, so The Intruders, right?   That was a big hit and--'Cowboys to Girls.'
Speaker 2: That sort of established me and Gamble as Gamble and Huff.  This was before Philly International [Philadelphia International Records, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  We had Gamble and Huff Productions [Gamble Huff Productions, Inc.].
Story_ID: 647146
Speaker 1: Now did you produce Archie Bell [Archie Bell and the Drells] during this time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did, we did the follow up to 'Tighten Up.'
Speaker 1: Okay.  'I Can't Stop Dancing'?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now 'Tighten Up,' was that something that he wrote himself?
Speaker 2: I think he did write that.  I think Archie was, he was in the [U.S. military] service.  He was in Vietnam when that record was number one here in America.  And he couldn't come home and do the tour or nothing, but he used to tell us stories about that.  And Archie was fun to work with.  So Jerry Wexler contacted us from Atlantic Records to come up to New York [New York] and talk about a follow up, because they didn't have any.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  Because they're famous for that one song, 'Tighten Up,' pretty much.  And this, this one I remember too, but the 'Tighten Up'--
Speaker 2: 'Tighten Up,' that's--
Speaker 1: Everybody thinks of them and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --everybody knows where they were from, because they would say, "I'm Archie Bell from Houston, Texas" (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Houston, yeah.
Speaker 1: "And this is how we--," you know.
Speaker 2: That's it, huge record.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: So we had a chance to get the follow up; and we did a few albums with them.
Story_ID: 647147
Speaker 1: Now during this period of time, this is like, this is '67 [1967], '68 [1968] period?
Speaker 2: Around about that time, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  You had a collaboration with [HistoryMaker] Jerry Butler, too.
Speaker 2: Which was wonderful.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: The first time--I used to see Jerry when he used to come to the Uptown Theater in Philadelphia [Philadelphia] when Georgie [Georgie Woods] used to have those great shows there.  And it was sort of similar to the Apollo Theater in New York [New York].  Uptown Theater, every major black entertainer came through the Uptown Theater.  And I used to be at all, every show, and that's where I used to see Jerry Butler.  So I knew of Jerry Butler, but when I got a chance to work with him, it was like a musical.  It was a magic carpet ride--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --with him.
Speaker 1: Jerry Butler at one time washed dishes, too.
Speaker 2: He did?
Speaker 1: He and Curtis Mayfield--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (laughter)?
Speaker 1: --washed dishes together--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --in Chicago [Illinois] at one time.  It's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: But that--so Jerry Butler, he's so polished, you know, like--
Speaker 2: He's, oh, how can I describe Jerry?  I mean, 'For Your Precious Love,' I mean his connection with The Impressions and Curtis.  So he started with--I think him and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] worked together writing the lyrics.  See, I on--I'm the melody.  You know, chord structure, music, that's me.  And I used to watch Kenny Gam- and Jerry Butler just--off the top of their head just--those lyrics just flowed out.  You know, 'Only the Strong Survive.'  We was doing Jerry so good that--we was writing so good for Jerry Butler that Elvis Presley covered one of our songs.  He did--Elvis Presley covered 'Only the Strong Survive' off of Jerry Butler's album, a great cover.  That's how--we was really writing good for Jerry.  That was a good era.
Speaker 1: Now this is, this song, 'Only the Strong Survive,' I don't know if it was the first one of its genre, but it typifies the kind of music that Gamble and Huff are known for.  I mean they're known for inspirational--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --inspirational secular music.  I mean we all have--we know about gospel, and it's supposed to inspire you and uplift you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: But in the secular music world, there aren't so many, say, a lot of broken hearted songs and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --blues songs, you know, disaster songs.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But your songs tend to, tend towards--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --uplifting or, you know, that kind of--
Speaker 2: Well, me and Gamble used to--you know, we talked.  One thing that we always did was we talked.  We always talked, me and Gamble.  And we talked about everything, really, you know, current events and all of that.  And Gamble's approach to songwriting was positive messages.  It's those kind of lyrics he was writing.  And of course, he was writing love songs, too, you know, dance too.  But we had to have some songs in there to inspire in different ways, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In 1970, you worked with Dusty Springfield.
Speaker 2: Which was a great experience working with Dusty, great talent (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now she was, she was from Britain.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you know much about her when she--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --started.
Speaker 2: I knew, I knew about Dusty Springfield before I got a chance to work with her.  And it was great.  I mean it was, it was exciting.  And we made some classic music with Dusty.  She--we did a song, 'A Brand New Me,' which we did with Jerry Butler, and she killed it.  She was--what a great experience working with Dusty.
Story_ID: 647148
Speaker 1: So during this period of time it seemed like there's so--how many--back to the songwriting process. I've read that in a day, you all would maybe write ten songs in a day.
Speaker 2: So- yeah, sometimes it was like that sometimes.  What we used to do is--okay, we're going to plan a writing session. Say, we're going to, going to plan a writing session for, say, Thursday.  So we'll compile a lot of titles, ideas, you know, put them on paper.  Then we'll, we both will bring them to the session and we'd just compare notes.  I had, I might have about maybe fifty titles, and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] the same thing.  And we'll pick, out of those fifty we'll pick which we think is interesting to write about and--
Speaker 1: So you picked them by--you choose the title first of all?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then you try to flesh it out?
Speaker 2: Then we just--I started playing it.  Sometime, sometimes, you know, sometimes I'd come in Gamble's office and I'd just start, just playing.  I could sit down, I could just play whatever comes to my head.  I'd just play it.  And Gamble might say, "Oh, that sounds good.  What is that?"  I'd say, "Oh, no, ain't nothing, really."  And the next you know, we're sitting down and we done put some meat to that music.  And, or we'd both sit down and I'd just start jamming, Gamble would just start free styling.  But at the same time we're doing that, the tape recorder is running, so everything is recorded.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you can always run back to whatever--if you miss something (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we'd get into a zone.  Just say--well, say we're in a writing session and we're going to write a song, and 'For the Love of Money' was on that list.  And we'll get into a jam, for the love of money, you know, and I'd come up with a bass line or whatever kind of groove I'm going to get into.  And Gamble would start free styling a song about for the love of money.  And the next thing you know, we're in the studio cutting it with The O'Jays.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's how we was rolling, you know.  The studio was right next to--after we bought that building--that at one time we weren't allowed to go in, on 309 Broad Street [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--the studio was right next to Gamble's office.  So, we'll rehearse and go get the musicians, and it was like this (snaps fingers).  It was like (snaps fingers) a process that just--from Gamble's office to the studio and then record the record.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was the process.
Speaker 1: Now another white artist you worked with was Laura Nyro.
Speaker 2: Laura Nyro.
Speaker 1: Nyro, okay.
Speaker 2: It was great.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Laura was, she was different.  And we also had Patti LaBelle and the Bluebelles doing the background, and that was a great, great album.  It's a classic album.  Working with Laura was, I learned a lot from her songwriting--
Speaker 1: This is 'Go- Gonna Take a Miracle' ['It's Gonna Take a Miracle'].
Speaker 2: --structure.  Yeah, it was great.
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-one [1971].
Story_ID: 647149
Speaker 1: I think everybody that knows about Gamble and Huff [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble and HistoryMaker Leon Huff] knows about, you know, thinks about The Delfonics and The O'Jays.  And, but Delfonics were one of the earlier groups along with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was mainly Tommie Bell [Thom Bell], though.
Speaker 1: Tommie Bell?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Tommie Bell was, he was writing some great music for them.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And we were, we--during that time, Tommie was doing The Delfonics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We was doing The Intruders.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  I'm getting them mixed up.
Speaker 2: And it was sort of like, sort of a rivalry in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], you know.  And Tommie wrote some great songs for them.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Philadelphia sound was--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  It was all incorporated, you know.  Because Tommie had offices in our building, and Tommie was on our team.
Story_ID: 647150
Speaker 1: I know one song that didn't, wasn't that positive a theme.  But it's not that bad considering what we have today, was 'Drowning in the Sea of Love.'
Speaker 2: Joe Simon.
Speaker 1: Joe Simon (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, that was great.  I loved working with Joe.  It was another different kind of experience.  Because I remember Joe Simon from 'The Choking Kind' ['The Chokin' Kind'], and I started recognizing that rich baritone voice.  So we was friendly with Julie and, Julie Rifkin, and they had a record label called Spring Records.  Every time me and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] used to go to New York [New York] and we, we'd visit them.  And they had Joe Simon, so we got an opportunity to record him.  And they sent him down to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and then we wrote 'Drowning in the Sea of Love' for him, was great.  I knew it was--it sounded so good.  'Cause he's such a great singer, so we had a chance to do--we had a couple of hits with him, gold album.
Story_ID: 647151
Speaker 1: When did you first meet The O'Jays?  Now they're from Cleveland [Ohio], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had got this heads up from a disc jockey, named Eddie O'Jay--I think that's where they got their name from--to come to, to come to Cleveland to see them in this club.  And me and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] flew to, flew to Cleveland, and that's when they had five members then.  And they really, really, really was tearing the house down.  The O'Jays, they always was good, you know.  So me and Gamble was impressed with their performance; and then, and eventually we signed them.
Story_ID: 647152
Speaker 1: When you work on a--I mean as a, as the person really wri- writing the music, I guess you're almost like somebody doing a score for a movie or something in some ways.  You have a song called 'Only the Strong Survive,' and the music kind of matches that, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that song, say, did the music come first or the lyrics?  Which?
Speaker 2: Together.  It was like a collaboration.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Me and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] would both sat down together.  It wasn't like we had it in music and he'd just take it.  No, we'd be in there together.  And it would all be coming at the same time, you know.  And Gamble would be free styling lyrics, and I'd be playing.  And we basically knew where each other was.  We was on the same page, we was in the same zone.  We was like--I knew exactly, Gamble knew exactly where I was going to go.  And we had our own show in that room.  Gamble was the singer and I was the piano player.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we was sounding--Gamble--I loved to hear Gamble sing.  That's another--was very unique about our collaboration, because Gamble could really make the song sound good, you know, I mean in the sense of what the singer should be singing.  The way, the way Gamble was in- interpreting it, and the way I'd be playing it, you know, is basically what you hear on the record.
Story_ID: 647153
Speaker 1: You also were--worked with Harold Melvin and the Blue Notes.  That's a group that--
Speaker 2: It was great.
Speaker 1: And you played a major role in the development of that group, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, Melvin had been around--
Speaker 2: See, but they always was good, though.  See, before, before we met--well, Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] grew up with Harold in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], in Philly, and that's how--but I was aware of the Blue Notes back in the '50s [1950s].  That's how far back the Blue Notes go with Harold, with Harold Melvin.  And then I got to work with them during the time Teddy Pendergrass era was starting to rise, because he was the drummer.  And I remember going to a club in Camden [New Jersey] called the Apollo [ph.], where the Blue Notes was performing at that weekend.  And the owner called me and told me to come check them out.  And I went there, I went to the club that weekend.  I think it was on a Sunday.  And Harold and the Blue--they had lines around the corner.  They didn't even have a record out, but they was just great performers.  And we signed them.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Which one of you discovered Teddy Pendergrass could sing?
Speaker 2: I was first one--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to see Teddy.  Because I called Gamble, I said, "Gamble, you should hear this big, this big dark one in the back sing.  You should hear him sing."  So I got an opportunity to hear him sing, you know.  We wrote a song called 'I Miss You,' by Harold Melvin and the Blue Notes.  And that was, and I was in there rehearsing them on that particular song, and I could hear Teddy.  I said, "Man, this guy can sing."
Speaker 1: He has a powerful, powerful voice.
Speaker 2: It just stood out.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was so rich.
Speaker 1: It's interesting, the drummers that sing.  You know, Jeffrey Osborne was a drummer and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Phil Collins and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --was a drummer.  I mean, I don't, you know--
Speaker 2: Teddy, that's where his, he started at.  And I think 'I Miss You' was the song that really brought us--his attention.
Speaker 1: You know, around the country most people thought he was Harold Melvin.
Speaker 2: I know.  We used to have a problem with that.  (Laughter) I always had a problem with that.  That's how the name Harold Melvin and the Blue Notes started out, because Harold couldn't take it, you know.  But that's, but Teddy was rising so.  You know, that voice just stuck out.  I mean--but I think Gamble was trying to get the group complete.  Because I remember Harold being the lead singer first.  He sang mostly all the songs.  But Gamble thought it needed something before we started, and he told Harold that he needed a sing- a singer that could sing up tempo songs.  Because me and Gamble would do an album full of ballads.  We had to have some, we had to have some music in that album where they could dance, you know, music to slow dance to or sit and listen to or get up and do a line dance or the bop, or whatever you wanted to do.  You had to have some dance music in there.  And Teddy was that kind of artist. So when he got Teddy in the group, that rounded it out.  And Teddy rocked them up tempo songs (makes sound), and that made that group great.  I used to love working with them.
Story_ID: 647154
Speaker 1: Harold Melvin and the Blue Notes.  So, so there was--I wondered if there was any tension in the Harold Melvin and the Blue Notes with Teddy Pender- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Harold [Harold Melvin] was kind of upset because they were throwing more attention to Teddy [Teddy Pendergrass].  I mean, come on.  But that's the way it was going.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they had been around so long, too.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then here's somebody new who becomes, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I guess a younger guy--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --who happens to--
Speaker 2: But it wasn't until Teddy stepped upfront on the microphone singing that the group went to another level.
Speaker 1: And the group had quite a few members too, as I recall seeing them on stage.  They were--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was--since Harold, since the '50s [1950s] that group evolved a lot.  And it ended up with Teddy and Sharon Paige when we got them.  That's, that was the group that sold all the records.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have a favorite song that you did for Harold Melvin and the Blue Notes?
Speaker 2: Oh, man (laughter).  I love all of them.  I mean come on, 'The Love I Lost.'  I mean, well, one of my favorite ballads by them was 'If You Don't Know Me By Now, You'll Never Know Me.'  I like their rendition.  But Simply Red's rendition, that's when we won the Grammy [Grammy Award for Best R&B Song].  But I love the way Teddy and the Blue Notes, the original version--I still listen to that, too.  That's my favorite ballad from them.  But the Blue Notes, oh, I can name them.  I mean, 'Wake Up Everybody.'  I mean I can't--no favorite one, I mean.  But 'If You Don't Know Me By Now,' we got the Grammy for that.
Story_ID: 647155
Speaker 1: This is around '73 [1973], you know, '73 [1973], '74 [1974] era?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I, I remember The O'Jays, the first album, I guess you all worked on, 'Back Stabbers' I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Then 'Ship Ahoy,' now I discussed this with [HistoryMaker] Kenny Gamble about five or six years ago.  That's the first time I think that one of the--a popular, you know, recording played on a radio had, by a black artist had something to do with slavery.  I can't even think of anything else.  And since, what--I think 'Can't Truss It' by Pub- Public Enemy is the only other song I know of like that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that dealt with slavery, you know.  And it seems strange that no other song ever dealt with that.  But 'Ship Ahoy,' that was an interesting album theme.  That was the name of the album and the title cut on it.  But it had a lot of hits on it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: Well, that's the way me and Gamble was thinking.  And it was that type of a climate in America during those days that we were writing, so that was an issue that Gamble and I thought was a great thing, something to write about.  It was history.  And the music was--I was in another--I don't know where my head was--where my mind--my head was.  Because I listened to that music, and it sounds just like that ship coming across that ocean.  And the way we produced it, you know, the music, it was, it was great.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It kind of reminds me of something that The Soul Stirrers or somebody would do, you know, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and the right group sang it, [HistoryMaker] Eddie Levert and Walt [Walter Williams], them O'Jays [The O'Jays].  I mean we painted the picture musically, and it was clear the way Gamble wrote them lyrics.  And it's one of my favorite cuts.
Speaker 1: Now what kind of--you said you liked to read.  I know Kenny Gamble does too.  So what kind of literature were you all reading in those days?  And what was informing your lyrics?
Speaker 2: Well, basically current events basically, you know, everything that's going on in the world.  You know, we'd write about the conditions, you know.  We wrote that song, 'Clean up the Ghetto' ['Let's Clean Up the Ghetto'].  I mean we was writing all that type of--that's where me and Gamble's minds was.  And, you know, all over the news, you know.  Gamble was more into religious books.  You know, he's in a philosophy type of--you know, Malcolm X.  Gamble reads everything about the religious--and that's the way his mind is.  So he'll come up with a concept like that, and I'll be right there musically too, with him, you know.  So we was basically on the same page.
Story_ID: 647156
Speaker 1: Now '73 [1973], that's when MFSB was (unclear).
Speaker 2: Our orchestra.
Speaker 1: And that stands for officially?
Speaker 2: Mother, Father, Sister, Brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was a great--and the way we came up with that concept because the whole orchestra was mixed.  It wasn't just one nationality.  We had a group of people that were different nationalities playing together, and that's where we came up with that concept.  And that orchestra was wonderful.  I mean it was--they played on all the hits.  In fact, we had a number one album with them.  We had a number one album with the orchestra when we were--at the time we did that 'Soul Train' theme for Don Cornelius, that we used the orchestra and The Three Degrees.  Because that whole collaboration was huge.  The orchestra was great.  See, Motown [Motown Records] had a rhythm section, The Funk Brothers.  We had an orchestra.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the sound of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] is known for the strings and the horns and the--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the vibe, the background.
Speaker 2: The whole works.  We incorporated every aspect of an orchestra in our music--flutes.  I mean our arrangers had that type of wide range of musical knowledge where they could write arrangements for every instrument that we, that we wanted.  We didn't care what it was.  French horn, whatever me and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] thought about that would be in that orchestration, they were capable of writing it.  Bobby Martin, he was, he was doing arrangements.  We had Tommie Bell [Thom Bell] was doing arrangements.  And some of the guys in our rhythm section was doing so many sessions that actually they taught themselves how to arrange.  Like Roland Chambers, our guitar player, became an arranger.  Lenny Pakula, our organ player, he played a B3 organ [Hammond B3] like Jimmy Smith (laughter).  He was great, you know, and he became an arranger.  So we had our own nucleus of talented people that was responsible for that combination of making them records.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So the process--I mean once you wrote a song you thought about what musical components--
Speaker 2: The orchestration.  You basically could hear it when I'm playing it, the way I'd be structuring the chords and the bass.  And you can actually--like Gamble says, you can hear the arrangements in the way I'm playing it.  So it wasn't easy, it wasn't hard for the arrangers.  And plus, me and Gamble would be there when the arrangers was write- doing the orchestration.  And we'd basically hum him the parts that we would want him to write, you know, the horn parts, the string parts.  We was there.
Story_ID: 647157
Speaker 1: Did you approach a project like, if you know you're writing for Harold Melvin and the Blue Notes or The O'Jays, would you write songs specifically for that project?  Or would you have songs that you would say, "I'll give this one to the--?"
Speaker 2: No, we wrote specifically for a group (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: If we had Lou Rawls coming in town--we have a, we had blackboard in our studio.  And if we got the Lou Rawls coming in, I would put Lou Rawls' name on the blackboard and then I'd make the writers aware that Lou would be in in a couple weeks.  So you had the songs ready.  By the time Lou Rawls would get in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], we'll have about a hundred songs for him to listen to, you know, from our staff of writers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's how basically the system worked.  Or whoever the artist was, if The O'Jays was due in, they'd go in and see their name and who's coming in town.  And that's the way--and it worked so good.  By the time all those artists came to Philadelphia, they had the song sitting there waiting for them to listen to.
Speaker 1: And say I come in.  I'm Lou Rawls.  And then how do I hear the mus- well, was it, is it tape recorded, or live musicians playing?  Or how--
Speaker 2: Well, basically when--okay, you come in.  You come in today, we'll send you to Dexter Wansel's room.  Dexter might have maybe ten, fifteen songs you'd listen to.  Then we might send you down in- into Tommie Bell's [Thom Bell] office, him and Linda Creed.  Each room in our, up on our third floor had writers in it.  We might send you to McFadden and Whitehead's [Gene McFadden and John Whitehead] office, and they'd have some songs for Lou.  So we'll spin Lou around and dazzle him with all these songs.
Speaker 1: So these are recorded--are they recorded for him to listen to?  Or that's where they're presented?
Speaker 2: It's like, you know, you want to--what song?  What album?  It's ten songs on an album?  You know, but you might listen to fifty, you know, just break the ten best.  About fifty, that's how we would do it.  And whoever would write the best ones would get on that album.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you would listen to--the day you come in the, and, and your time to record, you're going to listen to a lot of songs before that day is over.
Story_ID: 647158
Speaker 1: I didn't ask you about how you formed Philadelphia International Records [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and the business, I guess, aspect of that.  So how did that happen?  And how was it done?
Speaker 2: It wasn't really planned.  I think it all came together.  It was destiny, because me and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] didn't sit down and plan everything out.  We just didn't do that.  It was all trial and error.  Because we started--with Gamble and Huff Productions [Gamble Huff Productions, Inc.], we was doing, we was doing some work for all the majors then, before Philly International.  Gamble and Huff Productions was very active, because we was doing Wilson Pickett for Atlantic Records, Dusty [Dusty Springfield] for Atlantic Records, Archie [Archie Bell] for Atlantic Records, [HistoryMaker] Jerry Butler for Mercury Records, and we was doing Joe Simon for Spring [Spring Records].  So we was doing a lot of work for other record companies then.  So we decided we was getting hits for these other record companies, why not form our own record company?
Speaker 1: Now this is 1971, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When you formed Philadelphia International Records.
Speaker 2: And we started Gamble Records; that's with The Intruders.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's when we had that big hit, 'Cowboys to Girls.'
Speaker 1: So that was a Gamble Record first?
Speaker 2: First.
Speaker 1: And then--I know you mentioned that earlier.  That was about 1967 or so.  Then in '71 [1971] when you formed Philadelphia International you'd already collaborated with a number of people, you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So our name got around you know.  We was very active on the, on the national charts.  And I think that activity brought the attention to Clive Davis, which he was president of Columbia at that time.  And after we decided we wanted a stronger distribution outlet--see, we was doing independently at first, and we decided to get some more powerful distribution unit.  And who was more powerful then was Columbia Records.  And we was just fortunate enough to be introduced to Clive Davis, and he signed us to a label deal, Columbia Records.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is in '71 [1971]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that's how Philadelphia International Records starts.  And you're head- you're headquartered in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  And this is in the building that you--
Speaker 2: 309 South Broad Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We started out at 250 Broad Street, 250 South Broad Street, when we was up on the sixth floor.  That was over the top of the Shubert building [Sam S. Shubert Theatre; Merriam Theater, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], until we outgrew that place.  And then that's when we had the opportunity to meet Allen Klein, who was managing the Rolling Stones then.  He owned that building, and he sold it to me and Gamble (unclear).  Because we started with that one office on the sixth floor, then we ended up with the whole floor.  Then it started to grow, so we started, we was making too much noise and we had to get out.  And that building was on the market at the same time.  Because we had nowhere to go, and it was right on time.  And Allen Klein sold us the building.  Cameo-Parkway [Cameo-Parkway Records, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was there.  They had, the studio was already there.  It was, it was a perfect setup.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So that is, you know, right on time.  Did you have to do any major re- renovations or anything?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We, they had two studios.  They had Studio A, Studio B.  We turned Studio A, which was the bigger one, into offices.  We kept Studio B, that's where they cut 'The Twist' at, because that was a great rhythm room.  So we kept the smaller studio and that's where we--Joe Tarsia [Joseph Tarsia] which was chief engineer, that's where we started recording at.  But it was a perfect structure, you know, for a record company, because it was a record company.
Story_ID: 647159
Speaker 1: You mentioned working with Wilson Pi- Pickett.  I didn't ask you about him, but I heard he was, he could be kind of difficult (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Wilson, oh, boy.  Wilson was something.  But he could sing.  I mean Wilson could sing, but he was a different kind of guy.  Nobody screamed like Wilson, you know.  And we came with that 'Don't Let the Green Grass Fool You,' with Wilson Pickett.  And we had a lot of fun with Wilson, you know.  But Wilson just wanted to--kept singing it over and over again.  I said, "No, Wilson, that's a good take.  That's a great take."  "No, I want to do it again.  No, no."  You know, but it was great.  We got two big hits out of Wilson, cut a really good album with Wilson Pickett.  But it was a good, a great experience.  I never thought I'd be in the studio with Wilson Pickett, you know.  I mean we and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] were producers, music people.  Like we could go from Nancy, we could go to [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson, which we did a great album on Nancy--and Wilson Pickett, two different kind of artists altogether.  So our wi- our range of music production was so wide.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they really are.  I mean, so many people we haven't even mentioned yet.
Story_ID: 647160
Speaker 1: In '76 [1976], you actually worked with The Jacksons, too, right?
Speaker 2: Wonderful experience meeting Michael, yeah.  Meeting that whole family was real- never forget.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: But you know we got, you know, we got that opportunity through Ron Alexenburg, who was vice president, Epic Records.  I think he was pre- president of Epic Records then.  And they called us to--we were thrilled, you know, when they wanted to work with me and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble].  I remember Michael coming to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and it was amazing.  It was an amazing journey with him, working with him in the studio during that time.  You know, when they, when they were with Motown [Motown Records] they were like kids, so they was only allowed to stay up to a certain time.  But when they came to Philadelphia they started working all night, because me and Gamble had a whole different work ethic.  You know, we didn't, we didn't go by no time.  You know, we worked until we got tired.  So when we had their first session, I think we were rehearsing, and Joe [Joe Jackson] came into the studio and stopped it at ten o'clock.  So I looked at Gamble and I said, "Ten o'clock, sometimes we're just getting started."  So when they came to Philadelphia we changed up their whole work ethic.  And they loved working.  We worked until three or four o'clock in the morning.  And that's when Michael, I seen Michael's growing experience in the studio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us.  Well, what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, Michael was, I mean Michael was there in every, every aspect of the record, the rehearsals.  He'd be in there when me and Gamble cutting the tracks.  He was there until it was over.  And I used to, when I watched Michael put his voice on, it was the first time Michael--well, what me and Gamble used to do, we stacked the voices.  That was the first time Michael did that.  In fact, he talked about it in his book.  And--
Speaker 1: What do you mean by that, stack the voices?
Speaker 2: You know, you sing harmony to yourself, do all the parts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And sometimes you could, you could stack your voice, or you could do--get a stronger sound--overdub yourself over the top of your voice or harmonize with yourself.  We used to do that with Teddy [Teddy Pendergrass].  And it worked.  Michael was very, very, very, particular about what he wanted to sound like.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that became, you know, more clear to people after he passed in some ways.  I don't think people realized how--
Speaker 2: Michael, yeah he was--
Speaker 1: --much attention--I mean outside of the music business--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't the general public realized how much attention he paid to every album he made, basically.
Speaker 2: Michael wasn't no joke, you know.  Whatever he looked like on the outside was a whole different story.  But Michael was a talented singer, entertainer--you listen to Michael at nine years old sing 'I Saw Mommy Kissing Santa Claus.'  Listen to him sing that.  Nine years old.  I mean his voice was so clear, right on tune, perfect pitch.  I mean that young, singing that.  I mean, come on.  I mean when he auditioned for Motown, what did he sing?  'I Got the Feelin',' James Brown.  Young like that, dancing like that.  Young Michael was destined for stardom then.  Even with the group, you know, and as a solo artist he just, he just went through the--I mean Michael just--too much you can say about Michael.  He could do it all.
Speaker 1: What about the other Jacksons?  Were they--
Speaker 2: Oh, they were great, all the brothers.  I got along with them great.  Randy [Randy Jackson], Marlon [Marlon Jackson], all of them.  Me and Gamble used to go to their house when we'd go to California and have dinner.  Katherine [Katherine Jackson] cooked me and Gamble dinner.  I mean we spent the whole day at the compound.  I mean we spent a lot of time with the Jackson family when we were recording them, and I got to know them good.
Speaker 1: Did you have any idea--Michael Jackson himself like seemed--I mean some of his behavior seemed strange to people.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was mysterious.  Was there anything mysterious or strange about him when you were around him?
Speaker 2: No, I had a ball with Michael.  I didn't see none of that.  I saw Michael before the transition, but to me Michael was the same person.  It's just his physical--but in the studio, on the stage, that's Michael.  Moonwalk--I see all the dances today.  That's Michael.  I see it, Michael doing it all.  Look at the dances, you know, you'd see the videos.  You see the way they dance.  That's Michael Jackson.
Story_ID: 647161
Speaker 1: Yeah I'm trying to think of who we haven't mentioned that's--but the themes I guess as we get towards, towards the--well, you produced for Patti LaBelle too right, in the early--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did a couple of albums on them.  But Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] wrote the big hit she had, 'If Only You Knew.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For that International Records [Philadelphia International Records, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  That was a big record for Patti.  I think that was her first number one record as a solo artist.  But Patti was great to work with, a lot of fun, you know.  And she was our girl, still is.
Story_ID: 647162
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite group of all the, all the ones we've me- we've mentioned?
Speaker 2: A favorite group?  I have to start with the group I started out on, The Intruders.  I used to love Little Sonny [Sam "Little Sonny" Brown].  Phil Terry Bird [Eugene "Bird" Daughtry], Big Sonny [Robert "Big Sonny" Edwards], loved them.  You know, my first, they was my first, you know.  I had a ball working--I loved--used to love to rehearse them.  I used to love to watch them on stage.  I watched them develop.  So I say The Intruders.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, the gentleman we interviewed yesterday, when he found out we were going to interview you, he said, "They produced The Intruders."  And he was, that's what he mentioned.  That's who he meant.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He mentioned them.
Speaker 2: They were so popular.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Especially Little Sonny.  And they were just a great, great, group.  They knew harmony, you know.  It wa- wasn't hard rehearsing them.  I mean it was really easy.  We just had a ball.  And 'Cowboys to Girls,' you know, what can I say about 'Cowboys to Girls'?
Story_ID: 647163
Speaker 1: Now of all your many hits, is there a favorite that you have?
Speaker 2: You know, every time they used to ask me and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] that, we used to name a different one every time.  But me and Gamble decided to say, "Well, you know, it's between 'Love Train' and 'Back Stabbers.'"
Speaker 1: Okay.  Two different things (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).  But I remember cutting them tracks, and I remember listening to the playback.  It was such a groove.  Everybody in that control room was jamming, especially 'Love Train,' you know.  I mean we had a rocket.  And it was, you know, you know, the thrill of it all was, you know, after you record the tracks, and all the musicians are in the control room and we're listening to the playback, it's exciting.  I mean I could tell right then before the record even had come out that it had a great feel to it.
Speaker 1: Can you always tell when something is going to be a hit?  Have you been disappointed (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not always, no.  You know, not always.  Because I didn't really didn't like 'Me and Mrs. Jones.'  You know, that grew on me.  You know, when Gamble had the idea, you know.  He came up with some chords, you know, that I--he showed me the chords, you know, and I like put my thing to it, you know.  And of course Billy Paul is such a unique artist.  I mean, the song fit him so good.  But I just couldn't, of course it was different, that's why.  Because I think that 'Me and Mrs. Jones' track--in fact, Billy's, Billy productions is so different than, say Teddy Pendergrass, and they're both male solo artists.  And Billy was more like a jazz orientated artist.  And that 'Me and Mrs. Jones' was a song that grew on me to be one of my favorites.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that is, it is a different kind of--I tend to think after talking to you that you like up tempo better.  You like up tempo rhythmically?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I like to jam, you know.  You know, it's like, you know, I mean I like ballads too, you know.  I play a lot of ballads, especially with The O'Jays, you know, 'Forever Mine' and fifty fifty love ['When Somebody Loves You Back'], Teddy, you know, 'Turn Out the Lights' [sic. 'Turn Off the Lights'] and all that.  But the up tempo ones, I be jamming.  I like to jam.  I did a record called 'I Ain't Jivin', I'm Jammin'.'  You know, I did, I used, I do instrumental music now too.  I do albums all myself, just a keyboard player.  And I did a song called 'I Ain't Jivin', I'm Ja- Jammin'' which they do a popular dance to, called the bop.  And they still pack the dance floors today, and I cut that song in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: All right.  That's, you know, they call it different--the bop is--I know they call it ballroom dancing in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They have different names for it.
Speaker 2: R. Kelly--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --calls it stepping.
Speaker 1: Right, stepping.
Speaker 2: In Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Chicago calls it stepping, right.
Speaker 2: But the bop is the, is the dance in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you know, around this Delaware Valley area.  And a lot of other places the bop is a big dance, I mean.  You know, but that song, 'I Ain't Jivin', I'm Jammin',' that's my signature song.
Speaker 1: And that's what they call it in Ohio too, the bop.
Speaker 2: The bop?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they got, they got--there's a lot of bop dances across the country.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's, that song took a life of its own, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a culture of its own now, too.  People get together--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and go to the--
Speaker 2: They do it now.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's huge.
Speaker 1: Yeah, hundreds of people show up--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to these dances every weekend.
Speaker 2: That bop dance.  I like to dance.  My wife [Regina Bryant Huff] dance.  In fact that's where I met her, in that dance club.  And they was bopping to my music.  And it was, you know, great.
Story_ID: 647164
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now the heyday of your collaboration with [HistoryMaker] Kenny Gamble just kind of--I guess went to the, about the mid-'80s [1980s] I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The real heyday of it.  But I mean the music is--
Speaker 2: Evolving.
Speaker 1: --constantly regenerating--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, over and over again.  I was telling you when I came in that [HistoryMaker] Herb Kent, the Cool Gent, in Chicago [Illinois], one of the WDAO--I mean WVON guys [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois], plays, you know, every Sunday afternoon you hear like a lot of your songs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, they're still on?  Really?  Yeah
Speaker 1: --on the drive, you know, as people are driving home from church or driving home from the pancake house or whatever, they're listening to, you know, a lot of these positive messages and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the music that you and Kenny Gamble produced.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you know, I hear that music today.
Speaker 1: You know, and songs like 'Family Reunion' and, you know, 'I'll Always Love My Mama' and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That was a great one.
Speaker 1: Those, you know, people--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --really relate to those.
Speaker 2: See, now that track I knew--well, I felt was great when I, when we were in there producing that.  Because me, McFadden and Whitehead [Gene McFadden and John Whitehead] and Gamble wrote it.  But Gamble and Huff [HistoryMaker Leon Huff] produced it.  And if you listen to the track, I mean (makes sound), we didn't want to stop playing.  So Joe [Joseph Tarsia] kept the tape going.  That's how that long cut came into play.  Because the musicians got into such a groove that we were just, we didn't want to stop playing.  So Joe kept the tape running.  So that's the same thing that happened on 'Wake Up Everybody,' the long cut.  Because we were jamming so hard that Joe just kept the tape running, so we just used it.  You know, because at the end of that, Teddy [Teddy Pendergrass] gets into like a talk thing at the end.  And, you know, allowed him to do that because the track was so long.
Story_ID: 647165
Speaker 1: Now one of the tragedies that occurred I guess in the, in the group of artists that you worked with was the accident that befell Teddy Pen- Pendergrass [Teddy Pendergrass].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And we were talking during the break and you're saying you don't really get involved in people's personal lives that've worked for you.  And, so you probably don't know any more about it.
Speaker 2: Well, basically I know Teddy, Teddy had all the fast cars he'd drive.  I don't know if Teddy could drive that good or not, but he had all the fast cars.  So Teddy had accidents, he had accidents before, you know.  But this was one of the ones that was the tragic one.  I was in Jamaica when that accident--me and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] was in Jamaica writing and preparing for Teddy's album when we heard, come across the news.  And of course, I mean me and Gamble was shocked.  I mean, at the same time but I was, but I knew Teddy had a reckless side about him.  But I was saddened by that.  I think Gamble flew back, and I think I came back a couple days later.  But it was a shock to me and Gamble, and it, and it sort of was a--changed directions.  Because, you know, Teddy was our main source during that time, Philly International [Philadelphia International Records, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  So after that accident, everything changed.
Story_ID: 647166
Speaker 1: When you look back on--I mean by the mid-'80s [1980s], how many gold and platinum albums had you accumulated, you know?
Speaker 2: Over, over a hundred and fifty gold, platinum albums.  And, you know, my wife wouldn't let me put them all up (laughter).  So, you know, we got quite a few Grammys [Grammy Award], you know, Rock and Roll of Fame [Cleveland, Ohio], and Dance Music--I remember going into the Dance Music Hall of Fame with [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones and Nile Rodgers.  I remember going to New York [New York] and receiving that award.  But that was another highlight of my early career, when I was going to New York.  During that same time I was working with Madara-White [Madara-White Productions], I was going to New York, and Madara-White was producing artists called Lesley Gore.  She had a song called 'It's My Party,' and it was produced by Quincy Jones.  And that's when I first met Quincy.  I think I was like nineteen, twenty.  And Johnny [John Madara] took me to Mercury Records, and I said, Johnny said, "Come on, I want you to meet somebody."  And Quincy was the producer of the artist, Lesley Gore.  And Quincy came in the room, and we've been friends ever since.  Quincy used to send me Christmas cards every--I mean we're really dear friends.  I met Quincy, hugged me and (makes sound) it was great.
Speaker 1: So would you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I got a chance to play on a Quincy Jones session.
Speaker 1: Would you consider him like a mentor, you know, (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Quincy?  Yeah, definitely.  I mean, Quincy--I mean, every time I used to go to California I used to visit him, and we used to talk.  Quincy used to talk about everything.  I think Quincy was the first person who told me about fiber optics, the first pers- person I ever heard say that it was coming.  And here it is, you know.  Quincy was way ahead of the curve, and I used to love to sit and listen to him talk.  And I used to take my family, you know, to Quincy's house for dinner or lunch.  He's definitely a mentor, Quincy is.  I remember he'd send me books.  He sent me a book I'll never forget called 'The Road Less Traveled' ['The Road Less Traveled: A New Psychology of Love, Traditional Values and Spiritual Growth,' M. Scott Peck]; and that's the kind of relationship I have with Quincy, still do.
Story_ID: 647167
Speaker 1: I know when you first got involved in business--I mean really fou- founded the or- the Philadelphia International Records [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Clive Davis was important I guess in that regard.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Clive Davis was, he had, he had that type of vision.  And during that time Columbia Records wasn't really into the R and B business, and they wanted to get into the R and B business.  Because during that time, FM was coming into play, the albums.  And the whole thing was starting to change--mono, stereo, the whole thing was changing.  And Columbia wanted, wanted to get, they wanted to get into that black market, because that black music was starting to rise then.  And they, the only artists they had over there at that time was Johnny Mathis.  They had Sly Stone, that's about the only ones.  But me and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] was--had the bigger piece, and we--and Clive Davis seen that, that we could be a big contribution to what they were after.  And that was after the black market, the music, the R and B business, and that's when they made the deal with me and Gamble.  Because we had a great relationship with the disc jockeys.  We had our, we had our own--what you called--we had our own little system.  We was well connected, got our records played, and Columbia wanted that kind of relationship.  And we were fortunate enough to do that, you know, of course, with hit records.  You know, they made the label deal.  They gave us an extra amount of dollars to cut X amount of albums every year, and we came out the box smoking.  I mean that first six, seven months--I think Clive Davis said in his book ['The Soundtrack of My Life'], he said, "Gamble and Huff [HistoryMaker Leon Huff] went on a creative rampage after they started that Philadelphia International Records."  It just, it just, that rocket took off.  I mean we just, I mean we came out with 'Back Sta-' we must have had five or six hits right after--back to back that first couple years.  And it just grew, just grew.  So thanks to Clive Davis, we had, was had that opportunity.  And it gave us autonomy, which meant that we'd pick our own singles.  We didn't have to send the records to no A and R [artists and repertoire] department to get approval, none of that, because Gam- me and Gamble hated that.  Nobody could critique our records but us.  So we had that opportunity to run our own record company through Columbia; and it worked like a charm, fifteen years.
Story_ID: 647168
Speaker 1: There's hundreds of hits and, but was there ever a time--I'm tempted to ask this question.  Was there ever a time when something just didn't work?  You thought it was good and it just--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, sure.
Speaker 1: Peo- people didn't like it for some reason (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, plenty of that, you know, plenty failures.  You got to fail to be successful.  So me and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] went through all of that, bankruptcies, all that, you know, turning down our music.  We went, we went through all of that, you know, but that only makes you stronger, because me and Gamble really believed in what we were doing, you know.  We take records to an A and R [artists and repertoire] guy, you know, and he going to tell us that something's wrong with it, and me and Gamble couldn't see that.  And he ain't never wrote a hit in his life, and he's going to tell me and Gamble that he don't like the way the horns sound.  And me and Gamble thought that was a joke, so we never went through A and R people.  We had our own, we made our own decisions, which made it great.
Story_ID: 647169
Speaker 1: Now in the late '80s [1980s], early '90s [1990s], rap starts, you know, becoming super popular.  How did that affect your music?  Do you think that that really affected what you all were doing or?
Speaker 2: Well, after, after--I call it the live musician era.  Things were starting to change, you know.  Of course, the technology was starting to change.  You know, they were starting to use machines rather than the human.  So all that then changed.  And the rap era, that actually helped us, because they sampled our catalog like crazy.  So that rap era really kept our catalog current, because all of them sampled it, from Jay Z to Kanye West.  I mean all your top rappers sampled our catalog.  You know, 50 Cent, I mean, their biggest hits.  So it really helped us really.
Speaker 1: Well, give me an example of something they sampled that--
Speaker 2: Well, the songs are--'Stronger.'  I think that was one of Kanye West's biggest ones, one of his earliest biggest ones.  When he first came he sampled that record.  He went in our catalog, the must have dug really deep to get that song.  The song was 'Coca' [sic. 'Cola Bottle Baby']--let me see the name of that song.  I forgot about it, really.  See, they'll get them catalogs and they'll dig in them catalogs and help find something to sample, and it might be a song that was written years ago.  That's what's happening with me and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] now.  You know, we forget about the song--forgot about it.  But it's in the catalog, and one of the guys would sample it and then the copywriters--took on another life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So do like BMI [Broadcast Music Inc.] and ASCAP [The American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers] or something, you know, like check that kind of stuff out and make sure that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, BMI.  In fact, me and Gamble's being honored in June, BMI.  They're coming to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Del Bryant, they're going to give us an award at the Sigma Sound Studios [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] where we used to record at.  Well, it's new now, but that's going to be the place.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that, the rappers keep sampling (laughter).
Story_ID: 647170
Speaker 1: So what, what, what do you do nowadays in terms of--are you still playing and still, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I still play.  I do, I do instrumental music; and me and Gamble, we just signed with the William Morris, William Morris Agency [William Morris Endeavor] now.  We're writing a book now.  We're like well into the book now, so, and there's talk about our musical.  So those things are, you know, on the table.  And we keep up with our licensing, that's what we do now--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: I know years ago, you know, they say that 'Dreamgirls' and 'The Five Heartbeats,' a lot of these movies are made about the different dramas in the music business.  There's always a lot of drama.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: People--guys leaving the group and, you know, and, you know, gangsters and drugs and all this kind of stuff.  When you--would the story of you and [HistoryMaker] Kenny Gamble make a popular movie, you know, with the full blown content?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I would think so.  But it wasn't, we wasn't involved with no gangsters (laughter), you know.  Drugs was around, you know, but that wasn't me and Gamble's game.  I mean, no, we was very serious about our careers, and we weren't going to get trapped in no drugs, you know.  That was, but it was around.  I mean, it was an escape, you know, and that was up to the individual what he wanted to do.  But me and Gamble was pretty well focused on being successful in our music careers.  Now we didn't really, we really didn't get--we had drama.  There's no success without drama.  You got to have drama, you know.  Motown [Motown Records] had plenty of drama, you know, but that don't stop the music.  You know, that's all growth, you know.  Egos get, you know, trying to coexist, you know.  Artists are egotistical people.  You know, [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones has a sign on his--before you go into a Quincy session, you know, "Check your ego at the door" (laughter).  Don't bring that foolishness in the studio, because that's a whole different world.  But that's basically how me and Gamble controlled our sessions too, you know.  Once you came into that studio with Gamble and Huff [HistoryMaker Leon Huff], it was all business.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  With so many artists together, you'd think there'd be a lot of ego--
Speaker 2: Oh, it is.
Speaker 1: --in a recording session.
Speaker 2: You got to be somewhat of a psychiatrist, you know.  Me and Gamble dealt with it all--the ups and downs, still going through it, you know.  It's--
Speaker 1: Do you have any stories that you can tell without necessarily mentioning the person?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a writer pull a gun on me because he couldn't figure out how come he couldn't write, he didn't write no hits.  I mean, he pulled a gun on me.  I mean I was on the way to the studio, and I mean this guy must have been distraught or something.  Had a gun on me.  I mean it could have went either way, you know.  Thank God for Richard Barrett, who calmed him down.  You know, but I couldn't understand.  He was crying and shaking.  I mean, "How come I can't get no hits?"  So I said, "What you--write them, write them."  But I don't know what he was on.  Maybe he was on something.  I don't know, you know.  But that was like a scary moment for me, because I just didn't know which way it was going to go.  I froze, I didn't do nothing.  It's just that Richard Barrett, he was the manager of The Three Degrees, and he just happened to come up in the building.  And he talked that gun out of his hand.  I went home, I was real shook.  Because I didn't know which way it--that gun was loaded, and I didn't know, you know, I didn't do anything.  You know, I didn't pull a John Wayne, you know, try to walk, talk it out.  No.  But, you know, drama, you know.  But that don't stop the music.  You rise above all that.  Nothing--me and Gamble's philosophy was nothing interferes with that, with that, making that music.  You got a problem, you work it out.  But we got a session going on.
Story_ID: 647171
Speaker 1: Now you've been married for, since--?
Speaker 2: I got married young.  This is my third marriage and best.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and the five children, they're all grown now.  I have a son, he's trying to find his way in the music business as a beat maker.  Good, he's good at it.  He's got to keep at it.  And my daughters, they're all grown.  I got grandkids.  And my third wife, Regina [Regina Bryant Huff], is the best thing that ever happened to me.  Because my first and second marriages was all growing--growth periods to me.  And--
Speaker 1: Is it hard to maintain a marriage with that kind of intense creativity--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) and the work that you were describing?
Speaker 2: I think so.  Because me and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] spent so much time together during those days.  I mean, we didn't care.  We wrote every day and we produced them every day.  It didn't matter, you know.  But the wives sometimes couldn't understand that, you know.  The time we spent in the studio was, that studio was like twenty-four, seven.  You know, you're supposed to be home for dinner at six o'clock, you tell your wife you're going to be home at six o'clock.  You ain't going to be there, you know, because me and Gamble be in there writing.  Because our minds are free, we ain't thinking about that.  So when I come home I want to hear the music, you know, and that, and that happens all the time.  So eventually you grow apart.  And unfortunately you got the children, you know, but I got a good relationship, you know.  So it's unfortunate but that's the way it happens.  Gamble went through the same thing, "You spend more time with him than you do with me" (laughter).  But look what we're doing.  So it wasn't easy, it was, you know, a lot of, lot of emotions.  That's how we wrote our song, we wrote a lot of them songs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So real life in forms of music on a--
Speaker 2: We wrote our story.  'I Don't Love You Anymore' to 'Together' to 'If You Don't Know Me By Now, You'll Never Know Me' ['If You Don't Know Me By Now'], come on.  'The Love I Lost,' 'Love TKO' (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, those are all, you know--
Speaker 2: Like a soundtrack to your life.
Speaker 1: Yeah, to a lot of people's lives apparently.
Story_ID: 647172
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: If I'd do it again?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No.  I'd do it the same way, drama and all, especially if I'm going to end--turn out like I am now.  I'm with a wonderful woman [Regina Bryant Huff] now, you know.  I've done been through hell and back with relationships, but this is different.  And it couldn't have happened at a better time for me, because now my mind is in a frame where me and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] want to write for musicals.  If we get an opportunity for that Philly sound like a Broadway, we're going to write some new music for it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seems like something that should be done.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Motown [Motown Records] is going to do it.  The musical 'Motown' ['Motown: The Musical,' Berry Gordy] is going to be great.  And the Philly, Philly music is going to go to Broadway one day.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] gets, I think gets shortchanged sometimes as a--it's really a music center.  I mean (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, it is (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, the people from the jazz musicians to the Philly sound and--
Speaker 2: Opera, Mario Lanza.  Come on.  I mean, Mar- Marian Anderson--I mean from Corey Taylor [ph.] to--I mean--
Speaker 1: Art Tatum, you know.  And people--
Speaker 2: Unbelievable history, Philadelphia.  That's where I started hanging out.  Once I--Camden [New Jersey] got a little small for me, like after, like when I started, met Gamble, that's when I started spending a lot in Phila- I didn't hang out in Camden anymore, because Philadelphia was the place.  It had all the jazz clubs and all the studios.  So that was my place then.  That's why people always thought I was from Philly, because I was there a lot.
Story_ID: 647173
Speaker 1: Now are there any young artists now that you ad- you really admire that are coming along?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Me and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble], we always think about that.  I'd have to think hard about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because it's so different now, you know.  You know, today they write songs to beats.  That's not the way me and Gamble work, you know.  We got to rehearse you.  We got to re- we got to write the song and we got to rehearse you.  We just can't go in the studio, get a beat, and put your voice on it.
Story_ID: 647174
Speaker 1: What music do you listen to at home when you're just, when you want to listen to some mu- some music?
Speaker 2: I listen to jazz, love jazz.  I got a huge jazz collection.  Bruce Lundvall gave me the whole Blue Note catalog [Blue Note Records], and I got all that music.  And I listen to our music, Philly sound music and some of today's stuff, some of it.  But I'm into, I listen to more--from the '70s [1970s] on back.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The '70s [1970s] going backward in time?
Speaker 2: I loved, I loved Count Basie.  I got a lot of his albums.  I got a lot of Quincy's [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] albums.  I got, I got all the jazz.  I got the Riverside [Riverside Records] catalog that Quincy gave me, the Blue Note.  I got all of Miles Davis.  So I listen to a wide range of music.
Story_ID: 647175
Speaker 1: Now when you look back again at your career to this point, now what would you consider to be your professional legacy at this point?
Speaker 2: Music, period.  That's my legacy.
Speaker 1: Well, that's enough I think.
Speaker 2: That was first.  Like what Duke Ellington said, "Music is your [sic.] mistress."
Speaker 1: Now you said earlier too, when you described yourself, you described yourself as a humanitarian.  So what aspect--I mean are you involved in--
Speaker 2: Scholarships, education.  You know, me and my wife [Regina Bryant Huff], you know, we contribute a lot.  But I don't look for publicity.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, we do a lot in, around the Camden [New Jersey] area, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  Me and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] is involved in a lot of, you know, projects there.  But Gamble's more deeper into it than I.  I stay close to the music.  But I basically understand that Gamble's living what he wrote about, you know, when he invested all the real estate, the houses.  It was a great idea to replenish the area where he thought it needed that--areas.  But Gamble always talked about it, so I knew that's what he was going to do.  Once our careers slowed up aft- after Teddy's [Teddy Pendergrass] accident, you know, we left Columbia [Columbia Records], so the whole thing changed.  So I stayed into the studio producing instrumental music; and Gamble went into real estate.  But we always stayed in close contact with each other.
Story_ID: 647176
Speaker 1: Now do you have a--you mentioned the Broadway idea.  Do you have an idea for a show?  Or do you have an idea for a show that you're developing now?
Speaker 2: Well, basically there was a show in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] at the Prince Theater called 'Me and Mrs. Jones,' which starred Lou Rawls.  And it was there for about a month, and they had lines--it was standing room only every night.  And it--unfortunately after that run, the finances got messed up.  Lou Rawls, something, something got messed up in the business and, so it didn't turn into a touring that would--see, you got to tour first before you end up on Broadway.  You know, you got to--so it didn't get to that point.  But I seen the effects of a musical.  I call it a demo, because it was crowded every night.  It was standing room every night.  And Lou Rawls had some great singers--Darlene Love was in it, I think.  She's another one of my favorite singers.  And it was great, the whole cast was great.  I mean it was great.  But it just--the deal--something happened with the deal, that it get--it didn't, didn't, didn't follow through.  But I'm looking forward--so I looked at that and said, "Now that could be Broadway if it was put into the right hands, all that music."  So that's the opportunity I'm waiting for.  They're talking about it now, but I've got to find the right chemistry of people to pull that off, like Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] just did.  We're going to do the same thing.  We're next.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Motown' ['Motown: The Musical,' Berry Gordy], um-hm.
Story_ID: 647177
Speaker 1: Has it been kind of--I mean what's your relationship like with Motown [Motown Records], I mean, Phil- Philadelphia International [Philadelphia International Records, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Admire [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy.  He's our prime.  He's, he inspired me and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble], because we had an opportunity to visit him.  And that's another highlight of my music career, meeting Berry Gordy.  And--
Speaker 1: About what time was this?  How old were you?  What year was it?
Speaker 2: It was during the time that me and Gamble had 'Expressway to Your Heart' out, 'Cowboys to Girls,' during that time.
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Because we knew a guy that was a producer there called Jeffrey Bowen who produced The Temptations.  And him and Gamble grew up together.  But he used to always tell me, "Gamble, man, you guys should come up to Motown, man.  You guys should come to Motown."  So I wanted to go, you know.  And when we got the invitation, I was excited to go there.  And I remember arriving in Detroit [Michigan].  And when we went, got to the Motown building, Hitsville [Hitsville U.S.A., Detroit, Michigan], they had lines, they had a line all the way down the block.  And it was raining really hard that day, and all I seen was umbrellas.  That was people trying to get in Motown to audition.  I never seen a line like that.  And I guess that was the day for auditions, I guess.  Me and Gamble had to fight through the line to get in the building.  So boy, I went down in that--they call it the pit, the studio.  Oh, man, it was amazing.  So me and Gamble spent a few days in Detroit and met Holland and Dozier [Lamont Dozier], Eddie Holland.  And I met a couple of--Ivory Joe [Ivory Joe Hunter], he was a keyboard player I think at Motown.  He was one of The Funk Brothers.  It was just a wonderful thing.  But me and Gamble just wasn't too happy about the contracts that was given to us, you know.  You can't own all the publishing, not on Gamble and Huff [HistoryMaker Leon Huff] songs.  We didn't start out like that.  And I think Berry had a lot of problems with that, you know.  We--no, if we didn't, if we didn't have the publish- fifty fifty publishing, you know, but you couldn't have, you know, we couldn't understand the philosophy of we're going to, we're going to toil and beat our heads against the wall to write a song and just give it away.  We didn't see it like that, and we didn't enter the music business like that.  We always owned a piece of our songs or all of it.  And we ended up owning all of our songs and our masters.
Speaker 1: Now that's--is that unusual?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We'd be the first ones to come through the music business with a contract like that.  Because we knew if you don't know the game, don't play it.  You got to know the game before you get into it, you know.  We knew about publishing, and Gamble knew about the basic breakdown and percentages of what the writer gets, what the producer get, what the publisher gets.  We knew about all of that before we actually got on a roll.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So when we used to make deals and talk publishing, "No, you can't have all the publishing."  "Oh, you boys ain't got to worry about publishing."  Oh, yes, we do.  You know, that era was over.  You know, you did that in the '50s [1950s] on back.  But when Gamble and Huff came through the music business, we knew about how important publishing was--owning your own copyrights and your masters.  We knew about all of that.  So, you know, if you don't know, they ain't going to tell you, you know.  So it's like we knew the rules of the game, and that's how we ended up owning.
Story_ID: 647178
Speaker 1: Now are you, are you called upon by young music producers to--for advice?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we do--yeah, every now and then we do seminars.  And you know, I meet different people, talk, you know.  More Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble], he's more the talker than me.  But it's basically--yeah, they like to pick our brain, you know.  We talk to people.
Speaker 1: Are there any of them in business now that you admire, in terms of how they ha- handle their business?
Speaker 2: When we were coming through--when we were coming up through the music world, I admired L.A. Reid and Babyface [Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds], with that Babyface label [LaFace Records, Atlanta, Georgia] they had.  They did great with that.  And of course, Babyface, very talented.  And L.A. Reid, of course, now he's doing great things.  But I admire them, as far as the label concept and artists.  And Al Bell, Stax [Stax Records, Memphis, Tennessee], that whole Stax, you know, Otis Redding.  We're close with Al Bell, so I admire that whole pocket of music, too.  That's basically it.
Speaker 1: Any of the new people?  I mean the--
Speaker 2: Oh, the recent people?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, the successful ones, you know, Jay Z, which is, you know, the main players today with the label and the branding.  It's a whole different--it wasn't branding.  It wasn't about branding when me and Gamble came through.  It's about branding now.  You know, so it's--I found out how important branding was, you know, when that rap era came through, you know, with the clothes lines.  And the whole thing just opened up, you know.  Anybody successful.  I don't really get into all of that.  You know, I'm into like trying to create something new (laughter) music wise, you know.  I read about them, you know, but I don't follow it.
Story_ID: 647179
Speaker 1: Is there anything I need to ask you about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Well, it's the story in there about the payola that me and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] went through.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: They thought me and Gamble was paying disc jockeys to play our music, was total fabrication.
Speaker 1: So this is in the mid-'70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was during the time we was with Columbia [Columbia Records], when they, when they thought disc jockeys were being paid off for playing records.
Speaker 1: So was there an investigation or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there was a big investigation.
Speaker 1: Yeah, did--well, what happened?  Did the federal government get involved in this or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was the, it was life changing for a lot of the disc jockeys.  And they tried to nail me and Gamble, but their case wasn't strong enough.  In fact, they gave me immunity to give Gamble up.  Now you know that wasn't going to happen.  And I really didn't know anything no way.  So, but that was just their scare tactics, you know.  But they wasn't really after me and Gamble.  They was going through me and Gamble to get to somebody else.  Because, because we were so successful within that Columbia system that they thought Columbia was involved too.  So we was all being investigated, Clive Davis, all of us.  A lot of people got hurt.  Me and Gamble got off, because they really didn't find nothing.
Speaker 1: I know at some point, I know Dick Clark got--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was huge.  I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) actually convicted of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In fact, they changed up his whole program.  He left the city after that and went to California.  But that's how deep that investigation was.  Because, you know, it was a different day, it was a different time then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, disc jockeys was more personal with the music, you know.  You could go meet the disc jockeys.  There'd be about what, five or six disc jockeys on one station?  You could sit and talk to all of them.  You can't do that now.  I mean, it's a whole different thing now.
Story_ID: 647180
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, what you described is you were like trying--as you were climbing up in the business, there's so many people that you had to talk to, so many--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so many people you had to network with.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: You said by the time you got to Clive Davis, they knew that you knew--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a whole network of people.
Speaker 2: That's right.  And what it was, a network of people.  And they knew that we had it, and we showed them we had it.  But it was a hard time convincing them that black people buy records too.  And in order for you to sell black music, you got to hire black people.  So Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] formed the Black Music Association, and that's when all the major record companies started having black music departments.  First, it was Columbia [Columbia Records] and then everybody else followed suit.  So that BMA organization created a lot of jobs in the music industry then.  And me and Gamble was at the forefront of all of that, because we demanded that they hire black promotion people to promote our music.  And it made sense.  It took them a while to understand that.  You know, they spent all that money for a Harvard, went to Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] for a report, you know, to tell them that, yeah, black music is on the rise.  Well, we told them.  You ain't had to spend all that money for no Harvard people to tell you that.  You know, we told you that and what to do to sell it.  Hire black promotion people.  And that's what they did, and our, and our music went through the roof.
Speaker 1: And it created a lot of jobs for peo- people.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it did.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in a business where we are producing, we're at the production side of it.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And Clive Davis was all for it.  But, you know, we had to convince you first.  So what we did was we went and did that Joe Simon 'Drowning in the Sea of Love' for Spring Records to show them that you need black promotion men to sell black music, because that's what Spring Records was doing.  Because they had a great black promotion man called Joe Medley [ph.].  He was the man then.  In fact, Joe eventually came to work with us.  And when they did that, that was over.  I mean me and Gamble, everything we was writing and producing was top sellers.  I mean the music had legs, but we had great promotion people, I mean some great guys that got the job done.
Story_ID: 647181
Speaker 1: Yeah, I suppose there's a lot of music that never really gets heard by a lot of people, because it doesn't get distributed.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I mean you got a lot of writers out there right now that's great that just can't get that foot in the door, which me and Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble] was fortunate enough to do, have an outlet.  To write songs--I mean you could write songs and write songs, if you don't have an outlet, I mean who going to hear it?  That's basically what our philosophy was, you know.  So, but I play everything.  I love to hear myself play, so I ain't got no problem with it.  You know, I just, I'm a musician so I play.  You know, you're shedding, you know, but I, it don't matter.  Because I hear my music every day.  Just, you know, the statement me and Gamble made in the '70s [1970s] is just as vibrant today.  You know, I'm hearing commercials.  I mean it's amazing how this music has got the staying power, this music.
Speaker 1: You're right.  I mean, I, you know, as somebody that's heard it, you know, over the years, I mean you're absolutely right.
Speaker 2: Exactly, this music is not going to, never go away.
Speaker 1: Right.  And--
Speaker 2: It's part of the fabrication of America.
Speaker 1: And those things--to think about it--I mean I mentioned this before, but those things like 'Family Reunion' and, you know, they keep reverberating and they become like standards in the black community.
Speaker 2: Exactly, they are (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And maybe in other communities too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they are, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Especially 'Ain't No Stopping Us Now,' by McFadden and Whitehead [Gene McFadden and John Whitehead].  This--that song is, that song just vibrates everywhere.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you hear it at graduations.
Speaker 2: Everywhere.  I hear 'I'll Always Love My Mama' on Mother's Day all day, everywhere.  You know, I got relatives that call me from all over the country, "I just heard so and so and so and so."  You know, the music is everywhere, you know.
Speaker 1: They still call you about that?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.  I mean, really--, "I just heard--." My wife is real excited, you know.  When I met my wife Regina [Regina Bryant Huff], she didn't, she didn't know--she knew, but she didn't know, when she met me.  You know, she knew I was in music, but she didn't know I wrote all them songs.  So one day we was looking at TV, so one of the songs--I think it was a Will Smith movie, and one of our songs, 'I'm Going to Make You Love Me' ['I'm Gonna Make You Love Me'] by The Supremes and The Temptations came on, and she didn't believe I wrote that song.  Today, she don't know.  She gets excited.  You know, it's funny to me, and so that's.
Speaker 1: It's awesome.  That's awe-inspiring.
Story_ID: 647182
Speaker 1: Is there anything else because--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I got one more question, actually.  But the last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, basically like I said before, a music, a music person.  I'm a music person, you know, a loving father, you know, I'm a good husband to my wife [Regina Bryant Huff]--friendly, you know.  That's the way I was raised.  I don't know no other way.  And I mean other people look at you different, but I want to be remembered as, as a music person, a music man.  That's what I want to be remembered as.
Story_ID: 647183
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's the picture of my wedding day.  And that's my lovely wife, Regina [Regina Bryant Huff].  Her maiden name was Regina Bryant, now she's Mrs. Regina Huff.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's Mrs. Hazel Nimmo, my mentor that we spoke about.
Speaker 1: Okay.  She's a librarian, the school librarian?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who's this guy?
Speaker 2: That good looking guy there, that's Huff, [HistoryMaker] Leon Huff.  That's my early promotion picture.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good looking.  I'd like to meet him sometime.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter) (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, that's that picture of The Dynaflows.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I remember one time it was the birds, you know, The Orioles, The Cardinals.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You're the cars.
Speaker 2: That's me and my wife Regina again.  We was at a charity dinner.
Speaker 1: I was thinking maybe we need to put The Dynaflows back up and you can name them, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.  There's me and my wife again, we're in the Bahamas (unclear).
Speaker 1: Can you name The Dynaflows for us?
Speaker 2: Individually?
Speaker 1: Yes (unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's Floyd Henley--
Speaker 1: On this end, right?
Speaker 2: --at the top, at the piano.  And there's Horace Sloan, the bass.  Then we have Everett Cooper, which we call Honey.  Then we have the famous Buster Williams, Herbie Hancock's favorite bass player.  And Harrison Artis and Leon Huff on the keyboards.
Speaker 1: All right, thank you.  And this is about 1960--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or so.
Speaker 2: That was early.  That was in the mid-'50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Before you graduated from high school [Camden High School, Camden, New Jersey] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  I was in--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) '59 [1959]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's one of my favorite writers, [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson.  We all, was all in London [England], me and Gamble, receiving the Ivor Novello Award [51st Ivor Novello Awards] in London, and Smokey just happened to be there.  Smokey is one of my favorites.
Speaker 1: So he just happened to (laughter)--
Speaker 2: I think he was performing.
Speaker 1: --volunteer?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, that's me in a recording session jamming on the organ (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: I think that's Leon pre- his preteen years.  (Laughter) It's sideways.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know, but he (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, really.  Okay.  That's Leon again, preteen.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's not going to work.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My graduation from school.  This was at graduation.
Speaker 1: Doing okay, Matt [Matthew Hickey]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  That's the signing of Teddy Pendergrass.  Teddy was getting ready to take off.  You know, too, you know, Teddy was the first black artist to have an all-female concert.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: They was throwing their panties at him and everything.
Speaker 1: Oh, really, throwing their drawers on the stage?   They must have been crazy.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Oh god.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) reading about.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear) (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) One of my favorite singers, yeah, Lou Rawls.  We was recording Lou Rawls.  (Singing), "You'll never find--."
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is that Kenny--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Kenny Gamble on your left, Leon Huff and Lou Rawls.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  The collage.  Okay, the first picture was The Dynaflows.  The one on the right is--I'm up on the--I'm going around--what is it, Times Square [New York, New York]?  Going around the, around the, I was on the board of directors of a bank.  And that particular day we went to Wall Street, and I rang the bell.  And put took my picture, and I went around there once and I was freaked out ever since.  I was on that board for about seven years.  Then of course my dear friend, [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones.  I was at his house and we were listening to some music.  In fact I'm playing him some music that I wrote.  And under that I was recording--Stevie Wonder came to the studio.  He played on one of the cuts on one of my instrumental albums, and then we was in the studio all night.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Right here.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Stevie, Stevie stayed all night in the studio with me.  And then we have that picture, that was in the studio.  That's my friend.  We've been friends since high school, junior high school [Cooper B. Hatch Junior High School; Cooper B. Hatch Middle School, Camden, New Jersey], Paul Martin, Paul Martin.  And that's Teddy.  Then that's me.  And that's me again in the studio, and that's Leon Huff again.
Speaker 1: Then my favorite, one of my favorite singers and producers, Chaka Khan, Arif Mardin, one of my favorite producers, and Leon Huff.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: The great Chaka Khan.
Speaker 2: Oh, she's got a voice.  I know people in Chicago [Illinois] who went to high school with her (unclear), and they said she could sing.
Speaker 1: She could always sing, right?
Speaker 2: Always singing.
Speaker 1: Oh, these are my favorite boys here, Hall and Oates [Daryl Hall and John Oates].
Speaker 2: I don't think Chaka Khan is taken as serious because of the, you know, (unclear) but she's got one of the greatest voices.
Speaker 1: Oh, she's got a voice like an instrument.
Speaker 2: That's my friend, Paul Martin.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  (Unclear) are recording stars.
Speaker 2: Oh, I had a ball with them.
Speaker 1: Me and Gamble had the opportunity to meet Raquel Welch.  She came to the studios this particular day and we didn't sign her, but she wanted us to make some music for her.  And I was just--
Speaker 2: Oh, did she, did she want to perform?
Speaker 1: Yeah, she wanted to--we had a lot of those--
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: --actresses, actresses who wanted to make records (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) wanted to make a record?
Speaker 1: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Did she have any talent (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Did she have any talent?
Speaker 2: I just wanted to meet her (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter) Of course.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) He said, "Come on over."
Speaker 1: That's--turn it up, yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: It's like a reflection off of Gamble.  Gamble had a mirror on his desk.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's really (unclear).
Speaker 1: That's me and Gamble sitting at his desk.  You can see how serious Gamble is.  We both are, really.  That's me and my wife, Regina, and my late sister, Jean [Jean Huff].
